6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 1/524
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-01-291
AN ORDINANCE APPROVING A SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR A
MANUFACTURER OF BEVERAGES AND
AMENDING CHAPTERS 4 AND 7 OF THE
VILLAGE OF LAKE ZURICH MUNICIPAL CODE
Steel Hearts Brewery – 101 East Main Street
WHEREAS, Mark D. Cook, is the applicant (“Applicant”) for an amendment to the Village of Lake Zurich Zoning Code and special use permit for the
property at 101 East Main Street (“Property”), said Property legally described in Exhibit A hereto; and
WHEREAS, the Applicant is also the owner of the Property and has operated a Retail Lawn and Garden Supply Store on the premises since 1986
known as Mar Cook’s Garden Center; and
WHEREAS, the Applicant intends to redevelop the Property for the manufacture of beverages (microbrewery) to be known as Steel Hearts Brewery;
and
WHEREAS, the Applicant has filed zoning application PZC 2018-12 dated August 17, 2018 (the “Application”) seeking approval of the following:
· Text Amendment to provide for Drinking Places accessory to an authorized Special Use Permit (since there is no established eating place on
the premises).
· Special Use Permit for the establishment of a manufacturer of beverages in Lake Zurich’s B-2 Central Business District
· Special Use Permit to allow for outdoor seating accessory to the authorized Special Use Permit in Lake Zurich’s B-2 Central Business
District
· Special Use Permit to allow for live entertainment accessory to the authorized Special Use Permit in Lake Zurich’s B-2 Central Business
District
WHEREAS, the Applicant also seeks an amendment to Sections 9-4-2 of Chapter 4 of Title 9 and Section 9-7D-5 of Chapter 7, Article D of Title 9
regarding the Business District regulations of the Zoning Code; and
WHEREAS, the Applicant seeks approval of a special use permit to establish a manufacturer of beverages and to establish outdoor seating and live
entertainment at said Property currently within the B-2 Central Business Zoning District under the Zoning Code; and
WHEREAS, in compliance with the law and the requirements of the Village of Lake Zurich Zoning Code, notice was published on November 10,
2018, in The Daily Herald, and the Village posted a public hearing sign on the Property on November 9, 2018, both the newspaper and sign notices
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 2/524
informing the public of a public hearing to be held before the Lake Zurich Planning and Zoning Commission on November 28, 2018, to consider the
Application for this requested zoning authority and relief; and
WHEREAS, the Lake Zurich Planning and Zoning Commission received and considered the STAFF REPORT dated November 28, 2018, which was
provided to the Commission for the hearing, addressing the request for approval of said Special Use Permit and Text Amendment, and considered the
standards and applicable factors required under Section 9-4-2 of Chapter 4, Section 9-7D-5 of Chapter 7, Article D and Section 9-19-3 of Chapter 19, all
contained within Title 9 of the Village Code, and after the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission recommended that the
Board of Trustees approve the zoning approvals requested in this Application, with those conditions of approval recommended by Village staff; and
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lake Zurich met on January 7, 2019, and considered the findings and
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission, including the STAFF REPORT dated November 28, 2018, all consisting of 13 pages, said
required zoning standards, findings and recommendations attached hereto as Exhibit B and having considered all of the facts and circumstances affecting
the Application and these recommended approvals, the President and Board of Trustees have determined that the applicable standards related to these
zoning approvals have been met.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lake Zurich, Lake County, Illinois, as follows:
SECTION 1: ADOPTION AND INCORPORATION OF RECITALS. The foregoing recitals, findings, recommendations, exhibits and plans are
incorporated herein as findings and requirements of the President and Board of Trustees, and all Exhibits referenced herein are made a part of and
incorporated into this Ordinance and related approvals, except as otherwise provided below.
SECTION 2: APPROVAL OF TEXT AMENDMENT TO SECTION 9-4-2 OF CHAPTER 4 OF THE VILLAGE ZONING CODE. The Mayor and
Board of Trustees, pursuant to the authority vested in them under the laws of the State of Illinois and Chapter 18 of the Lake Zurich Zoning Code, hereby
approve an amendment to Subsection C. 24 of Section 9-4-2 entitled “PERMITTED USES” of Chapter 4 entitled “BUSINESS DISTRICTS” of Title 9
entitled “ZONING” of the Village of Lake Zurich Municipal Code by adding the following provisions to the current provisions of said Subsection C. 24 of
Section 9-4-2 of Chapter 4, as shown in those provisions italicized bold and underscored, to read as set forth below:
Chapter 4
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
9-4-1: PURPOSES:
9-4-2: PERMITTED USES:
9-4-3: SPECIAL USES:
9-4-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
9-4-5: TEMPORARY USES:
9-4-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
9-4-7: SIGN REGULATIONS:
9-4-8: LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING:
9-4-9: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE REGULATIONS:
9-4-10: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
9-4-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and no others are permitted as of right in the business districts indicated in the following table. In interpreting the use designations,
reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the North American industry classification system, and chapter 15 of this
title. SIC codes and NAICS codes, where applicable, are given in parentheses following each use listing.
B-
1
B-
2
B-
3
A.
Agricultural services:
1. Landscape counseling and planning (0781) P P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 3/524
B.
Printing, publishing, and allied industries:
1. Commercial printing (275) P P -
C.
Retail trade:
1. Paint, glass, and wallpaper stores (523) P P P
2. Hardware stores (525) P P P
3. Department stores (531) - - P
4. Variety stores (533) P P P
5. Miscellaneous general merchandise stores (539) P P P
6. Grocery stores (541) P P P
7. Meat and fish markets (542) P P P
8. Fruit and vegetable markets (543) P P P
9. Candy, nut, and confectionery stores (544) P P P
10.
Dairy products stores (545) P P P
11.
Retail bakeries (546) P P P
12.
Miscellaneous food stores (549), except poultry dealers P P P
13.
Men's and boys' clothing and accessory stores (561) P P P
14.
Women's clothing stores (562) P P P
15.
Women's accessory and specialty stores (563) P P P
16.
Children's and infants' wear stores (564) P P P
17. Family clothing stores (565) P P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 4/524
18.
Shoe stores (566) P P P
19.
Miscellaneous apparel and accessory stores (569) P P P
20.
Home furniture and furnishing stores (571) P P P
21.
Household appliance stores (572) P P P
22.
Radio, television, consumer electronics, and music stores (573) P P P
23.
Eating places (5812), but not including live entertainment or drive-in establishments P P P
24.
Drinking places (5813) accessory to permitted eating places or accessory to a special use granted at subsection J.1
under Section 9-4-3.
P P P
25.
Drugstores and proprietary stores (591) P P P
26.
Sporting good stores and bicycle shops (5941) P P P
27.
Bookstores (5942) P P P
28.
Stationery stores (5943) P P P
29.
Jewelry stores (5944) P P P
30.
Hobby, toy, and game shops (5945) P P P
31.
Camera and photographic supply stores (5946) P P P
32.
Gift, novelty, and souvenir shops (5947) P P P
33.
Luggage and leather goods stores (5948) P P P
34.
Sewing, needlework, and piece goods stores (5949) P P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 5/524
35.
Florists (5992) P P P
36.
Tobacco stores and stands (5993) P P P
37.
News dealers and newsstands (5994) P P P
38.
Optical goods stores (5995) P P P
39.
Miscellaneous retail stores (5999), but not including auction rooms, firework sales, gravestone sales, sales barns, or
tombstone sales
P P P
40.
Miscellaneous retail trade uses, not otherwise classified, if approved by the village manager; provided, however, that any
such use shall be: a) compatible with and consistent with existing retail uses in the vicinity of the proposed use, b)
consumer oriented, and c) retail sales tax generating if located in the B-3 district. If the village manager approves such a
use, then the manager shall report such approval to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of trustees, which
may, by majority vote of those present, overrule such approval. No such use shall be finally approved until after such
meeting of the board of trustees
P P P
41.
Computer and software stores (NAICS 443120) P P P
D.
Finance, insurance, and real estate:
1. Depository and nondepository credit institutions (60-61), but not including drive-in establishments, currency exchanges, or
automatic teller machines, except automatic teller machines attached to the principal structure on the lot
P P P
2. Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, and services (62) P P P
3. Insurance carriers, agents, brokers, and service (63-64) P P P
4. Real estate offices (65) P P P
5. Holding and other investment offices (67) P P P
E.
Services:
1. Garment pressing, and agents for laundries and dry cleaners (7212) P - -
2. Photographic studios, portrait (722) P P P
3. Beauty shops (723) P P P
4. Barbershops (724) P P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 6/524
5. Shoe repair shops and shoeshine parlors (725) P P P
6. Tax preparation services (7291) P P P
7. Advertising services (731) P P P
8. Employment agencies (7361) P P P
9. Computer programming, data processing, and other computer related services (737) P P P
10.
Photofinishing laboratories (7384) - P P
11.
Packaging and labeling service (not packing and crating), parcel packing service (packaging), and mailing service (7389) - P P
12.
Electrical repair shops (762), but not including refrigeration and air conditioning service and repair shops (7623) - P -
13.
Watch, clock, and jewelry repair (763) P P P
14.
Picture framing to individual order, not connected with retail art stores, and picture framing, custom (7699) P P P
15.
Videotape rental (784) P P P
16.
Offices and clinics of doctors of medicine, dentists, osteopaths, chiropractors, optometrists, podiatrists, and other health
practitioners (801-804)
P P P
17.
Legal services (81) P P P
18.
Engineering, architectural, and surveying services (871) P P P
19.
Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services (872) P P P
20.
Management and public relations services (874) P P P
21.
Miscellaneous services (89) - P P
22.
The following general office services: clerical services such as telephone, fax, copier, computer, scheduling, billing,
administration, and other clerical work in support of a retail use or other permitted service use that is performed off site.
Such general office services shall not include any use that is listed as a permitted or special use in the B-2 district and shall
not include any delivery, distribution, or storage of materials
- P -
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 7/524
23.
The following miscellaneous personal services, not elsewhere classified (7299): baby sitting bureaus, birth certificate
agencies, buyers' clubs, car title and tag service, checkroom concessions or services, clothing rental (except industrial
launderers and linen supply), college clearinghouses, computer photography or portraits, consumer buying service,
costume rental, debt counseling or adjustment service to individuals, depilatory salons, diet workshops, dress suit rental,
electrolysis, genealogical investigation service, hair weaving or replacement service, marriage bureaus, massage therapy,
porter service, quilting for individuals, scalp treatment service, shopping service for individuals, tanning salons, tuxedo
rental, valet parking wardrobe service (except theatrical)
P P P
Massage therapy shall be subjected to the following conditions:
a. Such use shall be ancillary to a full service hairdressing and beauty salon (729), ancillary to a full service nail salon in the
B-3 district only, or such use shall be ancillary to an office or clinic of doctors of medicine, osteopaths, chiropractors,
podiatrists, and other health practitioners (801-804)
b. Such use shall be offered during normal business hours, and only when all other services of business are offered, and
never before 8:00 A.M. or after 9:00 P.M. on any day
c. Massage therapy services shall be restricted to 2 rooms, not to exceed a total of 200 square feet. "Tune up" services shall
be restricted to the reception area
d. Massage therapy services shall be performed only by trained and professionally certified massage therapists
24.
Physical fitness facilities (7991) including aerobic dance and exercise classes, health clubs, exercise salons, fitness salons,
gymnasiums, physical fitness centers, reducing facilities-physical fitness (without lodging), slenderizing salons, spaceshealth
fitness (except resort lodges)
P P P
25.
Computer programming (NAICS 541511) P P P
26.
Computer software analysis and design (NAICS 541512) P P P
27.
Personnel supply services (7360) P P P
28.
Photocopying and duplicating service (7334) P P P
29.
Party stores (454390) P P P
30.
Travel agencies (4724) P P P
F.
Transportation and utility services:
1. Office of local and suburban transit and interurban highway passenger transportation companies (41), but not including
terminals, stations, vehicles yards, or garages and not on the first floor of any structure in the B-3 District
- P P
SECTION 3: APPROVAL OF TEXT AMENDMENT TO SECTION 9-7D-5 OF CHAPTER 7, ARTICLE DOF THE VILLAGE ZONING CODE. The
Mayor and Board of Trustees, pursuant to the authority vested in them under the laws of the State of Illinois and Chapter 18 of the Lake Zurich Zoning
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 8/524
Code, hereby approve an amendment to Subsection A. 1 of Section 9-7D-5 entitled “SPECIAL USES” of Chapter 7, Article D entitled “DR DOWNTOWN
REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT” of Title 9 entitled “ZONING” of the Village of Lake Zurich Municipal Code by adding the following provisions
to the current provisions of said Subsection A. 1 of Section 9-7D-5 of Chapter 7, Article D, as shown in those provisions italicized bold and underscored, to
read as set forth below:
ARTICLE D. DR DOWNTOWN REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
9-7D-1: BACKGROUND; GOAL; PURPOSES:
9-7D-2: OVERLAY DISTRICT FUNCTION; APPLICATION OF BASE DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
9-7D-3: MAPPING LOCATION AND STANDARDS:
9-7D-4: PERMITTED USES:
9-7D-5: SPECIAL USES:
9-7D-6: LIMITATIONS ON USES:
9-7D-7: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE REGULATIONS; CONFLICTS:
9-7D-8: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
9-7D-9: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
9-7D-10: SIGN REGULATIONS:
9-7D-11: BULK, YARD, SPACE, AND PARKING STANDARDS:
9-7D-5: SPECIAL USES:
A. Special Uses On First Story Abutting Main Street Or Old Rand Road: The following uses and no others may be authorized on the first story (street level)
of any building in the DR overlay district on property that abuts Main Street or Old Rand Road, subject to the issuance of a special use permit as
provided in chapter 19 of this title:
1. Drinking places (5813) accessory to permitted eating places, or accessory to a special use granted at subsection J.1 under Section 9-4-3
and 9-7D-5.
2. Garden supplies, tools, and nursery stock stores (526) in existence and operation within the B-2 central business district as of January 1, 2004.
3. Outdoor seating accessory to permitted eating places, or ACCESSORY TO A SPECIAL USE granted at subsection J.1 under Section 9-4-3
and 9-7D-5.
4. Live Entertainment accessory to permitted eating places, or accessory to a special use granted at subsection J.1 under Section
9-4-3and 9-7D-5.
4. Beauty shops (723), barbershops (724), and full service beauty and health spas.
5. Such other retail sales tax generating uses as the board of trustees determines are consistent with the uses stated in this subsection A and in
subsection 9-7D-4A of this article and that are consistent with and promote the goals and purposes set forth in section 9-7D-1 of this article.
In interpreting the use designations, reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the North American industry
classification system, and chapter 15 of this title.
B. Special Uses Above First Story Abutting Main Street Or Old Rand Road: The following uses and no others may be authorized above the first story (that
is, not at street level) of any building in the DR overlay district on property that abuts Main Street or Old Rand Road, subject to the issuance of a special
use permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title:
Such services uses as the board of trustees determines are consistent with and promote the goals and purposes set forth in section 9-7D-1 of this article.
In interpreting the use designations, reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the North American industry
classification system, and chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2012-08-852, 8-20-2012)
SECTION 4: GRANT OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT. The Mayor and Board of Trustees, pursuant to the authority vested in them under the laws of the
State of Illinois and Chapter 9 (Section 9-4-3) and Chapter 19 of the Lake Zurich Zoning Code, hereby grant the following approvals, as shown and
provided in the STAFF REPORT dated November 28, 2018, and final findings and recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission, all
consisting of 13 pages, approving Special Use Permit to Applicant as set forth below:
· To allow for the establishment of a manufacturer of beverages in Lake Zurich’s B-2 Central Business District granted under Subsection J.1.
of Section 9-4-3;
· To allow for outdoor seating as a use accessory to a special use granted under Subsection J.1. of Section 9-4-3.
· To allow for live entertainment as a use accessory to a special use granted under Subsection J.1. of Section 9-4-3.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 9/524
This approval and grant of these special use permits is made subject to the following:
1. Substantial conformance with the following documentation submitted as part of the application subject to revisions required by Village Staff
and applicable governmental agencies:
a. Zoning Application and Cover Letter dated August 20, 2018, and prepared by Mark Cook
b. Exhibit A: Legal Description
c. Aerial Site Plan, dated August 27, 2018 and prepared by Mark Cook
2. The outdoor seating areas shall be properly separated and protected from motor vehicle conflicts by adequate barriers that extend along the
full length of these areas. The design and material of such barriers may take the form of metal guard rails or masonry walls. The final design
shall be approved by village staff prior to occupancy of the premises.
3. The Applicant shall take every measure and precaution to ensure that users, employees and patrons on the property are properly separated
and protected from the frequent railroad traffic that operates on the adjacent CN Railroad that runs immediately east of the subject property.
The final proposed design and manner of separation in the form of a barrier shall be as approved by village staff and village engineer.
4. The parking lot shall be properly screened with landscaping and buffered from the neighboring parcels and street. The design and materials
may take the form of shrubs, ornamental trees, shade trees or evergreens. The final landscaping design shall be approved by village staff prior
to installation.
5. The ten (10) offsite parking spaces on the Lions Club property shall be made available for the use of the patrons and employees of the
subject property through written agreement with the Lions Club in a form acceptable to the village. Said ten (10) spaces on the Lions Club
property shall be connected to the Subject Property by means of a walkway that is paved and properly lit. The final alignment, design and
illumination of such walkway shall be approved by village staff prior to installation.
6. The development shall be in compliance with all other applicable codes and ordinances of the Village of Lake Zurich.
SECTION 5: FINDINGS IN SUPPORT OF APPROVAL OF GRANT OF TEXT AMENDMENTS. The findings, conditions and recommendations as
set forth in the STAFF REPORT dated November 28, 2018, and the PZC recommendation, all consisting of 13 pages, along with the filings provided to the
PZC, are hereby accepted as the Board's own, are incorporated herein by this reference and shall be made a part of the official record for the Application
and this grant of approval of the text amendment.
SECTION 6: FINDINGS IN SUPPORT OF APPROVAL OF GRANT OF SPECIAL USE PERMITS. The findings, conditions and recommendations
as set forth in the STAFF REPORT dated November 28, 2018, and the PZC recommendations, all consisting of 13 pages, along with the filings provided to
the PZC, are hereby accepted as the Board’s own, are incorporated herein by this reference and shall be made a part of the official record for the
Application.
SECTION 7: SEVERABILITY. If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision of this Ordinance shall be adjudged by any
Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder thereof, which remainder shall
remain and continue in full force and effect.
SECTION 8: CONFLICTS. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed only to the extent of such conflict.
SECTION 9: EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage and approval, as provided by law.
PASSED THIS ____________ day of _____________________________, 2019.
Ayes:
Nays:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 10/524
Absent:
Abstain:
APPROVED this ______ day of _________________, 2019.
_________________________
Mayor Tom Poynton
ATTEST:
_______________________
Village Clerk Kathleen Johnson
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Village of Lake Zurich
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-_05____-_312_________
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 7, CHAPTER 6
OF THE LAKE ZURICH MUNICIPAL CODE
CONCERNING THE REGULATION OF TREES
WHEREAS, Title 7, Chapter 6, titled “Trees,” of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code governs the regulation of trees on all Village-owned property or in Village rightsof-
way; and
WHEREAS, the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., authorizes the Village of Lake Zurich to zone and to regulate subdivisions and the authority to
complement the State’s interests and values as stated through the enactment of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq., and, generally, the
authority to protect and enhance the quality of life and general welfare of the Village; and
WHEREAS, growth in the community, changes in residential and commercial neighborhoods in the Village, and new development and increasing redevelopment
in the Village can threaten trees and native vegetation in the Village; and
WHEREAS, the Chapter 6 was last amended through Ordinance No. 2007-10-527 entitled “An Ordinance Amending Title 7, Chapter 6 of the Lake Zurich
Municipal Code Concerning the Regulation of Trees.”
WHEREAS, after reviewing the Village’s current tree preservation regulations, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lake Zurich have determined
that it is necessary to further amend the Lake Zurich Municipal Code to keep pace with changes in the Village; and
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees have determined that it is necessary and appropriate to further revise Title 7, Chapter 6 in the manner provided
in this Ordinance to safeguard the ecological environment in the Village.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lake Zurich, Lake County and State of Illinois, as follows:
Section 1 .Recitals. The foregoing recitals are incorporated herein as findings of the President and Board of Trustees.
Section 2 .Amendment to Title 7, Chapter 6. Chapter 6, titled “Trees,” of Title 7 of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code is hereby amended in its entirety so that said
Chapter 6 hereafter reads as provided in Exhibit A attached to and by this reference incorporated into this Ordinance.
Section 3 .Effective Date. This Ordinance will be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form in the manner
provided by law.
PASSED THIS _____20_______ day of ________May_____________________, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 11/524
Ayes:
Nays:
Absent:
Abstain:
APPROVED this ____ day of _______________, 2019.
___________________
Mayor Tom Poynton
ATTEST:
__________________
Village Clerk
Kathleen Johnson
Exhibit A
Chapter 6
TREES
7-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
7-6-1-1: APPLICABILITY; EMERGENCIES; INTENT:
7-6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
7-6-1-3: LAKE ZURICH TREE COMMISSION:
7-6-2: PUBLIC TREES:
7-6-2-1: OFFICIAL TREE PLAN:
7-6-2-2: PUBLIC TREE SPECIES:
7-6-2-3: PUBLIC TREE SPACING AND DIVERSIFICATION:
7-6-2-4: DISTANCES FROM CURBS AND SIDEWALKS:
7-6-2-5: DISTANCES FROM CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
7-6-2-6: DISTANCES FROM UTILITIES:
7-6-2-7: MINIMUM PUBLIC TREE ROOT ZONE PROTECTION:
7-6-2-8: VILLAGE AUTHORITY TO CARE FOR, REMOVE TREES:
7-6-2-9: TOPPING PROHIBITED:
7-6-2-10: SITE CLEARANCE PRUNING:
7-6-2-11: INTERFERENCE WITH VILLAGE TREE WORK:
7-6-3: PROTECTED PRIVATE TREES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 12/524
7-6-3-1: PROTECTED PRIVATE TREE PERMIT REQUIRED:
7-6-3-2: PROTECTED PRIVATE TREE PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND APPROVALS:
7-6-4: GENERAL TREE STANDARDS:
7-6-4-1: TREE PROTECTION REQUIRED:
7-6-4-2: REPLACEMENT OF PROTECTED PRIVATE TREES REQUIRED:
7-6-4-3: CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PROTECTION PLAN:
7-6-4-4: GENERAL MAINTENANCE; REMOVAL OF DISEASED, DEAD, AND DANGEROUS TREES:
7-6-4-5: WAIVERS OR MODIFICATIONS THROUGH ZONING OR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
7-6-5: APPEALS; PENALTIES; PERMIT REVOCATION:
7-6-5-1: APPEALS:
7-6-5-2: PENALTIES:
7-6-5-3: PERMIT REVOCATION:
7-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS: link link
7-6-1-1: APPLICABILITY; EMERGENCIES; INTENT: link link
A. Applicability: The village has the right and authority to impose the regulations of this chapter on all lots of record and public and private rights of way throughout the
village. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of title 10 of this code or any other village code or ordinance, the provision
deemed by the public works director to be most protective of promoting the proliferation and maintenance and care of trees will apply and control. (Ord. 2007-10-
527, 10-1-2007)
B. Emergencies: In case of emergencies such as tornados, windstorms, floods, freezes, or other natural disasters, the requirements of this chapter may be waived by the
village manager, the public works director, or the village president. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
C. Intent: It is the intent of this chapter to promote increases in the quality of trees and tree care in the village and to promote increases in tree populations in the village
whenever practicable.
It also is the intent of this chapter to preserve trees on both public and private property and, in the event that tree removal is necessary, to ensure that appropriate
replacement trees are planted.
It also is the intent of this chapter to help provide for and sustain buffers between neighboring properties, to preserve historic streetscapes, to minimize the visual
and environmental impacts of paved surfaces and buildings, and to ensure landscaping in conjunction with new development and redevelopment in a manner that
preserves indigenous vegetation.
It also is the intent of this chapter to balance the property rights of individual property owners with the overall health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
village and the village itself. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings ascribed to them:
APPLICANT: An owner or occupant, or a representative of an owner or occupant, of a lot, parcel, or tract of land for which an application has been filed for a subdivision,
special use permit, or any activity requiring the issuance of grading, building, utility, or demolition permits.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Any manmade change, other than maintenance of existing structures, paved areas, or utilities, to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, without limitation: a) the construction or installation of new, or the enlargement of, existing structures, streets, or utilities, b) dredging, filling, clearing,
drilling, mining, grading, paving, or excavating operations, c) demolition, and d) open storage of materials.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY AREA: The area of the subject property that is the smallest area reasonably needed to undertake the proposed construction activity as
determined by the public works director. See subsection 7-6-4-3C of this chapter.
CUTTING: The felling or removal of a tree, or any procedure that results in the death or substantial destruction of a tree. Cutting does not include normal pruning or
trimming of trees consistent with this chapter.
DAMAGE: To take any direct or indirect action that causes, or is reasonably likely to cause, the death of a tree or a significant loss of a tree's structural integrity,
including, without limitation, destruction; poisoning; carving; mutilating; girdling; severing the main trunk, leader, or large branches or roots; removing any portion of
the bark from the main trunk, leader, or large branches; touching with live wires; crushing or exposing the roots; digging or drilling any hole or trench within the root
zone; filling with soil or other materials within the root zone; compacting a substantial portion of the soil in the root zone; or moving a tree to another location. Without
limitation of the foregoing, "damage" does not include pruning in accordance with the national pruning standards.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): The diameter of the trunk of a tree measured at fifty four inches (54") above the ground at the base of the tree.
DISEASED TREE: Any tree determined by the director of public works in consultation with a certified arborist to be diseased, including, without limitation, all of the
following: trees infected with Dutch elm disease or oak wilt; trees in a dead or dying condition that may serve as breeding places for the European elm bark beetle, Dutch
elm disease, or oak wilt; and trees infected with, or that may serve as breeding places for, the Asian long horned beetle, the Asian cerambycid beetle, the emerald ash
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 13/524
borer, or any other type of severely destructive infestation.
LOT: Any lot of record in the village.
NATIONAL PRUNING STANDARDS: The National Arborist Association pruning standards.
PROTECTED PRIVATE TREE: Any tree located in any required yard of any lot in the village, or in any common open space of any subdivision or development, with a
dbh equal to or greater than ten inches (10").
PUBLIC TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation located within any village park or right of way or other public property.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The director of public works of the village of Lake Zurich or his or her designee.
REGULATED TREE ACTIVITY: Any activity that anticipates or involves the actual or reasonably likely damage to or removal of any protected private tree anywhere on
the lot on which the activity does, or is to, take place.
REMOVE OR REMOVAL: The physical detachment or elimination of a tree, or the effective detachment or elimination of a tree, through damage or otherwise, whether
directly or indirectly.
REQUIRED YARD: Any yard required to be established on any lot pursuant to the applicable zoning district regulations of the Lake Zurich zoning code.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs of a tree to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown, including, without limitation, such cutting
as would remove the tree's normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
TREE EMERGENCY: The existence of any tree within the village that has become an immediate danger or hazard to persons or property as a result of any tornado,
windstorm, flood, freeze, or other natural disaster.
TREE PERMIT: See sections 7-6-3-1 and 7-6-3-2 of this chapter.
TREE PROTECTION AREA: The area of the subject property identified in a construction activity protection plan or otherwise designated by the village within which
trees are to be protected. See subsection 7-6-4-3D of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-1-3: LAKE ZURICH TREE COMMISSION: link link
There is hereby created and established the Lake Zurich tree commission, constituted as follows:
A. Appointment; Term: The tree commission consists of five (5) members appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. Two (2) of the
five (5) original appointees will serve a term of one year; two (2) of the five (5) original appointees will serve a term of two (2) years; and one of the five (5) original
appointees will serve a term of three (3) years. Successors will be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees and will serve terms
of three (3) years. The president may adjust the terms of the appointees as necessary to effectuate and maintain the staggered nature of the terms provided in this
subsection.
B. Compensation: Members of the tree commission shall serve without compensation.
C. Quorum; Officers; Rules of Order: Three (3) members constitute a quorum of the tree commission for the conduct of all business. The tree commission must choose
from among its members a chairperson, a vice chairperson, and a secretary. The tree commission may set its own rules of order, subject to the approval of the board
of trustees.
D. Responsibilities: The tree commission has the responsibility to develop and review the village's official tree plan for village owned trees as provided in section 7-6-2-
1 of this chapter. The tree commission also has the responsibility to analyze the village's trees and to make recommendations to the village arborist from time to time
on areas where trees should be added, on trees that should be pruned, on trees that may be diseased or dying, and on trees that should be removed. The tree
commission has no jurisdiction to consider proposed plats of subdivision, natural resources management, zoning approvals, or any matters other than matters
related to trees as set forth in this subsection. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-2: PUBLIC TREES:
7-6-2-1: OFFICIAL TREE PLAN:
The tree commission has the responsibility to study, investigate, and draft, for review and approval by the board of trustees, an official tree plan relating to all public
trees. The official tree plan should include provisions for the planting, replanting, pruning, preservation, and general care of public trees and for the removal or other
disposition of dead, dying, or diseased public trees. The tree commission may present a draft official tree plan to the president and board of trustees for its review and
approval. After the official tree plan has been approved by the board of trustees, which approval must be in the form of a written resolution, the tree commission may
periodically review and analyze the plan in light of current conditions in the village. The tree commission may recommend to the board of trustees changes to the official
tree plan, and the tree commission should report annually to the board of trustees its findings as to the operation of the plan and state of public trees. (Ord. 2007-10-527,
10-1-2007)
7-6-2-2: PUBLIC TREE SPECIES:
The following species of trees, and no others unless approved by the board of trustees, are approved for planting as public trees. Until specifically approved by the board
of trustees and regardless of the species shown in the following table, no ash trees except for mountain ash may be planted anywhere in the village:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 14/524
Large
(40 Feet Or More)
Medium
(30 Feet To 40 Feet)
Small
(29 Feet Or Less)
Silver linden Hedge maple Amur maple
Littleleaf linden
"Greenspire linden"
American hornbeam Purple blow maple
American linden
"Redmond linden"
Chanticleer pear Crabapple
"David crabapple"
"Prairie fire crabapple"
"Red jewel crabapple"
"Sugar time crabapple"
Norway maple
"Crimson king"
"Emerald queen"
Aristocrat pear Witch hazel
Red maple
"Autumn blaze"
"Red sunset"
Mountain ash
Sugar maple
"Green mountain"
Dogwood
Ginkgo (male only) Ironwood
Honey locust
"Skyline"
"Shademaster"
Black alder
American sweetgum
Oak
"Red oak"
"Pin oak"
"White oak"
"Swamp white oak"
Hackberry
Hickory
Butternut
Chestnut
Catalpa
River birch
Sycamore
Buckeye
Kentucky Coffee Tree
Bald Cypress
Tulip Tree
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 15/524
(Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-2-3: PUBLIC TREE SPACING AND DIVERSIFICATION:
A. Spacing: The spacing of public trees is based on the three (3) species sizes listed in section 7-6-2-2 of this chapter. The recommended spacing for public trees is: 1) not
less than thirty feet (30') between small trees, 2) not less than forty feet (40') between medium trees, and 3) not less than fifty feet (50') between large trees. When
different size trees are planted next to each other, the spacing standard for the larger of the two (2) trees applies. Public trees should not be planted closer than the
recommended spacing, but the public works director, on the recommendation of the village arborist, may reduce spacing on a case by case basis for special planting
areas designed or approved by a landscape architect or for extraordinary circumstances when reduced spacing is in the best interests of the village.
B. Diversification: Public trees must be planted so that the genus and species are diverse, in accordance with this subsection. In every defined area of planting, as
designated by the director of public works, no more than ten percent (10%) of the public trees should be from one tree genus and no more than five percent (5%) of
the public trees should be from one tree species. For example, for every one hundred (100) public trees that are planted, there should not be more than ten (10) trees
of one tree genus and not more than five (5) trees of any one tree species. The "defined area of planting" to be designated by the public works director may include,
but is not limited to, a subdivision, or a portion of a subdivision, or a several block area, or a single property, or any other area on village owned property or right of
way reasonably determined by the public works director as logical to assure tree diversification. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-2-4: DISTANCES FROM CURBS AND SIDEWALKS:
A. Trees planted within the public right of way must be planted at distances from curbs and sidewalks consistent with the following criteria:
. The midpoint of the area between the back of the curb and the edge of the sidewalk; or
. If there is a consistent existing tree line, then in a location consistent with that existing tree line to the extent practicable; and
. Not less than four feet (4') from the back of the curb, to the extent practicable. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-2-5: DISTANCES FROM CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
No tree planted in the public right of way may be planted closer than thirty five feet (35') to any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or
curb lines. No tree may be planted closer than ten feet (10') to any fire hydrant. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-2-6: DISTANCES FROM UTILITIES:
No tree may be planted in any public right of way under, or within ten (10) lateral feet of, any overhead utility wire, except small trees as listed in section 7-6-2-2 of this
chapter. No tree may be planted on top of or within a two foot (2') offset from any underground public utility unless circumstances make it unavoidable to do so. (Ord.
2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-2-7: MINIMUM PUBLIC TREE ROOT ZONE PROTECTION: link link
The minimum root zone of all public trees within a public right of way is established in the following table. That minimum root zone must be protected by auguring in the
manner shown in the following table. No work affecting public tree root zone may be undertaken without prior notice to the department of public works, and the
department will monitor and enforce the standards set forth in this section.
Diameter At Breast Height Auguring Method
2.5 inches to 4 inches 2 feet from face of tree in all directions if trench located within this radius
More than 4 inches to 9 inches 5 feet from face of tree in all directions if trench located within this radius
More than 9 inches to 14 inches 10 feet from face of tree in all directions if trench located within this radius
More than 14 inches to 19 inches 12 feet from face of tree in all directions if trench located within this radius
More than 19 inches 15 feet from face of tree in all directions if trench located within this radius
The minimum depth of auger within a root zone must be thirty inches (30"). No trenching is permitted within the minimum root zone. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-2-8: VILLAGE AUTHORITY TO CARE FOR, REMOVE TREES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 16/524
The village and its authorized agents have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove public trees as may be necessary to ensure public safety, preserve, and enhance
the quality of vegetation and as appropriate to beautify the village. The village, for the same purposes, also may prune or remove all portions of any tree or shrub that
overhangs any village right of way or other village owned property.
The village will cause to be removed as soon as practicable any tree within a village right of way or on other village property that is diseased or dying, or that poses an
irreconcilable threat to a utility, or that otherwise threatens the public health, safety, or general welfare. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-2-9: TOPPING PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in this section, no person may cause or allow the topping of any public tree or protected private tree. The village may permit the topping of a tree
under circumstances determined by the director of public works to be exceptional, including, but not limited to, when the tree has been severely damaged by a storm or
other cause, when topping is otherwise the only practicable action, or when required to accommodate an overhead utility. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-2-10: SITE CLEARANCE PRUNING:
The owner of a tree that overhangs a public right of way within the village must prune the branches of that tree, if necessary, so that the tree does not obstruct the light
from any streetlamp or the view of any street intersection. The owner also must prune that tree so that the lowest hanging branch on that tree is a minimum of twelve feet
(12') above the ground. The failure to prune such a tree in accordance with the requirements of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The village has the
right to prune any tree that does not meet the requirements of this section, with village forces or with forces hired by the village for such purposes, if the owner fails or
refuses to accomplish such pruning within five (5) days after written notice to do so from the village. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-2-11: INTERFERENCE WITH VILLAGE TREE WORK:
No person may prevent, delay, or in any other way interfere with work undertaken by the village and its authorized representatives to plant, cultivate, mulch, prune,
spray, or remove any public tree or other tree as authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-3: PROTECTED PRIVATE TREES:
7-6-3-1: PROTECTED PRIVATE TREE PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Protected Private Tree Permit Required For Regulated Tree Activity: Except as expressly provided in subsection C of this section, no person or entity may commence
any "regulated tree activity", as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining a protected private tree permit from the public works director.
B. Group Permits For Utility Companies: Utility companies having overhead facilities within public rights of way, utility easements, or within required yards of private
property may apply for group tree permits to conduct scheduled, nonemergency pruning of groups of trees. Prior to issuance of a permit to a utility company, a
degreed forester or arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture on behalf of the utility company must meet with the public works director and
agree on the manner of pruning of the affected trees. The village will not issue a group permit for pruning of any species of elm between April 1 and October 31 or any
species of oak between April 1 and July 31, unless approved by the public works director to alleviate an imminent hazard.
C. Exceptions to Permit Requirement:
. Pruning: A protected private tree permit is not required for the pruning of any tree on private property by the property owner or his representative in compliance with the
national pruning standards ANSI A300 Standards. A copy of the ANSI A300 Standards is available for review at the Public Works Building.
. Tree Emergency: In the case of a "tree emergency", as defined in this chapter, the public works director is authorized to: a) issue a tree permit without a protected private
tree permit application, b) waive the requirement for a protected private tree permit set forth in this section, or c) waive any of the other regulations of this section or this
chapter.
Notwithstanding any other regulations of this code, in the event of a tree emergency, the person endangered by the tree emergency may take any reasonable action
necessary to avoid or eliminate the immediate danger or hazard. The action taken must be an action that is least likely under the circumstances to cause damage or
removal of any trees, and the village assumes no responsibility or liability for any such action taken. The person taking such action must document the reasons for the
tree emergency by photograph or videotape of the tree emergency condition and the damage or hazard created by such condition, and must report the action taken to the
public works director within forty eight (48) hours after the action is taken. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-3-2: PROTECTED PRIVATE TREE PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND APPROVALS:
A. Application: Each application for a protected private tree permit must be submitted to the public works director on a form provided by the village at the village hall
setting forth or otherwise providing the following information:
. The owner's name and address and the owner's signed consent to the application;
. The applicant's name and address, if different from the owner, and her or his interest in the property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 17/524
. The size, genus and species, and location of the affected trees and the location of the property on which the regulated tree activity will occur, including street address or
legal description;
. A brief explanation of reasons for the proposed regulated tree activity;
. A tree replacement plan, if applicable, in accordance with section 7-6-4-2 of this chapter;
. A construction activity protection plan, if applicable, in accordance with section 7-6-4-3 of this chapter; and
. Such other data and information as the public works director deems necessary to allow full and fair consideration of the tree permit application.
B. Property Inspection And On Site Consultation: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of a protected private tree permit application, the public works director and/or
his/her designee will:
. Visit and inspect the property and contiguous and adjoining lots to determine the existence of protected private trees and to evaluate the tree permit application; and
. Provide an on-site consultation with the applicant to: a) review the proposed regulated tree activity, b) suggest alternatives to the proposed regulated tree activity when
the proposed activity may result in the possible damage or destruction of a protected private tree, and c) provide instruction on the long term continuing care of any
protected private tree that is subject to the tree permit application and any other protected private trees on the property.
C. Approval Of Application: The Public Works Director will approve a protected private tree permit application if, based on the protected private tree permit application,
inspection of the property, and the on-site consultation with the property owner or applicant, as well as all other reliable and relevant information, the Public Works
Director determines that all of the following conditions have been met:
. The proposed regulated tree activity has been planned and will be performed in such a manner, to such a degree, and with such equipment and personnel, so as to: a)
reasonably involve the least amount of damage or removal of trees and b) not defeat, or be inconsistent with, the purposes and intent of this chapter as expressed in
section 7-6-1-1 of this chapter. Further, any tree proposed for removal that, because of its location, poses a threat of damage to an adjacent property will be removed by a
crew under the direct supervision of a certified arborist or degreed forester.
. The protected private tree permit application, including, without limitation, the construction activity protection plan if required, satisfies the requirements of this
chapter.
. The applicant has submitted a replacement guarantee in a form satisfactory to the Public Works Director and consistent with subsection 7-6-4-2B of this chapter. (Ord.
2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
D. Issuance Of Permit; Payment of Permit Fee: If a protected private tree permit application is approved, then the Public Works Director will promptly issue a protected
private tree permit. upon payment by the applicant of a permit fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. No fee will be required if the Public
Works Director determines that no permit is required. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
E. Conditions on Protected Private Tree Permit: As a condition of the issuance of a protected private tree permit, the Public Works Director may require one or more of
the following:
. That any or all protected private trees that may be affected by such regulated tree activity, wherever located on a lot, be preserved and protected; and
. That any or all protected private trees that may be affected by such regulated tree activity, wherever located on a lot, be replaced in accordance with the tree replacement
standards in section 7-6-4-2 of this chapter.
F. Denial: If the protected private tree permit application, inspection of the property, on site consultation, and consideration of all other reliable and relevant information
reveal that the applicant has not satisfied the conditions of subsection C of this section, or has not otherwise justified the damage or removal of trees to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director, then the Public Works Director will promptly notify the applicant that the protected private tree permit application is
denied and that no protected tree permit will be issued. No fee will be required if the application is not approved.
G. Exemptions: The Public Works Director has the authority to exempt a regulated tree activity from the protected private tree permit application requirements of this
chapter if the Public Works Director determines that any of the following circumstances exist:
. When a protected private tree, due to natural causes, is dead, dangerous, or interferes with any existing or proposed public improvements, is in dangerous proximity to
any public utility lines or related facilities, or is a diseased tree or otherwise unsafe, unhealthy, or insect infected and constitutes a hazard to persons, property, or other
trees.
. When a protected private tree, due to natural causes, obstructs any street, sidewalk, or pedestrian path to such an extent that such protected private tree interferes with
free passage and clear view along that street, sidewalk, or path or at any street or driveway intersection.
. When removal of a protected private tree is necessary to comply with the current standards generally observed by professionals in the arboricultural, forestry,
landscaping, or landscape architecture professions.
. When removal of a protected private tree is necessary to properly enhance the health and appearance of existing trees, shrubs, and other vegetation or to implement a
landscaping scheme that the public works director determines complies with the current standards generally observed by professionals in the arboriculture, forestry,
landscaping, or landscape architecture professions.
. When removal of a protected private tree is necessary to avoid denying an applicant a reasonable economic use of the applicant's property, or when the applicant
otherwise demonstrates a hardship or special and unique circumstances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 18/524
H. Appeals: See section 7-6-5-1 of this chapter for appeals related to the provisions of this section.
I. Term Of Protected Private Tree Permit; Expiration And Renewal: A tree permit will expire automatically if the activity authorized by the permit is not commenced
within one hundred eighty (180) days after the permit's issuance or if the activity is not completed within one year after the permit's issuance, except that the public
works director, upon application of the permit holder, may grant reasonable extensions of time for commencement or completion of such activity, but for not more
than fifty percent (50%) of the original time period.
J. Revocation and Remedies: Protected private tree permits are subject to revocation and other remedies as provided in section 7-6-5-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10-
527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-4: GENERAL TREE STANDARDS:
7-6-4-1: TREE PROTECTION REQUIRED:
A. General: All regulated tree activities must be planned and performed in such a manner, to such a degree, and with such equipment and personnel, so as to: 1)
reasonably involve the least amount of damage to or removal of trees and 2) not defeat, or be inconsistent, with, the purposes and intent of this chapter as expressed
in section 7-6-1-1 of this chapter.
B. Construction Activity: To ensure the protection of protected private trees during construction activity, a construction activity protection plan is required in accordance
with section 7-6-4-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-4-2: REPLACEMENT OF PROTECTED PRIVATE TREES REQUIRED:
A. Replacement Required: Installation of a replacement tree is mandatory when a protected private tree is damaged or removed in the course of a regulated tree activity,
except for damage or removal of a protected private tree that, due to natural causes, is dead, is dangerous, interferes with any existing or proposed public
improvements, is in dangerous proximity to any public utility lines or related facilities, is a diseased tree, or is otherwise unsafe, unhealthy, or insect infected and
constitutes a hazard to persons, property, or other trees. Tree replacement is required regardless of whether the protected private tree that is damaged or removed is
located on the same lot on which the regulated tree activity takes place.
B. Protected Tree Replacement Guarantee:
. Except as provided in subsection B4 of this section, the public works director may not issue a protected private tree permit for the removal of any protected private tree
without first receiving from the permit applicant a replacement guarantee in the form of cash or a letter of credit. If the replacement guarantee is a letter of credit, then
the letter of credit must be in a form provided by the village.
. The required amount of the replacement guarantee will be calculated as follows:
. If cash: Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) times the number of replacement trees calculated in accordance with subsection C of this section.
. If a letter of credit: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) times the number of replacement trees calculated in accordance with subsection C of this section.
. The public works director may draw on and use the replacement guarantee only when the applicant fails to replace the total number of all protected private trees actually
removed, and only after providing the applicant with thirty (30) days' notice of such failure to replace, delivered in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The village will return to the applicant any amount of the replacement guarantee remaining after the replacement work has been completed by the applicant or the
village. When the replacement guarantee is secured by a letter of credit, the letter of credit may be drawn on by the village only up to the amount required to ensure
reimbursement of all costs incurred by the village for replacement of all protected private trees actually removed, and thereafter the letter of credit will be returned or
canceled pursuant to the terms of the letter of credit.
. No replacement guarantee is required when no replacement trees are required pursuant to subsection A of this section or any other provision of this chapter. Also, no
replacement guarantee is required when the regulated tree activity is being undertaken in conjunction with other work pursuant to a building permit issued by the village
for which a performance security has been posted with the village by the applicant.
C. Protected Private Tree Replacement Formula: Replacement of a protected private tree must be on a one to one basis.
D. Tree Replacement Specifications: All tree replacements must be:
. Of a dbh of not less than two and one-half inches (21/2");
. Of a species listed in section 7-6-2-2 of this chapter;
. In good health and structurally sound;
. Made pursuant to a written time schedule approved by the public works director; and
. Planted at approximately the same location as the trees they replace, when possible in accordance with good construction practices and current standards generally
observed by professionals in the forestry, landscaping, and landscape architecture professions, unless otherwise approved in advance by the public works director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 19/524
E. Replacement Tree Care: The applicant is solely responsible for the care, watering, and feeding of newly planted trees for a period of two (2) years, and, with regard to
such care, watering, and feeding, the applicant must adhere to all tree care standards.
F. Alternative Tree Replacement Location: If the public works director determines that full tree replacement pursuant to the specifications provided herein will result in
the unreasonable crowding of trees on a public right of way immediately adjacent to the subject property or would otherwise be inconsistent with current standards
generally observed by professionals in the forestry, landscaping, or landscape architecture professions, then the public works director may reduce the number of
replacement trees to be planted on the subject property and designate nearby public rights of way or other public property suitable for the location of new trees.
G. Fee In Lieu Of Tree Replacement: An applicant may request that the village acquire and plant the required replacement trees in locations determined by the village on
payment by the applicant of a tree replacement fee to the village. The public works director has complete discretion whether to approve such a request based on the
best interests of the village at the time of the request, and the public works director has no obligation to approve any such request. If the public works director
determines to approve such a request, then the following standards apply:
. The fee for replacement trees required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter will be the amount set by ordinance of the board of trustees from time to time.
. The fee must be received by the public works director within thirty (30) days after the date of the damage or removal for which replacement is required. (Ord. 2007-10-
527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-4-3: CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PROTECTION PLAN:
A. Plan Required: A construction activity protection plan must be filed with all protected private tree permit applications when the proposed regulated tree activity is part
of construction activity.
B. Contents of Construction Activity Protection Plan: A construction activity protection plan must include a site plan of the property drawn to a scale not less than one
inch equals ten feet (1" = 10'). The plan must be drawn on a topographic map if deemed necessary by the public works director. The drawing must be graphically and
accurately marked with all of the following information:
. Location of the property, including street address or legal description.
. Existing and proposed contours of the lot on which the construction activity is to take place.
. Building elevations, if applicable.
. The name of the general contractor or project representative, if any, responsible for the proposed construction activity.
. A demonstration of the ways in which the applicant will ensure that the level of tree protection required by section 7-6-4-1 of this chapter will be achieved.
. The location of all existing protected private trees that are located on or near the subject property, and the location of all trees four inches (4") or larger dbh other than
protected private trees that are reasonably likely to be damaged or removed during the proposed construction activity.
. A legend referencing the Lake Zurich Tree Classification dbh, genus and species, general condition, and proposed disposition of existing protected private trees that are
located on or near the subject property and trees other than protected private trees that are reasonably likely to be damaged or removed during the construction activity,
including, without limitation, each tree located on a lot adjacent to the construction activity whose drip line overhangs the area of the proposed construction activity.
(a) Lake Zurich Tree Classification is determined by the Village of Lake Zurich Tree Commission, Lake Zurich Tree Classification List (Classification
List) as updated from time to time, found on the Lake Zurich Forestry page. Applicants shall utilize the Classification List on the Lake Zurich
Forestry page.
(b) The Classification List separates all trees found in the Morton Arboretum Northern Illinois tree list into one of five groups: Heritage, Landmark,
Desirable, Undesirable and Noxious. Tree ratings take into account the fitness, life expectancy, mature DBH, and weediness characteristics, and
other identified species traits into account.
The Commission assigned replacement rate for each tree rating group:
Heritage – 75% replacement
Landmark – 50% replacement
Desirable – 33% replacement
Undesirable – 0% replacement
Noxious – 0% replacement – mandatory removal as a part of new construction.
. Detailed specifications for protection of protected private trees and for the protection of trees other than protected private trees that are reasonably likely to be damaged
or removed during implementation of the proposed construction activity, including, without limitation, proposed measures such as construction pruning, root pruning,
installation of a retaining wall or high visibility plastic mesh fencing, and auguring of utility lines when such auguring is determined by the public works director to be
necessary to improve the chances of tree survival. Such specifications also must include the identification and clear delineation on the site plan of the construction
activity area, the tree protection area, and their respective perimeters.
(a) When an applicant proposes removing trees from a site within in the Village, the DBH of existing tree species to be removed will be classified by
tree rating group. Each rating group DBH total will be multiplied by the associated replacement rate. The resulting solutions will be added
together to identify the total DBH of replacement trees required for the current design plan. Replacement tree can be planted onsite, and/or the
total DBH of trees to be planted per plan can be subtracted from the total DBH of replacement trees required and the rest can be paid in-lieu-of
fee to the Village for tree replacement offsite.
(b) The applicable in-lieu-of fee is calculated by taking the remaining DBH to be replaced, divide the remainder by 2.5 (the minimum DBH for
replacement trees allowed in the Village) and multiply the solution by the average market value as determined by the Village Arborist for a >2.5”
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 20/524
tree for that year/season (as listed on the Lake Zurich Forestry page by the Village Arborist). Developers shall utilize the Village of Lake Zurich
Tree Replacement Worksheet found on the Lake Zurich Forestry page to work through this process.
C. Construction Activity Area: The construction activity area is the area of the subject property that is the smallest area reasonably needed to undertake the proposed
construction activity, as determined by the public works director. The construction activity area must include the entire area affected by the proposed construction
activity and any access route across the public right of way. Construction activity may not be conducted or staged in any area of the property located outside the
construction activity area. No excess soil, additional fill, liquids, or any construction debris may be placed or located outside the construction activity area. All
buildings, structures, and driveways must be located so as to reasonably involve the least amount of damage or removal of trees while complying with minimum
required yard and setback requirements of the Lake Zurich zoning code.
D. Tree Protection Area: The tree protection area is the area of the property, within the construction activity protection plan, in which no construction activity may be
conducted. All reasonable measures and protective materials must be employed to protect trees within the tree protection area. Protective materials may include,
without limitation, the temporary installation of high visibility plastic mesh fencing or other, similar materials specifically approved by the public works director. All
such fencing must be at least four feet (4') in height and be secured to metal posts driven into the ground and spaced not more than six feet (6') apart. All protective
measures and materials must be in place and approved by the public works director before commencement of any construction activity. Protective materials may not
be removed until the public works director approves such removal after the completion of all construction activity. No attachments, fences, or wires, other than those
approved for bracing, guying, or wrapping may be attached to any protected private tree during the construction activity. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-4-4: GENERAL MAINTENANCE; REMOVAL OF DISEASED, DEAD, AND DANGEROUS TREES:
A. General Maintenance Standards: Every property owner must maintain the trees and shrubs on her or his property and on the parkways abutting her or his property in
a safe and healthy manner; must keep trees and shrubs properly watered, trimmed, pruned, sprayed, treated, and preserved so as to avoid disease, insect infestation,
or other conditions detrimental to such trees and to avoid hazards to persons, property, and other vegetation; and must remove trees and shrubs on her or his
property that are so unsafe, unhealthy, diseased, or insect infested as to constitute a hazard to persons, property, or other vegetation.
B. Removal of Diseased, Dead, and Dangerous Trees:
. Obstructions and Other Dangerous Conditions: Every owner or occupant of any house, building, lot, or premises in the village must keep trees, shrubs, vines, and other
vegetation located on her or his property trimmed and maintained so as to prevent or remove the following:
. Any tree that is diseased, dead, dangerous, or likely to fall or that is otherwise so unsafe, unhealthy, or insect infected as to constitute a hazard to persons, property, or
other vegetation;
. The obstruction of any street, pedestrian path, or designated village path to any extent that interferes with free passage and clear view along such streets and paths and at
any street or driveway intersection;
. The obstruction of any sewer, drainage way, or septic field; or
d. The dangerous proximity of any tree or other vegetation to public utility lines.
Any tree or other vegetation located on private property that is maintained in violation of any of the foregoing standards is a public nuisance.
. Notice of Violation: If a tree or other vegetation has not been trimmed or cut as required by this section, then the public works director must cause a written notice of
violation to be issued as follows:
. The notice must be served personally or sent by registered mail to the person to whom was sent the last preceding general tax bill for the property on which the subject
tree or trees are located, and a copy of the notice must be mailed to the occupant of such property.
. The notice must identify, in general, the affected tree or trees and the violation or violations. The notice also must state that the violation or violations must be cured
within thirty (30) days after the date of delivery or mailing shown on the notice and that, thereafter, the village may issue a citation and may itself undertake all action
necessary to cure the violation or violations.
. Village Action If Violation Not Cured; Costs And Expenses: If the owner of the property has not cured all violations stated in the notice within thirty (30) days after the
date shown on the notice, then the village, with its own forces or forces hired by the village, may take all necessary actions to cause the violation or violations to be cured.
The village will assess all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred in connection therewith, including the costs of collection, against the property owner. If those
costs and expenses are not paid by the property owner within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written invoice, then the village may place a lien on the subject property
and perfect that lien in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
. Inspections: The public works director may cause inspections and surveys to be conducted as necessary to determine the existence, nature, and extent of violations of this
section, and the public works director will report the results of such inspections and surveys to the village manager. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-10-
861, 10-1-2012)
. Appeals: See section 7-6-5-1 of this chapter for appeals related to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-4-5: WAIVERS OR MODIFICATIONS THROUGH ZONING OR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
When a zoning approval or a subdivision approval is so conditioned as to fully accomplish the goals and purposes of this chapter, then the board of trustees may waive or
modify the requirements of this chapter as part of that zoning or subdivision approval. Such waiver or modification may be revoked by the board of trustees at any time if
any condition imposed pursuant to such approval is violated and such violation persists for more than ten (10) days after notice to the owner of the property of such
violation. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
7-6-5: APPEALS; PENALTIES; PERMIT REVOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 21/524
7-6-5-1: APPEALS:
A. Appeals Related To Protected Tree Permits; Stay Of Activities: An applicant may appeal any decision of the public works director: 1) denying a protected private tree
permit application, 2) revoking a protected private tree permit, or 3) denying an exemption pursuant to subsection 7-6-3-2G of this chapter. Any such appeal is taken
initially to the village manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the village manager within five (5) business days after receipt of notice of the public works
director's decision from which the appeal is taken. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the written notice of appeal, the village manager, based on his or her
review of the protected private tree permit application and any other reliable and relevant evidence, documents, or information, may either uphold, reverse, or
amend the Public Works Director's decision. The Village Manager must notify the person who filed the appeal within two (2) business days after such decision has
been made. The decision of the Village Manager is final. The filing of a written notice of appeal to the Village Manager pursuant to this section will stay all regulated
tree activity and other activity for which a tree permit subject to the appeal has been granted or sought.
B. Appeals Related To Maintenance And Removal Standards; Stay Of Activities: An appeal from a decision of, or notice issued by, the Public Works Director pursuant to
section 7-6-4-4 of this chapter may be taken to the Village Manager by an adversely affected person by filing a written notice of appeal with the Village Manager
within five (5) business days after receipt of the decision of the Public Works Director or the date of the delivery or mailing of the notice. The Village Manager must
review the evidence, documents, or information and may hear and receive new evidence, and must render a decision on such appeal. The decision of the Village
Manager is final. The filing of an appeal pursuant to this section will stay enforcement of the decision or notice unless the Public Works Director makes a written
finding that such stay would present an undue threat to the public health or safety or to property in the Village. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-10-
861, 10-1-2012)
7-6-5-2: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter will be subject to fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each violation. For purposes of
this section, each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs or continues will be deemed a separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007; amd.
Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-6-5-3: PERMIT REVOCATION:
Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended if the permit holder violates the terms of the permit or any other provision of this chapter. (Ord.
2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Lake Zurich, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2018-12-279, passed December 3,
2018. Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or
inconsistent therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or
repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE
LAKE ZURICH MUNICIPAL CODE
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF LAKE ZURICH, LAKE COUNTY, ILLINOIS, as follows:
SECTION I. Findings and Determinations. It is hereby found and determined that, in order to provide for health, safety and welfare of the citizenry served
by the Village of Lake Zurich, it is necessary and convenient to review, amend, establish and adopt a Lake Zurich Municipal Code for the regulation and
control of those activities, structures, uses and other matters all as authorized by Section 1-1-1 et seq. of Chapter 24, Cities and Villages, as amended,
being the Municipal Code 1961, as amended, and other relevant provisions of the Illinois Revised Statutes, 1987, as amended.
SECTION II. Code Adopted. The Lake Zurich Municipal Code as appended hereto is hereby authorized, approved and adopted as the Official Village
Code of the Village of Lake Zurich, Lake County, Illinois, all upon the terms, provisions, limitations and conditions as set forth in said Lake Zurich Municipal
Code.
SECTION III. Ordinance Number; Effective Date. This ordinance shall be designated Ordinance No. 89-04-311 and shall be in full force and effect ten days
after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form.
The foregoing ordinance was passed by a vote as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 22/524
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the Official Code of the Village. This
Village Code of Ordinances shall be known and cited as the LAKE ZURICH MUNICIPAL CODE or the MUNICIPAL CODE and it is hereby published by
authority of the Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this Municipal Code by title in any legal document.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The Municipal Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of
this State as the ordinances of the Village of Lake Zurich of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of
this Code.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the Municipal Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Municipal Code.
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this Municipal Code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so
authorized by the Village Board. The Village Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the officialcopies maintained in the office
of the Clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of the Municipal Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up-to-date and
efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through
the office of the Village Clerk. Said Municipal Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the
property of the Village and shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by order of the Village Board.
1-1-5: JURISDICTION:
Unless otherwise provided in this Municipal Code, this Municipal Code applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of the Village. Provisions of this
Municipal Code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law where the law confers power on the Village
to regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits.
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this Municipal Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Municipal
Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants, notes or bonds; salary ordinances; ordinances relating to the establishment, dedication, opening,
grade, naming, improvement, altering, widening or vacating of any streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public grounds; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the Village; ordinances regulating
subject matters reserved from enactment in this Municipal Code; and all special ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of this Municipal Code.
No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be considered reordained or re-enacted by virtue of this Municipal Code, unless
specifically re-enacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinance does not impair or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 23/524
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Municipal Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as the Municipal Code may contain provisions for
such matters; in which case, this Municipal Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Municipal Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new
enactment of the same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as
affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of
the adoption of this Municipal Code.
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Municipal Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Municipal Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction. Such decision shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Municipal Code, or any part thereof.
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF CODE VIOLATIONS; GENERAL PENALTY
1-3-1: ADMINISTRATION OF CODE VIOLATIONS:
A. Authorized Officials, Processes: The Village Board of Trustees and the Village Manager and their appointed delegates including among others
representatives of the Lake Zurich Police Department, Building and Zoning Department, and Public Works Department have authority to administer and
enforce the provisions of this Code. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, a Code violation may be processed, heard, and
adjudicated by the Illinois Circuit Court for the Nineteenth Judicial Circuit (Lake County), or through the Village's administrative hearing system, or as
otherwise specifically provided in this Code or otherwise by law. In the case of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this section and
any other provision of this Code, the provisions of this section will apply and control except as otherwise determined in writing by the Village Manager.
(Ord. 2010-02-697, 2-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
B. Administrative Hearing System: If a violation of this Code is processed, heard, and adjudicated through the Village's administrative hearing system, then
chapter 8 of this title will apply and govern the processing, hearing, adjudication, and enforcement of that violation. (Ord. 2010-02-697, 2-1-2010)
1-3-2: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. General Penalty; Fines: Whenever the fine or penalty for a violation of this Code or any other code, ordinance, or regulation of the Village is not
specified, then that violation is punishable by a fine as shown in title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2010-02-697, 2-1-2010; amd.
Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
B. Separate Violation: A separate violation will be deemed to have been committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
C. Imprisonment: The Village may seek imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months for any violation in lieu of, or in addition to, any fine levied
under subsection A of this section, except that the Village may assess only those penalties set forth in subsection A of this section unless imprisonment
is specifically provided for in the citation, summons, or warrant or by other notice. (Ord. 2010-02-697, 2-1-2010)
1-3-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The administration of violations under section 1-3-1 of this chapter and the general penalty provided in section 1-3-2 of this chapter are applicable to every
section of this Code the same as though they were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
Code when any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or when any action that is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, will be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense will be deemed committed on each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 24/524
continues unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code.
The administration of violations under section 1-3-1 of this chapter and the general penalty provided in section 1-3-2 of this chapter apply to the
amendment of any section of this Code and to any code adopted herein by reference, regardless of whether that penalty is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance.
A reference to a section of this Code is deemed also to refer to and include the administration of Code violations and the penalty section relating thereto,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
In all cases when the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed, but not more than one recovery may be had against the same person for the same offense. For purposes of this regulation, the
revocation of a license or permit will not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and no fine or penalty is
specifically declared for that breach, the provisions of this chapter will apply.
Every person concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by this code, whether one directly commits the act, or prosecutes, counsels, aids or abets
in its commission, may be prosecuted and on conviction is punishable as if he had directly committed such act. (Ord. 2010-02-697, 2-1-2010)
1-3-4: NO LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee will be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee
is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (Ord. 2010-02-697, 2-1-2010)
Chapter 4
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-4-1: ELECTION; TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
The village shall be governed by a board of trustees which shall be elected at large and shall consist of the village president and six (6) trustees.
The terms of office of the trustees shall be four (4) years and until their successors are elected and have qualified. After the first election, three (3) trustees
shall be elected by the electors of the village for a four (4) year term, as provided by statute.
The village president shall be elected by the electors of the village at a regular village election, as provided by statute. The village president's term of office
shall be four (4) years.
Vacancies in the offices of trustee or village president shall be filled as provided by Illinois law. (Ord. 2009-07-641, 7-6-2009)
1-4-2: SALARIES:
The village president shall receive a salary of nine thousand five hundred dollars ($9,500.00) per year. The village president also shall receive a salary of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year for serving as the Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner. These salaries shall be paid in accordance with the
village's regular payroll procedures. Trustees of the village shall be paid a salary of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per year, payable in accordance
with the village's regular payroll procedures. (Ord. 2009-07-641, 7-6-2009)
1-4-3: VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
A. Powers And Duties:
1. President Of Board: The village president shall be president of the board of trustees as provided by Illinois law. The village president may be referred
to as mayor of the village.
2. Supervisory Powers: The village president shall be the chief executive officer of the village and shall perform all such duties as may be required by
Illinois law or local ordinance. The village president shall have general supervision over all the executive officers of the village and over all of the
employees of the village. The village president shall have the power and authority to inspect at any reasonable time all books and records kept by
any village officer, employee, or agent.
3. Designations Of Duties1: The village president shall settle any question as to the respective powers or duties of any appointed officer or employee of
the village. The village president shall have the power to delegate to any such officer any duty that is to be performed when no specific officer has
been directed to perform the duty.
4. Appointments Of Officers: The village president shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, all officers whose
appointment which by law or ordinance the village president is empowered to fill, and whenever a vacancy occurs in any office, which by law or
ordinance the village president is empowered to fill, the village president shall, within thirty (30) days after the happening of such vacancy,
communicate to the board of trustees the name of the appointee to such office, and pending the concurrence of the board of trustees in such
appointment, the village president may designate some suitable person to discharge the functions of such office.
5. Removal Of Officers: The village president shall have the power to remove any officer appointed by the village president on any formal charge
whenever the village president determines that the interests of the village demand such removal. The village president's power to remove an officer
shall be exercised in accordance with Illinois law. The village president shall report the reasons for such removal to the board of trustees at a meeting
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 25/524
to be held not less than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days after such removal. If the village president fails or refuses to file with the clerk a
statement of the reasons for such removal, or if the board of trustees by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected, by
"yeas" and "nays" to be entered upon its record, disapproves of such removal, then such officer shall thereupon become restored to the office from
which the officer was removed, but the officer shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be removed a second time for the
same offense.
6. Signature Required: The village president shall sign all village warrants, commissions, permits, and licenses granted by authority of the board of
trustees, except as otherwise provided, and such other documents as law or ordinance may require.
7. Peace Officer: The village president may exercise within the village limits the powers conferred upon sheriffs by law to suppress disorder and keep
the peace.
B. President Pro Tem: During the temporary absence or disability of the village president, the board of trustees shall elect one of its number to act as
president pro tem who, during the absence or disability of the village president, shall perform the duties of the office, in accordance with Illinois law.
(Ord. 2009-07-641, 7-6-2009)
1-4-4: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
A. Regular Meetings: The board of trustees shall hold its regular meetings at the village hall on the first and third Mondays of each month at seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M., except when such date falls on a legal holiday, in which event the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding business day. The board of
trustees may change the date, place, or time of any meeting by proper notice in accordance with Illinois law.
B. Special Meetings: The village president or any three (3) of the trustees may call special meetings of the board of trustees at any time. Notice of each
special meeting shall be given by the village in accordance with the Illinois open meetings act. The clerk shall promptly notify all members of the board
of trustees of any special meeting by delivering a written notice stating the time and place of such meeting to each member personally or by leaving the
notice at the member's residence2.
Whenever all of the members of the board of trustees are present at any special meeting, the requirement of notice of such special meeting shall be
deemed waived. (Ord. 2009-07-641, 7-6-2009)
1-4-5: LACK OF QUORUM:
If for any reason a quorum of the board of trustees is not present at any meeting of the board of trustees, then those members present at the meeting shall
adjourn the meeting. (Ord. 2009-07-641, 7-6-2009)
1-4-6: CONTENT, ORDER OF AGENDA; CONSENT AGENDA; RULES OF PROCEDURE:
A. Content And Order Of Agenda: For regular meetings, the board of trustees may establish, from time to time, the categories of agenda matters and the
order in which the categories appear on the agenda. The board of trustees, by motion and a majority vote, may change the categories, order, and
content of the agenda for a particular meeting, in accordance with the Illinois open meetings act. The agenda for a regular meeting of the board of
trustees generally shall include, among other items determined by the board of trustees: 1) call to order; 2) roll call; 3) approval of minutes from
previous meetings of the board of trustees; 4) public comments; 5) consent agenda; 6) old or continuing business; 7) new business; and 8)
adjournment. (Ord. 2012-07-846, 7-16-2012)
B. Consent Agenda: The village manager, in his or her discretion, may include on the consent agenda, among other items: 1) all matters on which a
preliminary vote or recommendation has been taken by the board of trustees, subject to the drafting of an ordinance or resolution; 2) approval of
meeting minutes, resolutions, ordinances or motions; 3) acceptance of plats of subdivision; and 4) all other matters deemed by the manager as routine
or noncontroversial and appropriate for a consent agenda. The consent agenda shall be adopted and approved by a roll call vote and the roll call shall
be recorded in the minutes of the board of trustees along with the words "Consent Agenda". The motion to adopt the consent agenda shall be
nondebatable. Any item may be removed from the consent agenda at the board of trustees' meeting at the request of any one trustee or village
president, in which case the item shall be considered separately immediately following the consent agenda vote. The taking of a single vote on the
consent agenda shall be deemed sufficient compliance with all requirements of law, as if the vote had been taken separately by nays and ayes on the
question of each ordinance, resolution and motion included on the consent agenda. In the event one or more trustees wishes to be recorded as
passing or voting against any item included in the consent agenda, that trustee, immediately following the vote, shall so notify the village clerk who will
make an appropriate reference in the minutes to record such negative votes. (Ord. 2012-07-846, 7-16-2012; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
C. Rules Of Procedure: In matters not specified below and in general, the board of trustees shall apply "Robert's Rules Of Order" to guide the board of
trustees' legislative proceedings. The following specific rules shall guide meetings of the board of trustees:
1. Speaking On The Question: No member shall speak more than twice on the same question without unanimous consent of the board of trustees, nor
more than once until every member wishing to speak shall have spoken. Speeches on all questions shall be limited to ten (10) minutes.
2. Voting: Every member present when a question is taken shall vote unless excused by the board of trustees or unless the member may be directly
interested in the question, in which case, the member shall not vote. Every motion shall be reduced to writing if the village president or any member
desires it.
3. Question To Be Stated: Every question or motion when seconded shall be stated by the village president distinctly before it is open for debate.
4. Votes To Be Recorded: If any member requires it, the ayes and nays upon any question shall be taken and entered on the minutes.
5. Motion To Lay On Table: A motion to lay on the table simply shall not be debatable, but a motion to lay on the table with any condition shall be
subject to amendment and debate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 26/524
6. Clerk To Forward Papers: The clerk shall forward all papers to the appropriate committee and officers as early as the third business day after the
reference shall have been made.
7. Ordinances: Except where otherwise required by law, ordinances need not be read in their entirety prior to action by the board of trustees and may
be enacted at the same meeting at which they are introduced.
8. Written Communications: Written communications received by the village need not be read in full, but the clerk may report the substance thereof to
the board of trustees and, thereafter, the village president may refer the communication to the appropriate committee; provided, however, that any
such communication shall be read in full and separately acted upon by the board of trustees if so requested by the village president or any member
of the board of trustees.
9. Addressing The Board: Except during the public comment portion of the meeting, no person not a member of the board of trustees, except village
officials and employees, shall have the privilege of addressing the board of trustees without the consent of two-thirds (2/3) of all members present.
10. Suspension Of Rules: These rules of procedure may be suspended by concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the board of trustees. (Ord.
2009-07-641, 7-6-2009; amd. Ord. 2012-07-846, 7-16-2012)
1-4-7: COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE; SPECIAL COMMITTEES; TASK FORCES:
A. Committee Of The Whole:
1. Creation Of Committee: The committee of the whole of the board of trustees is hereby created as a standing committee of the board of trustees.
2. Meetings: The village president or any three (3) of the trustees may call a meeting of the committee of the whole at any time. Notice of each
committee of the whole meeting shall be given by the village in accordance with the Illinois open meetings act. The clerk shall promptly notify all
members of the board of trustees of a meeting of the committee of the whole by delivering a written notice stating the time and place of such meeting
to each member personally or by leaving the notice at the member's residence.
3. Membership; Chairperson: The committee of the whole is composed of the seven (7) members of the board of trustees. The village president is the
chairperson of the committee of the whole. In the absence of the village president from a meeting of the committee of the whole, the members of the
committee of the whole present at that meeting shall elect from among themselves a person to serve as chairperson for that meeting.
4. Meetings; Procedures: All meetings of the committee of the whole must be conducted in compliance with the requirements of the Illinois open
meetings act. The procedures governing meetings of the committee of the whole generally shall be the same as the procedures applicable to
meetings of the board of trustees.
B. Special Committees: Special committees of the board of trustees may be designated as provided in this subsection. A special committee must be
composed exclusively of members of the board of trustees.
1. Designation: The village president by appointment or the board of trustees by motion, resolution, or ordinance duly adopted may designate and
establish special committees of the board of trustees as the president or board of trustees deem advisable from time to time. The membership of a
special committee of the board appointed by the village president is subject to the advice and consent of the board of trustees. When a special
committee of the board is established, the appointing authority, being either the village president or the board of trustees, must set forth the
membership of that committee, the purposes and duties of that committee, and the term of that committee and its members.
2. Meetings; Procedures: Meetings of a special committee must be conducted in compliance with the requirements of the Illinois open meetings act.
The procedures governing meetings of a special committee generally shall be the same as the procedures applicable to meetings of the board of
trustees.
C. Committees Are Advisory Only: The committee of the whole and special committees of the board of trustees are advisory to the board of trustees only
and have no power to take final action on any matter.
D. Task Forces: The village president may appoint a task force from time to time to advise the village president on village policies and issues. Task forces
will not be advisory to the board of trustees, any other board or commission of the village, or employee of the village; will not have authority to act in
any way for or on behalf of the village; and will not be a board, commission, committee, or other subsidiary body of the village. Members of a task force
may not accept any monetary compensation or gratuity from the village. The village president must advise the board of trustees of the creation of any
task force, the purpose of that task force, and the membership of that task force. (Ord. 2009-10-658, 10-5-2009)
1-4-8: LEGAL COUNSEL TO THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The board of trustees, by resolution, may appoint an attorney or firm of attorneys as legal counsel to the board of trustees. Such legal counsel shall attend
board of trustees' meetings at the request of the village president or any three (3) trustees and, upon request at a meeting of the board of trustees or at
any other time, shall provide legal advice relative to village ordinances, resolutions, motions or any other village matters, to the village president, or to the
board of trustees, or to any committee of the board, or to any trustee. In addition, such legal counsel shall provide legal advice relative to village matters to
any staff persons of the village upon request of the village manager, the village president, or any trustee, and to the village president upon his or her
request. The trustees shall designate a convenient location at meetings of the board of trustees where such legal counsel shall be seated. Such legal
counsel shall not be an officer of the village and shall serve at the pleasure of the board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-07-641, 7-6-2009; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861,
10-1-2012)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE CLERK
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 27/524
1-5-1: ELECTION AND TERM:
The village clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until a successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute1. (1989 Code)
1-5-2: OATH AND BOND:
The clerk, before entering upon the duties of office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by law, and shall execute a bond to the village as provided in
subsection 1-6-4B of this title, with sureties as shall be approved by the president and board of trustees, conditioned for the faithful performance of the
duties of the office and the payment of all monies that may be received by the clerk according to law and ordinance. The bond shall be filed with the
treasurer. (1989 Code)
1-5-3: DUTIES:
The clerk shall:
A. Minutes, Notices: Attend all meetings of the board of trustees and keep in a suitable book a full and faithful record of its proceedings. The clerk shall
issue and cause to be served upon all trustees notices of all special meetings of the board2, also notices to the members of the different committees of
the board and to all other persons whose attendance may be required before any such committee when so directed by the chairman thereof.
B. Custody Of Seal And Records: Be the keeper and custodian of the corporate seal of the village. The clerk shall carefully preserve all books, records,
papers, maps and effects of every description belonging to the village or pertaining to the clerk's office and not in actual use and possession of other
village officers. Upon the expiration of an official term, the clerk shall deliver all such records, books, papers and effects to the successor in office.
C. Record Of Ordinances: Record and properly index in a book kept for that purpose all ordinances passed by the board within five (5) days after passage
and approval by the president, and at the foot of each ordinance so recorded, the clerk shall make a memorandum showing dates of passage3.
D. Preparation Of Documents: Prepare all commissions, licenses, permits and other official documents required to be issued by the clerk under the laws
and ordinances of the village and shall attest the same with the corporate seal and shall in like manner attest all deeds for the sale or transfer of real
estate owned by the village and all bonds issued by the village.
E. Record Of Licenses: Number in numerical order all licenses made out by the clerk and before delivery thereof, shall register them in like order in a book
kept for that purpose, giving number, date, period of time for which issued, to whom issued, for what purpose, fee and definite location of business of
licensee. The clerk shall also on May 1 of each year, prepare and mail notices for renewal of licenses and payment of fees to the village to all persons
engaged in or carrying on a business or occupation required to be licensed by this code4.
F. Other Duties: In addition to the duties set forth in this section, perform all other duties pertaining to the office as are and may be imposed upon the clerk
by law or resolution of the board of trustees. (1989 Code)
1-5-4: OFFICES OF CLERK AND COLLECTOR:
The village clerk shall not hold the office of village collector. (1989 Code)
1-5-5: OFFICE:
The clerk shall keep office in the village hall or at such other place as the board of trustees may direct. (1989 Code)
1-5-6: SALARY:
The salary for the village clerk shall be four thousand eight hundred dollars ($4,800.00) per year. The village clerk's salary may be adjusted, from time to
time, by the president and board of trustees, subject to the limitations set on increases or decreases in salaries of elected officers by the Illinois
constitution, article 3 of the Illinois municipal code, and other applicable law. (Ord. 2006-10-455, 10-16-2006, eff. 5-1-2009)
1-5-7: DEPUTY CLERK:
A. Appointment: There is hereby created in and for the village the office of deputy clerk who shall have the power and duty to execute all documents
required by any law to be executed by the village clerk and to affix the seal of the village clerk thereto whenever required. The appointment of such
deputy clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the village clerk and shall be a permanent, full time employee of the village at the time of and for the duration
of appointment.
B. Signature On Documents: In signing any such document the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the village clerk followed with the word "by" and the
deputy clerk's own name and the words "deputy clerk". (Ord. 2013-06-895, 6-17-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 28/524
Chapter 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-6-1: ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS:
The officials of the Village shall be as follows:
A. Elected Officers:
President of the Board of Trustees (Mayor)
Trustees
Village Clerk
The date of May 1 at nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., following a general Municipal election for the Village of Lake Zurich, is hereby set as the time when all
officials elected at such general Municipal election shall take office. (1989 Code)
B. Appointed Officials:
Budget Officer
Chief of Police and sworn officers
Collector
Fire Chief and sworn paramedic/firefighters
Prosecuting Attorney
Treasurer
Village Attorney
Village Manager (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
All other offices heretofore created within the Village pursuant to ordinance are abolished effective April 30, 1989. (1989 Code)
1-6-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply alike to all officers or employees of the Village regardless of the time of the creation of the office or of the time of
the appointment of the officer. (1989 Code)
1-6-3: TERM AND EXPIRATION OF OFFICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 91-12-491, 12-16-1991)
1-6-4: OATH AND BOND:
A. Oath: Every officer of the Village shall, before entering upon his duties, take the oath prescribed by law.
B. Bond Requirements: Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Board of Trustees, upon entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond in
such amount as may be determined by the Board, and with a corporate surety, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office or
position.
The following amounts shall be bonds required of the officers of the Village:
Clerk $25,000.00
Collector $500,000.00
Finance
Director
$50,000.00
Mayor $25,000.00
Treasurer An amount of money that is not less than 3 times the latest federal census population or any subsequent census figure used for
motor fuel tax, but not less than $500,000.00
The officers and employees required to supply a bond shall furnish such bond in an amount as required by statute or by resolution of the president and
board of trustees, whichever amount is greater.
The surety shall be a corporate surety licensed to issue fidelity bonds in the state of Illinois and must be approved by the village president and board of
trustees. (1989 Code)
1-6-5: SALARIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 29/524
All officers of the village shall receive such salaries as may be provided by ordinance. No officer receiving a salary from the village shall be entitled to
retain any portion of any fees collected by the officer in the performance of his or her duties as municipal officer in the absence of a specific ordinance
provision to that effect. (1989 Code)
1-6-6: ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES1:
The manager shall recommend and the board of trustees shall assign to any appointed officer any duty which is not assigned by ordinance to some other
specific officer and shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective powers and duties of officers. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-
1-2012)
1-6-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Money Received: Every officer or employee of the village other than the treasurer shall, at least once every day, turn over all money received to the
village clerk with a statement showing the source from which the same was received.
B. Books And Records To Successor: Every officer and employee of the village, upon the expiration of his or her term for any cause, shall deliver to his or
her successor all books and records which may be the property of the village, and if no successor has been appointed within one week after the
termination of office, such property shall be delivered to the village clerk. (1989 Code)
1-6-8: INSPECTION OF RECORDS2:
All records kept by any officer of the village shall be open to inspection by the president or any member of the board of trustees at all reasonable times
whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance. (1989 Code)
1-6-9: CONTINUITY IN OFFICE IN EVENT OF DISASTER:
In the event that at the time, or as a consequence of any disaster or occurrence caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or natural
causes such as tornado, earthquake, fire, etc., the incumbent of any municipal office, position or place of employment shall be killed or rendered incapable
of performing the duties of such office or position, such office or position shall be filled, until such time as a successor can be selected in the manner
prescribed by law, by appointment by the following in order of preference:
The mayor
A vote of four (4) of the remaining members of the board of trustees
The manager
The director appointed pursuant to 15 Illinois Compiled Statutes 30/0.01 et seq. (emergency services and disaster operation)
The chief of police
The fire chief
The person appointed in the manner prescribed herein to fill any such office or position shall exercise all the duties and powers of that position during the
emergency and until such time as a successor can be appointed or selected in the manner provided by law. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 93-03-580; Ord. 2012-
10-861, 10-1-2012)
1-6-10: PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Personnel Code: The manager shall develop, maintain, and, from time to time, amend a "Village Of Lake Zurich Employee Handbook" for the use and
governance of village personnel. (Ord. 91-12-491, 12-16-1991; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012; per correspondence dated 1-9-2015)
B. Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund: The president and board of trustees do hereby elect that the village participate in the Illinois municipal retirement
fund effective January 1, 1968. (1989 Code)
1-6-11: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Impersonating Officers And Employees: It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate without lawful authority any village officer or employee.
B. Hindrance Of Officers And Employees: It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or employee of the village while engaged in the duties of
his office or employment. (1989 Code)
1-6-12: INDEMNIFICATION:
It is hereby found and determined that it is in the best interests of the village to provide for the indemnification of officers and employees of the village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 30/524
when the conduct of such officers and employees was carried on in good faith and in a manner which such person or persons reasonably believed to be in
or not opposed to the best interests of the village.
The village shall indemnify any person who was or is a party to or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or
proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative (other than an action by or in the right of the village) by reason of the fact that such
person is or was an officer or employee of the village, against expenses (including attorney fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually
and reasonably incurred by such person in connection with such action, suit or proceeding if such person acted in good faith and in a manner reasonably
believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the village and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to
believe such conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit or proceeding by judgment or settlement, conviction or upon a plea of nolo
contendere or its equivalent, shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith and in a manner which such person
reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the village, or, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had reasonable cause
to believe such conduct was unlawful.
The village shall indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action or suit by
or in the right of the village to procure a judgment in its favor by reason of the fact that such person is or was an officer or employee of the village, against
expenses (including attorney fees) actually and reasonably incurred by such person in connection with the defense or settlement of such action or suit if
such person acted in good faith and in a manner reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the village and except that no
indemnification shall be made in respect of any claim, issue or matter as to which such person shall have been adjudged to be liable for wilful misconduct
or an illegal act in the performance of his duties for the village.
Any indemnification shall be made by the village only if the following conditions are satisfied:
A. The village board of trustees shall have determined, by a majority vote, that indemnification of the officer or employee is proper in the circumstances
because he or she has not committed any act constituting wilful misconduct or illegality as set forth above. (Ord. 91-02-427, 2-4-1991)
B. The said officer or employee shall have notified the village, in writing, through his or her immediate superiors, the village manager, the village president,
or the village attorney, within ten (10) days after being involved in an accident, or receiving notice of any circumstances, that would lead a reasonably
cautious person to anticipate a possible action, suit or proceeding as described above including a description of the incident or circumstances, and the
names, addresses and phone numbers of any potential parties and witnesses, to the extent that he or she knows them. This requirement may be
satisfied by information contained in reports filed by the said officer or employee in the course of his or her duties or employment.
C. The said officer or employee shall have notified the village, in writing, through the village manager and the village attorney, within ten (10) days after
being notified that he or she has been made a party to an action, suit or proceeding as described above, including copies of any summons or other
papers that have been served upon him or her, and, to the extent that he or she has such information, the title and number of the case, the court where
the case is pending, and the date that the officer or employee was served with process. (Ord. 91-02-427, 2-4-1991; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-
2012)
D. The said officer or employee shall have cooperated, and shall continue to cooperate, with the village in its efforts to defend, settle, or otherwise deal
with the action, suit or proceeding.
The indemnification provided by this section shall not be deemed exclusive of any other rights to which those indemnified may be entitled under any
contract or agreement, both as to action in his or her official capacity, and as to action in another capacity while holding such office, and shall continue
as to a person who has ceased to be an officer or employee and shall inure to the benefit of the heirs, executors and administrators of such a person.
The village shall have the power to purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is or was an officer or employee of the village,
against any liability asserted against such person and incurred in any such capacity, or arising out of their status as such, whether or not the village
would have the duty to indemnify such person against such liability under the provisions of this section. (Ord. 91-02-427, 2-4-1991)
1-6-13: MILITARY DUTY:
A. Preamble, Findings Of Fact: The preamble to ordinance 91-02-433 is hereby adopted as findings of fact herein.
B. Military Leave: Any employee of the village, who is also a United States military reservist, a member of the national guard or a former military person
and who is recalled to active military duty during the Persian Gulf Crisis, will be placed on a military leave of absence status during his or her military
active duty unless he or she resigns from employment by the village.
C. Payment Of Deficiency: During the period that such an employee is on active military duty, the village will pay any deficiency between the employee's
pay as such an employee and his or her military pay and housing allowance, if any.
D. Payment For Medical Insurance: During the period that such an employee is on active military duty, up to a maximum of eighteen (18) months, the
village will continue to pay for medical insurance for the employee and his or her family in the same manner and to the same degree as other
employees, pursuant to the COBRA program under the U.S. consolidated omnibus reconciliation act of 1986. (Ord. 91-02-433, 2-19-1991)
1-6-14: CODE OF CONDUCT:
A. Gift Ban And Prohibited Political Activities:
1. Definitions: Whenever the following words or terms are used in this subsection A, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them below:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 31/524
vice presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative
action3, b) relating to collective bargaining4, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: Any person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed
to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at either a general primary election or general election.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to an employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment but, for purposes of this subsection A, does not include any designated holidays,
vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off, or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or
employees whose hours are not fixed, compensated time includes any period of time when the officer or employee is on the premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Any authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in
excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of her or his employment.
EMPLOYEE: All full time, part time, and contractual employee of the village.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but
not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official
position of an officer or employee.
INTEROFFICE GIFT: Any gift given to an officer or employee of the village from a member of the Illinois general assembly; or from the governor,
the lieutenant governor, the attorney general, the secretary of state, the controller, the treasurer or the auditor general of the state of Illinois; or
from a member, officer, appointee, or employee of any state agency as defined in the state officials and employees ethics act5, or of any federal
agency, or of any unit of local government or school district.
INTRAOFFICE GIFT: Any gift given to an officer or employee of the village from another officer or employee of the village.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a) compensation for employment, b) service credit towards
pension benefits, and c) health insurance benefits paid for by the village.
OFFICER: All appointed and elected officials of the village, regardless of whether the official is compensated.
POLITICAL: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include
activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that
are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code6, but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: a. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or
other political event.
b. Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
c. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
d. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
e. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a
campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
f. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
g. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an
effort to get voters to the polls.
h. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
i. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
j. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes.
k. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate
for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
l. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
m. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
n. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
o. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 32/524
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
a. Is seeking official action by the village or by an officer or employee of the village;
b. Does business or seeks to do business with the village or with an officer or employee of the village;
c. Conducts activities regulated by the village or by an officer or employee of the village;
d. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the village or an officer or
employee of the village; or
e. Is registered or required to be registered with the secretary of state under the lobbyist registration act, except that an entity does not become
a prohibited source merely because a registered lobbyist is one of its members or serves on its board of directors.
RELATIVE: Those people related to the officer or employee as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle,
first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughterin-
law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the
father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the officer's or employee's spouse and the officer's or employee's fiance or fiancee.
2. Gifts:
a. Gifts Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided in subsection A2b of this section, no officer or employee, spouse of an officer or employee, or
immediate family member living with an officer or employee, shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source or in violation of
any federal or state statute, rule, or regulation. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this subsection.
b. Exceptions: The restrictions set forth in subsection A2a of this section shall not apply to the following:
(1) Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
(2) Anything for which the officer or employee pays the market value or anything not used and promptly disposed of as provided in subsection A2c
of this section.
(3) A contribution, as defined in article 9 of the Illinois election code7, that is lawfully made under that code or under the state officials and
employees ethics act, or activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate.
(4) Educational materials and missions.
(5) Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss village business.
(6) A gift from a relative of an officer or employee.
(7) Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the officer or employee has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee and not because of the personal
friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the officer or employee shall consider the circumstances
under which the gift was offered, such as:
(A) The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts
between those individuals;
(B) Whether to the actual knowledge of the officer or employee the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
(C) Whether to the actual knowledge of the officer or employee the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar
gifts to other officers or employees.
(8) Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are:
(A) Consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared; or
(B) Purchased ready to eat and delivered by any means.
(9) Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from the outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the duties of the officer or employee as an office holder or employee) of the officer or employee, or the
spouse of the officer or employee, if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer
or employee and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
(10) Intraoffice and interoffice gifts.
(11) Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
(12) Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
c. Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee that is a recipient of a gift that is given in violation of this subsection A may, at his or her discretion,
return the item to the donor or give the item or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501(c)3 of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 33/524
3. Prohibited Political Activities:
a. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any compensated time. No officer or employee shall
intentionally use any property or resources of the village in connection with any prohibited political activity.
b. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as part of
that employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment, or 3) during any compensated time off.
c. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded any additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued
employment, or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for the officer's or
employee's participation in any prohibited political activity.
d. Nothing in this subsection A3 prohibits activities that are otherwise permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as a part of his or her
official or employment duties or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis as permitted by law.
e. No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is paid
in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-06-295, 6-7-2004)
4. Ethics Officer: The village manager, or her or his designee, shall be designated the ethics officer for the village. The ethics officer's duties and
responsibilities shall include: (Ord. 2004-06-295, 6-7-2004; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
a. Providing guidance to officers and employees in completing statements of economic interest before they are filed with the appropriate office; and
b. Providing guidance to officers and employees in the interpretation and implementation of this subsection A and the requirements of section 5-15
and article 10 of the state officials and employees ethics act; and
c. Providing guidance to officers and employees in the interpretation and implementation of other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, or
regulations of the village, the state of Illinois, or the federal government dealing with ethics, conflicts of interest, interests in contracts, jobs, work, or
materials, or the profits thereof, or services to be performed for or by the village.
5. Interpretation: It is the intent of the village that the provisions of this subsection A shall be substantially in accordance with the requirements of
section 5-15 and article 10 of the state officials and employees ethics act. To the extent that section 5-15 or article 10 of the state officials and
employees ethics act may be more restrictive than the requirements of this subsection A, the provisions of section 5-15 and article 10 of the state
officials and employees ethics act shall apply and control. This subsection A does not repeal or otherwise modify the "Village Of Lake Zurich
Personnel Policy And Procedure Manual" ("existing regulations"). To the extent that the existing regulations are less restrictive than section 5-15 or
article 10 of the state officials and employees ethics act and this subsection A, the provisions of section 5-15 and article 10 of the state officials and
employees ethics act and this subsection A shall apply and control. (Ord. 2004-06-295, 6-7-2004)
B. Conflict Of Interest:
1. No officer, appointee or employee of the village shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in his own name or in the name of any other person,
association, trust or corporation, in any contract, work or business of the village, or in the sale of any article, whenever the expense, price or
consideration of the contract, work, business or sale is paid either from the treasury or by any assessment levied by any statute or ordinance. No
officer, appointee or employee shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the purchase of any property which: a) belongs to the village, or b) is sold
for taxes or assessments, or c) is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the village.
2. However, any elected or appointed village board member may provide materials, merchandise, property, services or labor, if:
a. The contract is with a person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or cooperative association in which such interested member has less than
a seven and one-half percent (71/2%) share in the ownership; and
b. Such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his interest prior to or during deliberations concerning the proposed award of
the contract; and
c. Such interested member abstains from voting on the award of the contract, though he shall be considered present for the purposes of establishing
a quorum; and
d. Such contract is approved by a majority vote of those members presently holding office; and
e. The contract is awarded after sealed bids to the lowest responsible bidder if the amount of the contract exceeds one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00), but the contract may be awarded without bidding if the amount is less than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); and
f. The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association,
partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
3. In addition to the above exemption, any elected or appointed village board member may provide materials, merchandise, property, services or labor
if:
a. The award of the contract is approved by a majority vote of the village board, provided that any such interested member shall abstain from voting;
and
b. The amount of the contract does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and
c. The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association,
partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); and
d. Such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his interest prior to or during deliberations concerning the proposed award of
the contract; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 34/524
e. Such interested member abstains from voting on the award of the contract, though he shall be considered present for the purposes of establishing
a quorum.
4. Nothing contained in this subsection B, including the restrictions set forth in subsections B2 and B3 of this section, shall preclude a contract of
deposit of monies, loans or other financial services by the Village with a local bank or local savings and loan association, regardless of whether a
member or members of the Village Board are interested in such bank or savings and loan association as an officer or employee or as a holder of less
than seven and one-half percent (71/2%) of the total ownership interest. A member or members holding such an interest in such a contract shall not
be deemed to be holding a prohibited interest for purposes of this subsection B. Such interested member or members must publicly state the nature
and extent of their interest during deliberations concerning the proposed award of such a contract, but shall not participate in any further
deliberations, concerning the proposed award. Such interested member or members shall not vote on such a proposed award. Any member or
members abstaining from participation in deliberations and voting under this subsection B may be considered present for purposes of establishing a
quorum. Award of such a contract shall require approval by a majority vote of those members presently holding office. Consideration and award of
any such contract in which a member or members are interested may only be made at a regularly scheduled public meeting of the Village Board.
(Ord. 88-01-251, 1-18-1988)
C. Financial Disclosure: (Rep. by Ord. 2017-6-200, 6-5-2017)
D. Miscellaneous:
1. Financial Interest: Any official, appointee, employee or attorney of the village having a direct or indirect financial interest in any matter pending before
the village board or any committee thereof or before the plan commission or zoning board of appeals shall disclose in writing to the manager the
nature of such interest, providing full details, and shall refrain from taking any action or voting on such matter.
2. Representation Of Others: No official, appointee, employee or attorney representing the village in any manner may represent or have an economic
interest in the representation of any person or entity in any proceeding or transaction in which the village, its boards, committees or commissions
may be called upon to take discretionary action, unless such representation or interest does not violate any existing law, rule or regulation, and a full
disclosure of such representation or interest is provided in writing to each member of each board or commission before whom any such matter may
be presented, with copy to the village manager, prior to any hearing or meeting of such board or commission at which such matter is first reviewed or
considered.
3. Posttermination Representation: No official, appointee, employee or attorney shall, for a period of one year after termination of his term or
employment by the village, represent any person or entity in any transaction before the village, its boards, committees or commissions if the official,
appointee, employee or attorney participated personally and substantially in the subject matter of the transaction during his term of office or
employment, unless such representation or interest does not violate any existing law, rule or regulation, and a full disclosure of such representation
or interest is provided in writing to each member of each board or commission before whom any such matter may be presented, with copy to the
village manager, prior to any hearing or meeting of such board or commission at which such matter is first reviewed or considered.
4. Related Parties: No official, appointee or employee of the village shall use or permit the use of his position to assist any relative in securing
employment or contracts with the village, or to assist any relative in any manner to achieve promotions or salary increases, or to achieve any position
of priority or advantage over any other employee of the village, or to assist any relative in any disciplinary or other hearing before the village, its
boards, committees or commissions. For purposes of this subsection D4, a "relative" is defined as a spouse or as any of the following, whether by
blood or by adoption: parent, child, brother, sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother or half-sister; provided, however, nothing in this
subsection D4 shall prevent the employment of any related party where the supervisor of the department seeking the employee, or the manager,
where supervisory or other managerial employees are sought, determines that the related party is the best qualified individual for the position. (Ord.
88-01-251, 1-18-1988; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
5. Confidentiality: Except upon authorization by the corporate authorities of the village, no official, appointee, employee or attorney representing the
village shall disclose to any person information obtained or discussed during any session of the village board or any committee, board or commission
thereof where such session was closed to the public in compliance with 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq., of the open meetings act (and as
from time to time amended). (Ord. 88-01-251, 1-18-1988)
6. Interest In Real Estate: Each official, appointee, attorney and employee of the village shall, within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this section,
advise the village manager in writing of each and every parcel of real estate within the village in which such individual: (Ord. 88-01-251, 1-18-1988;
amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
a. Holds an ownership interest, whether directly or in the name of any other person or entity;
b. Holds a power of appointment or beneficial interest in any land trust, whether directly or in the name of any other person or entity;
c. Has a pecuniary interest in any such real estate or land trust; and
d. Holds a mortgage, lien or other form of security in any such parcel of real estate or land trust, whether directly or in the name of any other person
or entity,
providing in each instance full particulars as to the real estate titleholder and any action or request pending before the village, its boards,
committees or commissions. (Ord. 88-01-251, 1-18-1988)
Prior to, or simultaneously with, any annexation petition being filed with the village, each official, appointee, attorney and employee of the village
having an interest in such real estate shall advise the village manager in writing of such interest by providing the information required by
subsections D6a, D6b, D6c and D6d of this section, with full particulars.
Within thirty (30) days of acquiring an interest in real estate within the village, and prior to seeking any permit, variance, zoning or other action by
the village, its agencies, departments, committees, commissions and boards, each official, appointee, attorney and employee of the village shall
advise the manager in writing of such interest by providing the information required by subsections D6a, D6b, D6c and D6d of this section with full
particulars. Provided, however, and except as otherwise required by law, no official, appointee, attorney or employee shall be required to disclose
information pertaining to the parcel of real estate occupied by such individual as his principal place of residence.
7. Forms: Forms for use in complying with the requirements of this subsection D shall be prepared by the village attorney and deposited with the village
manager. Such forms may be modified from time to time as may be required to ensure compliance with the disclosure provisions of this subsection
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 35/524
D.
8. Public Disclosure: All disclosures required to be filed with the village manager shall be under oath and available for public inspection during normal
business hours. Each person examining a statement must first provide the manager a written statement identifying the examiner by name,
occupation, address and telephone number, and stating the date of examination and reason for such examination. The manager shall promptly notify
each person filing a disclosure statement pursuant to this subsection D of each instance of an examination of his disclosure statement by sending
him a duplicate original of the identification statement required herein.
The manager shall forward a copy of the written disclosure required by subsection D1 of this section to each board, committee, or commission
affected thereby. Each official, appointee, attorney or employee shall provide a copy of any other disclosure required by this subsection D to each
member of any commission, committee or board prior to requesting any action from such entity pertaining to any matter for which disclosure is
required pursuant to this subsection D. (Ord. 88-01-251, 1-18-1988; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
E. Hearings And Penalties:
1. All complaints against appointees (other than appointees to the positions of village clerk, trustee or president), employees and attorneys alleging
violations of this code of conduct shall be heard by the corporate authorities of the village as follows:
a. At least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing the person against whom a violation is alleged shall be provided a written statement of the
violation alleged, including particulars thereof sufficient to inform of the nature and extent of the violation, the time, date and location of the hearing,
and that the alleged violator may have an attorney present, and shall have the right to call witnesses, present evidence, and cross examine all
witnesses presented against him; a court reporter or other method for preserving the hearing proceedings shall be permitted, consistent with 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 275/2 of the open meetings act.
b. Unless otherwise determined by agreement, the hearing on complaint shall be held in executive session pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
120/2 of the open meetings act, but all final determinations shall be made in open session.
c. At the hearing the prosecuting attorney representing the complainant shall be permitted a five (5) minute opening statement, followed by a five (5)
minute opening statement by the alleged violator or representative. The proceedings shall generally be conducted informally with general
adherence to court procedures and rules of evidence. Upon completion of all testimony and evidence, the prosecuting attorney shall be allotted
four (4) minutes for closing argument, followed by six (6) minutes for closing argument by the alleged violator or representative, and two (2)
minutes of rebuttal by the prosecuting attorney.
d. The corporate authorities may grant such continuances and adjourn the hearing from time to time as the corporate authorities shall determine;
provided, however, the alleged violator shall be permitted one continuance of the initial hearing date as of right, to a date no longer than thirty (30)
days from the original hearing date.
e. Upon conclusion of the hearing, and within ten (10) days thereafter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written disposition of the complaint,
which disposition shall dismiss the complaint without further action, or, reprimand, demote or discharge the alleged violator, as the corporate
authorities shall determine based upon the evidence presented. Such written disposition shall be delivered to the alleged violator within five (5)
days of issuance.
f. Where circumstances warrant, the Corporate Authorities may refer any violation of this Code of Conduct to the State's Attorney of Lake County for
such criminal or other prosecution as the State's Attorney may determine. (Ord. 88-01-251, 1-18-1988)
2. All complaints against elected officials of the Village, and appointees to the positions of Village Clerk, Trustee and President, shall be prosecuted in
the appropriate judicial forum. Upon conviction the official shall be fined as shown in title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. Where
circumstances warrant, the Corporate Authorities may refer any violation of this Code of Conduct to the State's Attorney of Lake County for such
criminal or other prosecution as the State's Attorney may determine. (Ord. 88-01-251, 1-18-1988; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE MANAGER
1-6A-1: CREATION AND INTENT:
There is hereby created the office of the village manager, an administrative office of the village. The village manager shall be the chief administrative
employee of the village. All inquiries or requests for information by village officials and the general public shall be initiated through the village manager.
(Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
1-6A-2: APPOINTMENT:
The village manager shall be appointed by the village president and board of trustees, voting jointly, with each being allocated one vote. (Ord. 2012-10-
861, 10-1-2012)
1-6A-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
The village manager shall serve for an indefinite term, unless otherwise provided for in a written employment agreement. (Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
1-6A-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
The village manager shall be chosen for executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of
accepted practice in respect to the duties of the position hereinafter set forth. No elected official shall receive such appointment while serving in that
capacity. (Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 36/524
1-6A-5: COMPENSATION:
The village manager shall receive compensation in such amount and manner as provided in the written contract between the village and the village
manager. (Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
1-6A-6: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The village president and board of trustees may remove the village manager upon filing of the reasons for such removal or discharge, which removal or
discharge shall not become effective unless confirmed by a majority vote of the trustees. (Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
1-6A-7: TEMPORARY ABSENCE OR PERMANENT VACANCY:
During the temporary absence or disability of the village manager, the village manager may appoint a temporary successor to act as village manager pro
tempore to perform the duties of the office. If a permanent vacancy occurs, the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the appointment procedures set
forth in this article. (Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
1-6A-8: OATH AND BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the village manager shall: a) take and subscribe to the oath of office as set forth in section 3.1-10-25 of the
Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-10-25; and b) execute a bond in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), conditioned
upon the faithful performance of his or her duties and shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any act
of the village manager. Said bond shall be approved by the corporate authorities and filed with the village clerk. The premium of such bond shall be paid by
the village. (Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
1-6A-9: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The village manager shall be the chief administrative official of the village and shall report to the village president and board of trustees and shall be
responsible for the efficient management and operation of the affairs of the village and of all village departments and personnel. As chief administrative
official, the village manager shall be responsible for the management and control of all matters pertaining to the operation and maintenance of village
property. The village manager shall be responsible for the supervision of all village agencies and departments and officers thereof now in existence, or
hereafter created by the village board of trustees, unless the management and control of such agencies, departments and officers expressly is
delegated elsewhere by statute or ordinance.
B. The village manager shall have the following powers and shall perform the following duties:
1. The village manager shall appoint or hire, discipline and remove or discharge such assistants, department directors, or employees as are necessary
for the proper functioning of the village, except those officers and employees who are by law or ordinance required to be appointed by the village
president and/or board, the board of fire and police commissioners, or otherwise. The village manager may, however, make recommendations
regarding the appointment or removal of officers appointed by the village president.
2. The village manager shall instruct all department directors and employees as to the policy and method of operation of all village departments and
employee functions. The hiring, discipline, suspension or removal of employees may be undertaken through a process of recommendations from
department heads and other supervisors, but the final authority for such matters shall be that of the village manager. Such actions shall be
undertaken in compliance with applicable laws, ordinances and collective bargaining agreements and shall be based on the merit and qualifications
of the applicants and employees.
3. The village manager may recommend from time to time to the corporate authorities that village departments, employment positions, job descriptions
or the salaries paid to employees or appointed officers be revised or reorganized.
4. The village manager shall serve as the village's budget officer and be responsible for the preparation and administration of the annual budget,
including necessary financial estimates and required ordinance(s). The village manager shall keep the village board advised of the financial condition
and future needs of the village and make such recommendations, as he/she deems desirable.
5. The village manager is the chief purchasing agent of the village and shall be responsible for purchasing goods and services, soliciting bids for those
goods or services, if necessary, and the letting of contracts. The village manager shall execute all contracts authorized by the village board except
those contracts which by law must be executed by other village officers.
6. The village manager shall investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of village business and the services
maintained and provided by the public utilities or other departments of the village and may make internal investigations into the affairs of any
department or division of the village.
7. The village manager shall enforce: a) all laws and regulations within the village, and b) all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the village.
8. The village manager shall require all agencies, departments and officers thereof to submit all matters requiring the attention of the corporate
authorities to the village manager, who shall then submit such matters to the corporate authorities as deemed necessary by the village manager. The
village manager shall recommend to the village president and to the board of trustees the adoption of such measures as deemed necessary or
expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the village and its residents.
9. The village manager shall attend all regular, rescheduled and special meetings of the corporate authorities unless excused by the village president or
when the village manager's employment is under consideration, and shall have the privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming
before the corporate authorities, but shall have no right to vote.
10. The village manager shall supervise the issuance and sale of all bonds, warrants and obligations. (Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 37/524
11. The village manager may authorize the waiver of any village fees as the village manager deems reasonably necessary to assist the residents,
business owners, and property owners of the village to respond to, mitigate, and recover from a declared disaster event. (Ord. 2013-09-910, 9-16-
2013)
12. The village manager shall perform such other and additional duties as may be required by the village president or board of trustees from time to
time, not inconsistent with village ordinances and state statutes. (Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-09-910, 9-16-2013)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE TREASURER
1-6B-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of treasurer of the village. The president, at the first regular meeting in the month of May of each year, shall appoint, by
and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, a person who has the requisite technical training and knowledge as treasurer for the ensuing
fiscal year. (Ord. 2012-05-828, 5-21-2012)
1-6B-2: OATH AND BOND:
The treasurer, before entering upon the duties of the office, shall take the oath prescribed by law and shall execute a surety bond to the village in a penal
sum required by statute. (1989 Code)
1-6B-3: DUTIES:
The treasurer shall:
A. Money, Warrants:
1. Receive all monies belonging to the village corporation and pay all warrants signed by the president and countersigned by the clerk.
2. Keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and all the debits and credits belonging thereto.
3. Give to every person paying money into the treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid, and file copies
of such receipts with the records of the treasurer's office with the clerk at the time of making monthly reports of such office.
4. Keep an accurate register of all warrants redeemed and paid, showing the number, date and amount of each, the fund from which paid and the
name of the person to whom and when paid, and cancel all warrants as soon as redeemed.
B. Books And Accounts: Keep books and accounts in such manner as to show with accuracy all monies received and disbursed by the treasurer for the
village, stating from whom and on what account received, and to whom and what account paid out, and in such way that the books and accounts may
be readily investigated and understood. Such books and accounts and all files and papers of the office shall be at all times open to examination by the
president or board of trustees.
C. Separation Of Funds: Keep all monies in his or her hands belonging to the village separate and distinct at all times from personal monies or funds; the
treasurer is prohibited from using directly or indirectly the village money or warrants in his or her custody and keeping for personal use or benefit, or
that of any other person. Any violation of this provision shall subject the treasurer to immediate removal from office by the president and board of
trustees who may declare the office vacant and appoint a successor for the unexpired portion of the term in the manner prescribed for regular
appointment.
D. Reports:
1. Prepare for the president and board of trustees, as often as required, a full and detailed report of all receipts and expenditures of the corporation as
shown by the books of the office up to the time of the report. (1989 Code)
2. Annually, between January 1 and January 10 of each year, prepare and file with the clerk a full and detailed report of all receipts and expenditures of
all accounts of the office during the preceding fiscal year. The report shall reflect the state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year. The clerk
shall keep the report on file in his or her office for the inspection of the general public. (Ord. 2015-5-071, 5-4-2015)
E. Delinquent Officers: Report to the president and board of trustees any officer authorized to receive money for the use of the village who fails to make a
return of the monies received by such officer at the time required by law or ordinance. (1989 Code)
1-6B-4: DEPOSITORIES:
A. Designated Depositories: Subject to the requirements of this section, the village treasurer is authorized and required to keep all village funds and money
in his or her custody in the following institutions or any of them:
1. America Chartered Bank Of Lake Zurich.
2. Cambridge Bank.
3. Comerica Bank.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 38/524
4. First Chicago Bank.
5. First Midwest Bank, N.A.
6. First Of America-Illinois, N.A.
7. Harris Trust And Savings Bank.
8. Illinois Government Cash Investment Fund.
9. Illinois Public Treasurers Investment Pool.
10. LaSalle _ Northwest.
11. NBD Bank.
No funds or money of the village shall be deposited in a bank designated in this section unless and until such time as that bank shall have furnished
to the village copies of the last two (2) sworn statements of resources and liabilities which said bank is required to furnish to the commissioner of
banks and trust companies or the comptroller of the currency in compliance with the statutory requirements referred to in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-35-50. (Ord. 93-04-582, 4-5-1993; amd. Ord. 94-07-679, 7-18-1994; Ord. 95-10-767, 10-2-1995; Ord. 96-07-810, 7-1-1996)
B. Required Information: So long as any bank designated in this section shall continue to serve as a depository, that bank shall furnish to the village a copy
of each statement of resources and liabilities furnished to said commissioner of banks and trust companies or comptroller of the currency, pursuant to
the requirements of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-35-50.
C. Limit On Deposits: This section shall not authorize the deposit of any village funds or money in any one of the banks designated herein in excess of
seventy five percent (75%) of that bank's capital stock and surplus. Deposits in excess of such amount are hereby prohibited.
D. Notice To Sureties: The village clerk shall notify the sureties of the treasurer in writing of the designation by this section of the aforesaid banks as
depositories of village funds and money. No funds or money of the village shall be transferred into any of said banks for the first time until five (5) days
after the giving of such notice. (Ord. 93-04-582, 4-5-1993)
E. Deposits: The village manager, village finance director, village president, village treasurer, and each of them, are hereby authorized to endorse for
deposit all checks, drafts, and orders for the payment of money. Endorsements for deposit may be effected in writing or by stamped endorsement of
the village without designation of the person making the endorsement.
F. Transfer Or Withdrawal: Funds or money deposited pursuant to this section may be transferred and withdrawn upon corporate warrants, checks, and
orders signed, if less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in amount, by the village president or signed, if five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or greater,
by the village president and countersigned by either the village manager or the village finance director. The village president's signature may be made
by facsimile; the countersignatures of the village manager and the village finance director shall be originals. No corporate warrant, check, or other order
drawn against funds or money of the village deposited pursuant to this section shall be valid unless so signed. (Ord. 93-04-582, 4-5-1993; amd. Ord.
2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
G. Bank Authority: The aforesaid banks are hereby authorized and directed to honor and pay any checks or other orders signed in accordance with
subsection F of this section, including those drawn to the individual order of any such official signing the same, without further inquiry or regard to the
authority of said officers to sign said checks or orders, or in their use of the proceeds thereof.
H. Investing Funds: The village treasurer and, at the direction of the village treasurer, the village finance director or his or her designee are hereby
authorized to invest any funds on deposit in United States government securities or in certificates of deposit or time deposits constituting direct
obligations of the aforesaid banks as defined by the Illinois banking act. (Ord. 93-04-582, 4-5-1993)
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE COLLECTOR
1-6C-1: POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of Village Collector who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, and shall hold such position during the pleasure of the Board or for such period as may be agreed to by the corporate authorities; provided,
however, that any such period shall in no event extend beyond April 30 immediately following the date of appointment. (1989 Code)
1-6C-2: BOND:
The Village Collector, before entering upon his or her duties, shall execute a bond to the Village in the amount as provided in subsection 1-6-4B of this
Title, with surety to be approved by the Board. (1989 Code)
1-6C-3: DUTIES:
The Village Collector shall collect and receive all moneys due to the Village, including all special assessments and special taxes, shall keep a record of all
accounts and other financial records of the Village, including the care of all books of account, except as otherwise prescribed by the Board of Trustees,
and shall perform such other duties as may be delegated to him or her by the Board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 39/524
The records of all the accounts of the Village shall be kept by the Village Collector except as otherwise prescribed by the Board. (1989 Code)
Chapter 7
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
1-7-1: ANNUAL BUDGET AND BUDGET OFFICER:
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes, sections 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.7 and 5/8-2-9.9 and 5/8-2-9.10 providing for the adoption of an annual budget and
providing for the designation of a budget officer, as now in effect and as hereafter amended, are adopted. Effective January 1, 2017, and thereafter, the
village's fiscal year shall coincide with the calendar year. In light of this change from the village's current May 1 through April 30 fiscal year:
A. The 2015-2016 fiscal year shall be from May 1, 2015 through April 30, 2016;
B. The 2016 fiscal year shall be from May 1, 2016 through December 31, 2016;
C. The 2017 fiscal year, and all fiscal years thereafter, shall be from January 1 through December 31, thereby coinciding with the calendar year.
The president shall designate the budget officer with the approval of the board of trustees, pursuant to statute. The budget officer shall receive such
compensation for services as budget officer as the board may fix from time to time. (Ord. 2015-5-071, 5-4-2015)
1-7-2: LOST WARRANTS:
When any village warrant is lost or destroyed so that it cannot be presented to the treasurer for payment by the person entitled thereto, such person shall
apply by petition to the board of trustees for relief. The board may order the clerk to issue a duplicate warrant to the person so entitled to payment upon
such person filing an affidavit of the loss or destruction of the original and giving bond and security to the village to refund the amount of such warrant and
pay all costs in case the original or lost warrant should be presented and the village compelled to pay the same. (1989 Code)
1-7-3: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS:
All money received by the treasurer as a special tax or assessment shall be held as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for
which such special tax or special assessment was made, and the money so received shall be used for no other purpose except to reimburse the village for
money expended for such improvement1 or to provide rebates when any surplus is declared in any special assessment fund, as provided by statute2.
(1989 Code)
1-7-4: WAGE RATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES:
A. Recitals: The recitals of the ordinance codified herein are incorporated herein as findings of the president and board of trustees.
B. Ascertainment Of Prevailing Rate Of Wages: To the extent and as required by the act3, but only to the extent and as required by the act, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics, and other workers engaged in construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction
of the village is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the Lake County area as determined by the
department of labor of the state of Illinois as of June 2015, a copy of that determination being attached to the ordinance codified herein and
incorporated herein by reference as exhibit A. As required by the act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the department of labor of
the state of Illinois shall supersede the department's June 2015 determination and apply to any and all public works construction undertaken by the
village.
C. Contractors' Responsibility: This section calls for the construction of a "public work", within the meaning of the act. The act requires contractors and
subcontractors to pay laborers, workers and mechanics performing services on public works projects no less than the current "prevailing rate of wages"
(hourly cash wages plus amount for fringe benefits) in the county where the work is performed. The department publishes the prevailing wage rates on
its website at http://labor.illinois.gov/. The department revises the prevailing wage rates and the contractor/subcontractor has an obligation to check the
department's website for revisions to prevailing wage rates. For information regarding current prevailing wage rates, please refer to the Illinois
department of labor's website. All contractors and subcontractors rendering services under this section must comply with all requirements of the act,
including, but not limited to, all wage requirements and notice and recordkeeping duties.
Each contractor or subcontractor engaged in construction of public works for the village to which the general prevailing rate of hourly wages are
required by the act to be paid shall submit to the village a certified payroll on a monthly basis, in accordance with section 5 of the act. The certified
payroll shall consist of a complete copy of those records required to be made and kept by the act. The certified payroll shall be accompanied by a
statement signed by the contractor or subcontractor that certifies that: 1) such records are true and accurate, 2) the hourly rate paid is not less than the
general prevailing rate of hourly wages required by the act, and 3) the contractor or subcontractor is aware that filing a certified payroll that he or she
knows to be false is a class B misdemeanor. A general contractor may rely on the certification of a lower tier subcontractor, provided that the general
contractor does not knowingly rely upon a subcontractor's false certification. Upon seven (7) business days' notice, the contractor and each
subcontractor shall make available for inspection the records required to be made and kept by the act: 1) to the village and its officers and agents and
to the director of the Illinois department of labor and his or her deputies and agents and 2) at all reasonable hours at a location within the state.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 40/524
D. Definition; Limitations: The definition of any term appearing in this section that also is used in the act shall be the same as in the act. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed to apply the general prevailing rate of wages for Lake County as herein ascertained to any work or employment, except
public works construction of the village conducted in Lake County, to the extent required by the act.
E. Availability Of Ordinance: The village clerk shall publicly post, or keep available for inspection by any interested party in the main office of the village,
this determination of the prevailing rate of wages for Lake County.
F. Publication Of Ordinance: The village clerk is hereby directed to:
1. Promptly file a certified copy of the ordinance codified herein with the Illinois department of labor; and
2. Cause a notice to be published announcing the adoption of the ordinance codified herein in a newspaper of general circulation within the area within
thirty (30) days after its filing with the Illinois department of labor, which publication shall constitute notice that the determination is effective and that
this is the determination of the village; and
3. Mail a copy of this determination to any employer, to any association of employers, and to any person or association of employees that have filed
their names and addresses and requested copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workers whose wages
will be affected by such rate; and
4. Attach a copy of this determination or of the revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in effect to all public works construction contract
specifications. (Ord. 2015-6-077, 6-15-2015)
1-7-5: DEVELOPER CONTRIBUTION REQUIREMENTS:
The developer contribution policy adopted by the Lake Zurich community unit school district 95, as contained in exhibit A attached to ordinance 914, shall
be the developer contribution requirements required by the village in connection with all new subdivisions or resubdivisions within the village, including
new annexations to the village.
The village reserves the right to amend this policy from time to time and, upon showing of hardship, to vary this contribution policy from time to time. (1989
Code)
1-7-6: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT:
A. Recitals: The recitals set forth in ordinance 94-06-675 on file in the office of the village clerk are, by this reference, incorporated and made a part of this
section. (Ord. 94-06-675, 6-20-1994)
B. Approval And Adoption Of The Freedom Of Information Act Rules And Fees: The freedom of information act rules are hereby approved and adopted as
the rules and regulations for the implementation of the Illinois freedom of information act4 by the village. Fees shall be as provided in exhibit B attached
to ordinance 97-09-874 on file in the office of the village clerk and by this reference incorporated into this section. (Ord. 94-06-675, 6-20-1994; amd.
Ord. 97-09-874, 9-15-1997)
C. Delegation Of Authority: The president, village clerk, deputy village clerk and village manager of the village are hereby authorized and directed to take
all steps necessary to implement the Illinois freedom of information act in accordance with the freedom of information act rules. (Ord. 94-06-675, 6-20-
1994; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
Chapter 8
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING SYSTEM
1-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the fair and efficient enforcement of the village ordinances delineated in this chapter through an
administrative adjudication process and to establish an appropriate schedule of fines and penalties. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING SYSTEM:
A. Adoption: The village hereby adopts division 2.2 of article 1 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-1 et seq.; division 31.1 of
article 11 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.; and sections 11-208.3 and 208.6 of article II of chapter 11 of
the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., pursuant to which authority the village establishes an administrative hearing
system, including a code hearing department, to enforce and adjudicate violations of certain provisions of this code as set forth in subsection B of this
section.
B. Authorization To Enforce And Adjudicate: The code hearing department is authorized to enforce and adjudicate violations of the following titles of this
code:
1. Title 3, "Business Licensing, Regulation, Taxation, And Fees"; and
2. Title 4, "Public Health And Safety"; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 41/524
3. Title 5, "Police Regulations"; and (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
4. Title 6, "Traffic Code", pertaining to automated traffic law violations; violations concerning the standing, parking and condition of vehicles carrying
fines not in excess of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or such greater amounts as authorized by state law; and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
208.7, administrative fees and procedures for impounding vehicles for specified violations; and (Ord. 2012-01-806, 1-16-2012)
5. Title 7, "Public Ways And Property"; and
6. Title 8, "Building Regulations"; and
7. Title 9, "Zoning"; and
8. Title 10, "Land Development Code"; and
9. Title 11, "Flood Control"; and
10. Any other codes or ordinances as the board of trustees may designate from time to time in accordance with applicable law. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-
18-2010)
1-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: The devices located within the village with one or more motor vehicle sensors
working in conjunction within a red light signal to produce recorded images of a motor vehicle entering into or remaining within an intersection against a
steady red or flashing red signal indicating a violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code1.
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION: Any violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code2 as recorded by an automated traffic law
enforcement system.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: Any full or part time village employee whose duties include the inspection or examination of property or structures in the village
to determine if code violations exist.
BUILDING OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a structure.
CODE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATOR: Each person appointed by the village manager pursuant to, and having those responsibilities set forth in,
section 1-8-7 of this chapter.
CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT: The department under the direction of the office of the village manager that is designed to expedite the prosecution and
correction of code and ordinance violations in the manner set out in this chapter.
HEARING: A hearing on an alleged violation conducted pursuant to section 1-8-9 of this chapter.
HEARING OFFICER: Each person appointed by the village president pursuant to, and having those responsibilities set forth in, section 1-8-6 of this
chapter.
ILLINOIS ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW: Section 3-101 et seq., of the Illinois code of civil procedure, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq.
ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE: 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-1 et seq.
RECORDED IMAGES: Images recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system, which include either two (2) or more photographs, or two (2) or
more microphotographs, or two (2) or more electronic images, or a video recording showing the subject motor vehicle, together with at least one clearly
recorded image that identifies the subject motor vehicle's license plate and that displays the time, date, and location of the violation.
TRAFFIC EDUCATION PROGRAM: A traffic education program that is satisfactory under state law.
VIOLATION: A violation of a provision of this code or other codes or ordinances designated by the board of trustees, as set forth in section 1-8-2 of this
chapter.
VIOLATION NOTICE: A notice of any violation issued pursuant to section 1-8-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-
1-2012)
1-8-4: HEARING PROCEDURES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter do not preclude the village from using other methods or proceedings to enforce, and to adjudicate violations of, the
provisions of this code or other codes or ordinances of the village, including, without limitation, the institution of an action in the Lake County circuit court,
the United States district court, or any administrative body or proceeding. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-5: COMPOSITION OF CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT:
The code hearing department is comprised of one or more hearing officers, one or more code enforcement administrators, and security and other hearing
room personnel, all with the power, authority, and limitations as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-6: HEARING OFFICER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 42/524
A. Appointment: The village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may appoint one or more qualified hearing officers to perform
the functions set forth in this chapter.
B. Term: The term of a hearing officer is one year; except that the hearing officer is an at will position and the board of trustees may remove a hearing
officer at any time with or without cause.
C. Qualifications: To qualify as a hearing officer, an individual must:
1. Be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years;
2. Be in good standing with the Illinois supreme court attorney registration and disciplinary commission; and (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
3. Complete a formal training program approved by the village manager consisting of: (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-
2012)
a. Instruction on the rules of procedure for administrative hearings;
b. Orientation to each subject area of this code and other codes and ordinances that will be adjudicated;
c. Observation of hearings conducted by Illinois municipalities that have adopted the administrative hearing system; and
d. Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuance of final orders. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
D. Compensation: Authorization for compensation for a hearing officer is made by the board of trustees through the village's annual budget process.
Compensation is determined by the village manager within approved budget limitations. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-
2012)
E. Authority And Jurisdiction: Hearing officers are hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the allegation of a violation;
2. Issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and production of relevant documents, upon the request of the parties
or their representatives;
3. Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing, including all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
4. Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the hearing, on whether a violation occurred or exists. The hearing officer's determination
must be in writing and must include: a) written findings of fact, b) decision, and c) order, including any corrective measures, fine, penalty, and any
other action with which the defendant must comply; and
5. Postpone or continue a defendant's hearing to a later hearing date only in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of
the defendant, in which case continuance may not exceed twenty five (25) days, except that if the next regularly scheduled hearing date is more than
twenty five (25) days, but less than thirty five (35) days, thereafter, then the continuance may be until that regularly scheduled hearing date by
agreement of the defendant and the village and order of the hearing officer. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-7: CODE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATOR:
A. Appointment: The village manager may appoint one or more code enforcement administrators to perform the functions set forth in this section. The
code enforcement administrator may be an employee of the village or may be an independent contractor or agency contracted by the village manager
and be compensated in an amount as determined by the village manager. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
B. Authority And Jurisdiction: The code enforcement administrator is hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to:
1. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to manage the administrative hearing system;
2. Adopt, distribute, and process all notices required under this chapter, or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this chapter;
3. Collect payments made as a result of fines and/or penalties assessed and transmit such payments to the village treasurer;
4. Certify reports to the Illinois secretary of state concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5;
5. Refer to the village treasurer the collection of unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies that the village may retain or by filing
complaints in the Lake County circuit court; or select or appoint an individual or agency to act on behalf of the village in filing complaints, seeking
judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuing all postjudgment remedies available under current law;
6. Certify copies of findings, decisions, and orders adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the findings, decisions, and
orders that are issued in accordance with this chapter or the laws of the state of Illinois; and
7. Oversee the operation and maintenance of the computer programs for the administrative hearing system, including, without limitation:
a. Inputting information for violation notices;
b. Establishing hearing dates and notice dates;
c. Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 43/524
d. Issuing payment receipts;
e. Issuing notices of hearing dates, notices of default, such other notices as may be necessary to implement the administrative hearing system, and
final notices; and
f. Keeping accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at hearings, pleas entered, fines, and other penalties assessed and paid. (Ord.
2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-8: VIOLATION NOTICE; SERVICE OF NOTICE:
A. Issuance Of Violation Notice: Any individual authorized to issue a violation notice and who detects a violation must issue and serve a violation notice
only in the manner set forth in this section.
B. Process For Violations Of Title 6 Pertaining To Automated Traffic Law Violations And Violations Concerning The Standing, Parking, And Condition Of
Vehicles: In the case of an automated traffic law violation or a violation concerning the standing, parking, and condition of vehicles, the provisions of
this subsection B govern.
1. Prior to issuance of a notice of violation of title 6 of this code pertaining to automated traffic law violations, the recorded image must be inspected
and a determination must be made whether the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code, and
whether one of the defenses identified in subsection 1-8-9H of this chapter applies to the alleged violation. Upon determination that the recorded
image captures a violation and that no defense applies, notice of violation may be served upon the registered vehicle owner or lessee in the manner
herein provided.
2. A violation notice must contain, but is not limited to, the following information:
a. The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle;
b. The date, time, and place of violation of a parking, standing, compliance, or automated traffic law regulation;
c. The particular regulation violated;
d. The amount of any civil penalty imposed, the requirements of any traffic education program imposed, and the date by which the civil penalty
should be paid and the traffic education program must be completed;
e. The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment or failure to complete a required traffic education, or both, when so provided by
ordinance;
f. The vehicle make and state registration number where available and readily discernible;
g. The identification number of the person issuing the notice;
h. A statement that the person to whom the notice is issued may elect to proceed by:
(1) Paying the indicated fine, completing a required traffic education program, or both; or
(2) Challenging the charge in court, by mail, or by administrative hearing;
i. A statement that completion of any required traffic education program, payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty for late
payment, or both, shall operate as a final disposition of the violation;
j. Information as to the availability of a hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits;
k. Information about the time and manner in which a hearing may be had; and
l. A warning that failure to pay the civil penalty, to complete a required traffic education program, or to contest liability in a timely manner is an
admission of liability and may result in a suspension of the driving privileges of the registered owner of the vehicle.
3. A violation notice for an automated traffic law violation must also contain a copy of the recorded images, accompanied by a statement that recorded
images are evidence of a violation of a red light signal.
4. Service of a violation notice may be made by:
a. Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to the vehicle; or
b. Handing the notice to the operator of the vehicle if he or she is present; or
c. In the case of service of an automated traffic law violation, by mail to the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as recorded with the
secretary of state within thirty (30) days after the secretary of state notifies the village of the identity of the owner of the vehicle, but in no event
later than ninety (90) days after the violation.
5. The following certifications are required:
a. A person authorized by ordinance to issue and serve parking, standing, and compliance violation notices must certify the correctness of the facts
entered on the violation notice by signing the notice at the time of service or, in the case of a notice produced by a computerized device, by signing
a single certificate to be kept by the code enforcement administrator attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while it was
under his or her control.
b. In the case of an automated traffic law violation, a technician employed or contracted by the village must determine, based on inspection of
recorded images, that the subject vehicle was being operated in violation of section 11-208.6 of the Illinois vehicle code or in violation of this code.
If the technician determines that the vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in order to yield the right of way to an
emergency vehicle, no citation may be issued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 44/524
6. The original or a facsimile of the violation notice or, in the case of a notice produced by a computerized device, a printed record generated by the
device showing the facts entered on the notice, must be retained by the code enforcement administrator and must be kept as a record in the ordinary
course of business.
7. A parking, standing, compliance, or automated traffic law violation notice issued, signed, and served in accordance with this section, a copy of the
notice, or the computer generated record is prima facie correct and is considered prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the
notice.
8. The notice, copy, or computer generated record is admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings.
9. Additional notices must be sent in the manner and sequence established by this subsection B9 and must include, but are not limited to, the
information specified herein:
a. Service of additional notices must be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited
vehicle as recorded with the secretary of state; or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in
a United States post office approved database; or, pursuant to section 11-1306 of the Illinois vehicle code, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the
last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease; or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last
known address recorded in a United States post office approved database. Service of additional notices is deemed complete as of date of deposit
in the United States mail.
b. A second notice of a parking, standing, or compliance violation may be sent, which notice must contain, but is not limited to, the following
information:
(1) The date and location of the violation cited in the parking, standing, or compliance violation notice;
(2) The particular regulation violated;
(3) The vehicle make and state registration number;
(4) Any requirement to complete a traffic education program;
(5) The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment or failure to complete a traffic education program, or both, when so provided
by ordinance;
(6) Information as to the availability of a hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits;
(7) Information about the time and manner in which a hearing may be had; and
(8) A statement that failure to complete a required traffic education program, or to pay the indicated fine and any applicable penalty, or to appear at
a hearing on the merits in the time and manner specified will result in a final determination of violation liability for the cited violation in the amount
of the fine or penalty indicated, and that, upon the occurrence of a final determination of violation liability for the failure and the exhaustion of, or
failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any incomplete traffic education program or any unpaid fine or
penalty, or both, will constitute a debt due and owing the village.
c. A notice of final determination of parking, standing, compliance, or automated traffic law violation liability must be sent following a final
determination of parking, standing, compliance, or automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion of judicial review procedures, which
notice must contain, but is not limited to, the following information:
(1) A statement that the incomplete traffic education program or the unpaid fine or penalty, or both, is a debt due and owing the village; and
(2) Warnings that failure to complete any required traffic education program or to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the village, or both, within
the time specified may result in the village's filing of a petition in the circuit court to have the incomplete traffic education program or unpaid fine
or penalty, or both, rendered a judgment, or may result in suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten
(10) or more parking violations under section 6-306.5 of the Illinois vehicle code or five (5) or more automated traffic law violations under section
11-208.6 of the Illinois vehicle code.
C. Process For Violations Of Title 8: In the case of a violation of title 8 of this code, the provisions of this subsection C govern.
1. A violation notice must be issued on a standard village form and must contain, but is not limited to, the following information:
a. The name and address of the building owner, and also of the person in possession of the building if available;
b. The type and nature of the violation;
c. The date and time the violation was observed;
d. The names and addresses of witnesses to the violation, if any; and
e. The common street address where the violation was observed.
2. The violation notice must be forwarded to the code hearing department, where a docket number is stamped on all copies of the notice, and a hearing
date noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form.
3. One copy of the violation notice must be maintained in the files of the code hearing department and will be part of the record of the hearing.
4. One copy of the violation notice must be returned to the building inspector for preparation of evidence of the violation for presentation at the hearing.
5. Service of a violation notice may be made:
a. By first class mail, which service must include a copy of the violation notice and a summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing; or
b. If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, by posting the notice on the
front door of the structure where the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is scheduled.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 45/524
D. Process For Violations Of Titles 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, And 11: In the case of a violation of titles 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, and 11 of this code, the provisions of this
subsection D govern.
1. A violation notice must be issued on a multiple copy standard village form and must contain, but is not limited to, the following information:
a. The name and address of the defendant;
b. The type and nature of the violation;
c. The date and time the violation was observed; and
d. The names and addresses of witnesses to the violation, if any.
2. The violation notice must be forwarded to the code hearing department where a docket number must be stamped on all copies of the violation
notice, and a hearing date must be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form.
3. One copy of the violation notice must be kept in the files of the code hearing department and will be part of the record of hearing.
4. One copy of the violation notice must be returned to the individual representing the village in the case in order to prepare evidence of the code
violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated.
5. Service of a violation notice may be made by first class mail, which service must include a copy of the violation notice and a summons commanding
the defendant to appear at the hearing.
6. The violation notice or a copy thereof may be admissible in any subsequent administrative or judicial proceeding to the extent permitted by law. (Ord.
2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-9: HEARINGS:
All hearings conducted under the administrative hearing system must be conducted by a hearing officer, in accordance with the following rules and
procedures:
A. Scheduling:
1. Hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter on violations of title 6 of this code pertaining to automated traffic law violations and violations
concerning the standing, parking and condition of vehicles must be scheduled and conducted within six (6) months after the date of the violation.
2. All other hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter must be scheduled not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is
reported, as provided in section 1-2.2-20 and section 11-31.1-4 of the Illinois municipal code.
B. Recording: Hearings must be recorded.
C. Representation: Any party may be represented by counsel, present witnesses, and cross examine opposing witnesses.
D. Subpoenas: Any party may request the hearing officer to issue, and the hearing officer has authority to issue, subpoenas to direct the attendance and
testimony of relevant witnesses and production of relevant documents.
E. Evidence: Strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings do not apply to hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter. Any evidence,
including hearsay, relevant to the existence of a code violation may be admitted.
F. Default For Failure To Appear: If on the date set for hearing the defendant or the defendant's attorney fails to appear, then the hearing officer may find
the defendant in default and must proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
G. Determination Of Violation: Each hearing culminates in the determination by the hearing officer whether there was a code violation.
H. Defenses Regarding Automated Traffic Law Violations And Violations Concerning The Standing, Parking And Condition Of Vehicles: In instances of an
alleged violation of title 6 of this code pertaining to automated traffic law violations and the violations concerning standing, parking, and condition of
vehicles, it is considered a defense to a violation charged if the owner, the owner's attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the hearing
officer's satisfaction that:
1. The motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred and not under the control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the violation, as provided in section 11-208.6(i) of the Illinois vehicle code; or
2. The vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession; or
3. The vehicle entered the intersection in order to yield the right of way to an emergency vehicle; or
4. Any other evidence or issues in this code exist as a defense to an alleged violation of title 6 of this code.
I. Defenses Regarding Traffic Education Program: For purposes of the required traffic education program only, an owner may submit an affidavit to the
court or hearing officer swearing that, at the time of the alleged violation, the vehicle was in the custody and control of another person. The affidavit
must identify the person in custody and control of the vehicle, including the person's name and current address. The person in custody and control of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 46/524
the vehicle at the time of the violation is required to complete the required traffic education program. If the person in custody and control of the vehicle
at the time of the violation completes the required traffic education program, the registered owner of the vehicle is not required to complete a traffic
education program.
J. Defenses Regarding Violations Of Title 8: In instances of an alleged violation of title 8 of this code, defenses to a charged violation are set in section 11-
31.1-9 of the Illinois municipal code. It is considered a defense to a violation charged if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative
proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
1. The violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed; or
2. The violation has been caused by the current property occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling free
of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the violations; or
3. An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the
violation.
K. No Incarceration, Fines Exceeding Authority, Or Threat: In no event does the hearing officer have authority to:
1. Impose a penalty of incarceration;
2. Impose a fine in excess of the amounts set forth in section 1-8-18 of this chapter for a violation; or
3. In cases of a violation of title 8 of this code, threaten or institute an action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer, or other
similar action solely because an occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a hearing.
L. Hearing Room Personnel: Hearing room personnel may be designated and appointed by the village's chief of police and are authorized and directed to:
1. Maintain hearing room decorum;
2. Execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the Lake County circuit court; and
3. Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the hearing officer or the code enforcement administrator. (Ord.
2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-10: LIABILITY FOR FAILURE TO APPEAR AT HEARING:
A. Default: If at the time set for hearing the defendant, or his attorney or agent of record, fails to appear, and the hearing was not continued by the hearing
officer pursuant to his or her authority under subsection 1-8-6E5 of this chapter, then the hearing officer may enter a finding of default within the
findings, decision, and order and impose liability against the defendant.
B. Notice Of Default: A copy of the finding of default, which is a final determination, must be sent promptly to the defendant by first class mail, postage
prepaid, and must apprise the defendant of the procedure for setting aside the finding of default and must also apprise the defendant of the availability
to appeal the finding of default to the Lake County circuit court. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-11: FINAL DETERMINATION; FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
A. For violations of title 6 of this code pertaining to automated traffic law violations and violations concerning the standing, parking, or condition of vehicles:
1. Final Disposition: Payment of the indicated fine, and any applicable penalty for late payment, and completion of any required traffic education
program and payment of any applicable penalty for late completion thereof, constitute final disposition of the violation.
2. Final Determination Of Liability: Final determination of violation liability occurs following failure to complete the required traffic education program, to
pay the fine or penalty, or both, after a hearing officer's determination of violation liability and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any
administrative review procedures provided by this chapter.
3. Failure To Appear: Where defendant fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in the violation
notice, the hearing officer's determination of liability is final:
a. Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside hearing officer's determination; or
b. Upon expiration of the period for filing the petition without a filing having been made.
B. For violations of title 8 of this code:
1. Final Determination Of Liability: At the conclusion of the hearing on violations of title 8 of this code, the hearing officer makes a determination on the
basis of the evidence presented at the hearing whether or not a violation exists.
2. Findings, Decision, And Order: The final determination of liability must be in writing and designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings,
decision, and order must include, but is not limited to:
a. The hearing officer's findings of fact; and
b. A decision whether a violation exists based on the findings of fact; and
c. An order, ordering the owner to correct the violation or dismissing the case, if a violation has not been proved.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 47/524
3. Service Of Findings, Decision, And Order: A copy of the findings, decision, and order must be served on the defendant within five (5) days after
issuance, in the same manner as service of violation notice, in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-10.
4. Payment Of Penalty Or Fine: Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money must be made in the same manner as set forth in the
Illinois municipal code.
5. Sanctions Apply To Owner: An order to correct a violation, and the sanctions imposed by the village as the result of a finding of a violation of title 8 of
this code, attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a violation against one owner cannot be avoided by
conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings, decision, and
order of the hearing officer under this chapter.
C. For violations of titles 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, and 11 of this code:
1. Final Determination Of Liability: At the conclusion of a hearing on violations of titles 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, and 11 of this code, the hearing officer makes a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to whether or not a code violation exists.
2. Findings, Decision, And Order: The final determination of liability must be in writing and designated as findings, decision and order. The findings,
decision, and order must include, but is not limited to:
a. The hearing officer's findings of fact; and
b. A decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact; and
c. An order stating the sanction or dismissing the case if a violation is not proved.
3. Service Of Findings, Decision, And Order: A copy of the findings, decision, and order must be served on the defendant within five (5) days after
issuance, in the same manner as service of violation notice, in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-45.
4. Payment Of Penalty Or Fine: Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money must be made in the same manner as set forth in the
Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-12: PETITION TO SET ASIDE DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION LIABILITY FOR VIOLATION OF TITLE 6:
A. Filing Of Petition: A petition to set aside a determination of liability for violation of title 6 of this code pertaining to automated traffic law violations and
violations concerning the parking, standing, and condition of vehicles may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty or a person required to
complete a traffic education program. Grounds for the petition may include:
1. The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued;
2. The person already completed the required traffic education program or paid the fine or penalty, or both, for the violation in question; or
3. The person's failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing was excusable.
B. Filed With Code Enforcement Administrator: A petition to set aside determination of liability must be filed with the code enforcement administrator within
twenty one (21) days after the date of notice of final determination of violation liability.
C. Ruling: The code enforcement administrator must rule on a petition to set aside determination of violation liability within fourteen (14) days after receipt
of the petition. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-13: NONRESIDENT PROCEDURES FOR VIOLATION OF TITLE 6:
A. Nonresident May Contest Alleged Violation Of Title 6: Any nonresident of the village who has been served a violation notice for violation of any provision
of title 6 of this code pertaining to the standing, parking, or condition of vehicles or automated traffic law violations may contest the alleged violation on
its merits without personally appearing at a hearing by:
1. Completion Of Form: Requesting and completing, in full, the nonresident request for hearing-nonappearance form;
2. Waiver: Acknowledging in the space specified in the form that his or her personal appearance is waived and submitting to an adjudication based
upon the notarized statement filed by him or her and the facts contained in the violation notice;
3. Time For Filing: Filing the form with the code enforcement administrator postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month, if the violation notice was
issued between the first through the fifteenth day of that month; or postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the violation notice was issued between
the sixteenth of and the last day of the immediately preceding month. The filing is deemed completed if postmarked by the due dates herein
specified; and
4. Statement Of Facts: Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the violation notice with the code enforcement
administrator in conjunction with the violation notice.
B. Basis Of Decision: The hearing officer must make a decision based on the facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident and
as contained in the violation notice.
C. Notice Of Determination: Notice of the determination of the hearing officer must be served upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 48/524
D. Service: Service of the notice of such determination is considered complete on the date the notice is deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 2010-01-
692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-14: FAILURE TO PAY FINES FOR VIOLATION OF TITLE 6; CERTIFIED REPORT AND CONTESTING CERTIFIED REPORT:
A. Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension: Notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license must be sent to any person
determined to be liable for failure to complete a required traffic education program or to pay any fine or penalty that remains due and owing, or both, on
ten (10) or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violations or five (5) or more automated traffic law violations, which notice must contain, but
is not limited to, the following:
1. A statement that the failure to complete a required traffic education program or to pay the fine or penalty owing, or both, within forty five (45) days
after the date of the notice must result in the village notifying the secretary of state that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings
under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5;
2. A statement that the person may obtain a photocopy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope
to the village along with a request for the photocopy.
B. Sending Notice: Notice of impending suspension of driver's license issued pursuant to subsection A of this section must be sent by first class United
States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary of state or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last
known address recorded in a United States post office approved database.
C. Report To Secretary Of State: Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the village pursuant to title 6 of this code, pertaining to
automated traffic law violations and violations concerning the parking, standing, and condition of vehicles, and after the exhaustion of the procedures
set forth herein, the code enforcement administrator may make a certified report to the secretary of state pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
306.5(c) in a form prescribed by the secretary of state, stating that the owner or lessee of a registered vehicle has failed to pay the fine or penalty due
and owing the village as a result of ten (10) or more violations concerning the parking, standing, and condition of vehicles, or five (5) or more
automated traffic law violations, and thereby may initiate the suspension of that person's driver's license.
D. No Further Action Until Fines Paid Or Determination Of Error: The code enforcement administrator may take no further action thereafter unless and until
the fines and penalties due and owing the village are paid or on a determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified report was in
error. At either such time, the code enforcement administrator may submit to the secretary of state a notification that may result in the halting of a
driver's license suspension proceeding pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5(d). The person named therein must receive a certified copy
of such notification upon request and at no charge.
E. Challenge To Accuracy: Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by completing and filing, within twenty one (21) days after the date
of the secretary of state's notice under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5(b), a form provided by the code enforcement administrator specifying
the grounds on which the challenge is based. Grounds for challenge are limited to the following:
1. The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the vehicle receiving the ten (10) or more violation notices concerning standing, parking or
compliance or five (5) or more automated traffic law violations on the date or dates such notices were issued; or
2. The person has paid the fine and penalty for the ten (10) or more violations concerning standing, parking or compliance or five (5) or more
automated traffic law violations indicated on the certified report; or
3. Excusable failure to appear at or request a new hearing date.
F. Notice Of Determination: The code enforcement administrator must give notice of a determination on a challenge to accuracy pursuant to subsection E
of this section within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the form, and must notify the person filing the challenge of the determination, and, if applicable,
notify the Secretary of State. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-15: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a violation does or does not exist constitutes a final determination for purposes of judicial review and is subject
to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-16: DEBT TO THE VILLAGE:
Any fine, penalty, or part of any fine or penalty assessed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or
the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review Law constitutes a debt due and owing the Village and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-17: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENTS:
A. Court Judgment: After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination
of this Code violation, the Village may commence a proceeding in Circuit Court of Lake County, for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings,
decision, and order. Nothing prevents the Village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a person in such a proceeding.
B. Contents Of Filing: Upon commencement of the action, the Village files a certified copy of the findings, decision, and order, accompanied by a
certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 49/524
2.2-1 et seq., or 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3(b)(7) and with this chapter.
C. Service: Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for by section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order
does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
D. Action By Court: If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and order was entered in accordance with the requirements of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., or 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3(b)(7) and with this chapter, and that the defendant had an opportunity for a
hearing and for judicial review as provided by statute:
1. The court will render judgment in favor of the Village and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus
costs, which judgment has the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
2. The court also may issue any other orders and injunctions that are requested by the Village to enforce the order of the Hearing Officer to correct a
Code violation. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-18: FINES AND PENALTIES:
A. Schedule Of Fines And Penalties: The fines and penalties that may be imposed pursuant to this chapter are set forth in title 13, chapter 1, "Fee
Schedule", of this Code.
B. Violation Penalty: A Hearing Officer may impose on a defendant found liable for a violation penalty as set forth in title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of
this Code. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
The amount of any violation penalty is in addition to the fines and penalties set forth in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
C. Traffic Education Program:
1. In addition to any other penalty imposed pursuant to this section, a defendant who is found liable for violations of title 6 of this Code pertaining to
automated traffic law violations or violations concerning the standing, parking, and condition of vehicles may be required to complete a traffic
education program and to pay a fee for participating in such traffic education program. The late penalty for failure to timely complete a traffic
education program is shown in title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
2. A low income individual required to complete a traffic education program who provides proof of eligibility for the Federal Earned Income Tax credit
under section 32 of the Internal Revenue Code or the Illinois Earned Income Tax credit under section 212 of the Illinois Income Tax Act is not
required to pay any fee for participating in a traffic education program.
3. A violation of vehicle weight or size restrictions by the holder of a commercial driver's license is not considered a violation for which completion of a
traffic education program may be required.
D. Automated Traffic Law Violation Not A Moving Violation: An automated traffic law violation for which a civil penalty is imposed under this section is not a
violation of a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and may not be recorded on the driving record of the owner of the vehicle. (Ord.
2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-19: SIGN REQUIREMENT:
An intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system must be posted with a sign visible to approaching traffic indicating that the
intersection is being monitored by an automated traffic law enforcement system. (Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
1-8-20: RECORDED IMAGES ARE CONFIDENTIAL:
Recorded images made by an automatic traffic law enforcement system are confidential and shall be made available only to the alleged violator and
governmental and law enforcement agencies for purposes of adjudicating a violation, for statistical purposes, or for other governmental purposes. Any
recorded image evidencing an automated traffic law violation, however, may be admissible in any proceeding resulting from the issuance of the citation.
(Ord. 2010-01-692, 1-18-2010)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLAN COMMISSION
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
For provisions regarding the plan commission, see section 9-12-3 of the zoning code. (1989 Code; amd. Ord., 10-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 50/524
Chapter 2
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED:
For provisions regarding the zoning board of appeals, see section 9-12-2 of the zoning code. (1989 Code; amd. Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 3
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
2-3-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created a Board of Local Improvements which shall consist of the Village President and all of the Board of Trustees who shall hold office
as Village Trustees from time to time.
The term of office for each member shall expire May 1 of each year, or until his successor has been chosen and taken office.
2-3-2: SECRETARY OF THE BOARD:
The members of the Board of Local Improvements shall elect a secretary to keep the minutes of the meetings and keep the records of the Board. The
secretary may be chosen from the members of the Board or some other qualified resident of the Village.
2-3-3: PROCEDURE FOR MAKING LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS:
In recommending or making local improvements by special assessment, special service area, or other financing technique, the Board of Local
Improvements shall comply with all public notice and hearing and all further requirements of applicable statutes.
Chapter 4
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
2-4-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created the village emergency management agency "EMA" to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from
disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster in accordance with the Illinois emergency
management act1 (the "act"). (Ord. 2007-05-494, 5-21-2007)
2-4-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT:
The village EMA shall consist of the director, assistant director, and such other members as may be appointed pursuant to the act. Except as otherwise
specifically determined by the village president with the consent of the village board of trustees, the village fire chief shall serve as director and the village
police chief or his or her designee shall serve as assistant director. Other members shall be appointed by the village president with the consent of the
board of trustees. In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve of the director, the assistant director shall assume the duties and
responsibilities. In the event both the director and assistant director are unable to serve, the village president or any person designated by the village
president shall be and act as director until a new appointment is made as provided in this section. (Ord. 2007-05-494, 5-21-2007)
2-4-3: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
The director shall have responsibility for the organization, administration, training, and operation of the village EMA, subject to the direction and control of
the village president as provided by the act. (Ord. 2007-05-494, 5-21-2007)
2-4-4: FUNCTIONS OF EMA:
The village EMA shall perform such functions within the village as shall be prescribed in and by the state of Illinois EMA plan and program prepared by the
governor of Illinois and such orders, rules, and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor. In addition, the village EMA shall perform such duties
outside the corporate limits as may be required, availability of manpower permitting, pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other municipalities or
political subdivisions of the state of Illinois as provided in the act. (Ord. 2007-05-494, 5-21-2007)
2-4-5: MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 51/524
A. Team Designation: Any or all members of the village EMA may be designated by the director of the village EMA as members of a mobile support team
created by the state of Illinois EMA, as provided by law.
B. Leader Designation: The leader of a mobile support team shall be designated by the director of the village EMA.
C. Compensation:
1. Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor or the state director shall
receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities incident to his or her employment or office with the village. Any such
member who is not a paid officer or employee of the village while so serving shall receive from the state of Illinois reasonable compensation as
provided by law.
2. For deployment of salaried village employees, the village will pay regular straight time for those hours in which the salaried member is normally
scheduled. Regularly scheduled hours are Monday through Friday, eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. The village will pay the
salaried employees straight time for all other hours worked (portal to portal) provided the employee is considered working. Working will include travel
(to and from incident) plus standby time and sleep if there is a reasonable expectation the employee must be available for immediate work. Work
time will not include the employee's personal time when they are not subject to or may be prohibited from working. For deployment reimbursement
purposes and protocol, this shall serve as the village policy.
3. For deployment of sworn firefighters, police officers and public works employees who are members of recognized collective bargaining units, the
village will pay straight time for those hours in which the employee is normally scheduled. The village will pay the employees an overtime rate in
accordance with their current collective bargaining agreements for all other hours worked (portal to portal) provided the employee is considered
working. Working will include travel time (to and from incident) plus standby time and sleep time if there is a reasonable expectation the employee
must be available for immediate work. Work time will not include an employee's personal time when the employee is not subject to or may be
prohibited from working. For deployment reimbursement purposes and protocol, this shall serve as the village policy.
4. Members of the village EMA who are paid employees or officers of the village, if called for training by the state director, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to his or her employment or office with the village. Members of the village EMA who are not
village employees or officers shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by the village president. (Ord. 2007-05-
494, 5-21-2007)
2-4-6: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The director of the village EMA, at the direction of the village president, may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipalities or political
subdivisions of the state of Illinois, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the village president and board of trustees. (Ord.
2007-05-494, 5-21-2007)
2-4-7: COOPERATION IN DISASTER EMERGENCY:
If the governor of Illinois proclaims that a disaster emergency exists because of actual enemy attack upon the United States, or the occurrence within the
state of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the
village EMA to cooperate fully with the Lake County EMA, state of Illinois EMA, and the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
(Ord. 2007-05-494, 5-21-2007)
2-4-8: REIMBURSEMENT FUNDS:
The village treasurer shall receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the state of Illinois to the village for expenses incident to
training members of the village EMA, as prescribed by the state director, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team
while serving outside the village in response to a call by the governor or state director, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state
of Illinois incident to the village EMA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 2007-05-494, 5-21-2007)
2-4-9: PROCUREMENTS:
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the director of the village EMA, upon approval of the village president or village manager, is authorized on
behalf of the village to procure such services, supplies, equipment, or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without
regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or obligations, as authorized by the act. (Ord.
2007-05-494, 5-21-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
2-4-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the village EMA organization, and all persons who volunteer as members of the volunteer corps or as
spontaneous volunteers shall before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the director:
I , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I
am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and during such time as I am affiliated with the Village
of Lake Zurich EMA, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the
United States or of this State by force or violence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 52/524
(Ord. 2007-05-494, 5-21-2007)
2-4-11: OFFICE SPACE:
The village president is authorized to designate space in a village building or elsewhere, for the village EMA's office. (Ord. 2007-05-494, 5-21-2007)
Chapter 5
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-5-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners consisting of three (3) members, as provided by statute.1
2-5-2: APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE; REMOVALS:
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be appointed by the Village President, by and with consent of the Board of Trustees. The terms of office
of the members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be three (3) years and until their respective successors shall be appointed and
qualified; provided, that no such appointment shall be made by any President within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of office; and provided
further, that the President shall appoint the first members of such Board, one of whom is appointed to serve until the end of the current Municipal year in
which such appointment is made, another shall serve until the end of the Municipal year next ensuing, and the third shall serve until the end of the
Municipal year second next ensuing; provided, that each of the first members of the Board shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified.
The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be subject to removal from office in the manner as prescribed for officers of the Village.
2-5-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such qualifications as are now, or may hereafter be, required of them by law.
2-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such powers and duties as are now, or may hereafter be, given to it by law;except, that the
appointment of the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department shall be made by the President and approved by the Trustees.
2-5-5: COMPENSATION:
The secretary of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall serve without compensation and the members of such Board shall serve without
compensation.
Footnote 1: S.H.A. ch. 24, ¶10-2.1-1 et seq.
Chapter 6
PENSION FUND BOARDS
ARTICLE A. POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
2-6A-1: MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
The board of trustees of the police pension fund1 shall consist of five (5) members, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the village president, two (2) of
whom shall be elected by the active members of the regular police department, and one of whom shall be elected by the beneficiaries of the pension fund
as soon as there are such beneficiaries in existence. One of the members appointed by the village president shall serve for a period ending on the second
Tuesday in May next following his or her appointment. The other member appointed by the village president shall serve for a term expiring on the second
Tuesday in May which is two (2) years after the second Tuesday in May of the year of the creation of the fund. Thereafter, the terms of appointed members
shall be for two (2) years or as otherwise provided by the statutes. Elections for elective members of the board shall be held in accordance with the
applicable statute of the state of Illinois2. (1978 Code § 4.04)
2-6A-2: ORGANIZATION:
A. Meetings: The board of trustees of the fund shall hold regular quarterly meetings as established by its members in July, October, January and April and
any special meeting called by the president, or as required by the applicable statutes of the state of Illinois. All meetings of the board must be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 53/524
conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois open meetings act. The board shall keep current, accurate minutes of its proceedings.
(Ord. 2013-11-925, 11-18-2013)
B. Officers: At its first regular meeting, said board shall select from its members such officers as are required by law to serve for a period so defined. (1978
Code § 4.04)
2-6A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of trustees of the fund shall have the powers and duties to control and manage the pension fund as more fully described to the applicable
statutes of the state of Illinois3. (1978 Code § 4.04)
2-6A-4: COMPENSATION:
All of such trustees shall serve without compensation from either the village or the police pension fund. (1978 Code § 4.04)
ARTICLE B. FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
2-6B-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
A board of trustees of the firefighters' pension fund (the "board") is hereby created and constituted. The membership of the board shall be as follows:
Two (2) members shall be appointed by the president, two (2) members shall be active participants of the pension fund who are elected from the active
participants of the fund and one member shall be a person who is retired under the firemen's pension fund act of 19191, who is elected from persons
retired under the act. A firefighter receiving a disability pension shall be considered a retired firefighter. In the event there are no retired firefighters willing
to serve, an additional active firefighter shall be elected to the board.
Members chosen from the active and retired firefighters shall be elected by ballot at elections to be held on the third Monday in April at such place or
places within the village and under such regulations as the board shall prescribe. Only active firefighters shall vote for active firefighter positions; only
retired firefighters shall vote for the retired firefighter positions.
Each member of the board shall hold office for a term of three (3) years and until his or her successor has been duly elected and qualified.
The board shall canvass the ballots and declare which persons have been elected and for what term or terms. Vacancies shall be filled by special election
in the same manner as hereinabove set forth.
The board shall elect annually from its membership a president and secretary. No board members shall receive any salary from any pension fund for
services performed as a board member. (Ord. 2011-10-785, 10-3-2011)
2-6B-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have such powers and perform such duties as are required by statute2, including:
A. Control and management of pension funds;
B. Enforce contributions from members;
C. Hear and determine applications for membership and payments of pensions and benefits;
D. Invest pension funds3; and
E. Report for tax levy4. (Ord. 88-06-272, 6-20-1988)
Chapter 7
PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
2-7-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENTS:
There is hereby created the Park and Recreation Advisory Board consisting of seven (7) members appointed by the Village President with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees. The terms of office of the members of the Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall be staggered such that three (3)
members shall be appointed in one (1) year, two (2) members appointed in the second year, and two (2) members appointed in the third year. Each
member shall serve three (3) years and until his or her successor has been appointed and confirmed. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the
Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 2017-2-174, 2-6-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 54/524
2-7-2: APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRPERSON AND VICE CHAIRPERSON:
The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees, each for a term of one (1) year and until his or her successor is appointed and confirmed. (Ord. 2017-2-174, 2-6-2017)
2-7-3: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall meet periodically as established by the Board of Trustees. A quorum of the Board is four (4) members. All
meetings of the Board must be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act. The Board shall keep current, accurate
minutes of its proceedings. (Ord. 2017-2-174, 2-6-2017)
2-7-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To serve as a liaison between residents and the Board of Trustees in order to communicate residents' opinions, needs, desires, and interests.
B. To serve as an advisory body to the Board of Trustees and to the Village Manager and staff of the Village's Park and Recreation Department on all
matters related to the development and operation of recreation programs, playgrounds, facilities, and parks, and to make such recommendations with
regard to such matters as the Board determines are necessary and desirable.
C. To make long term, strategic recommendations regarding park land and recreation programs as well as short term recommendations on specific
matters for the Park and Recreation Department and special events budget, including existing and proposed park facilities for the purpose of identifying
appropriate improvements, expansions, and renovations.
D. To create, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, and to maintain a communication plan for both internal and external communications; to
survey residents about current recreational programs and additional programs needed and to make recommendations for future recreational facilities;
to meet with homeowners' associations and other groups and agencies for the purpose of reviewing specific concerns; and to establish a
communication process for residents' comments and a procedure for responses to such comments.
E. To review annually those portions of this Code related to parks and recreation and to recommend to the Board of Trustees any appropriate changes
thereto.
F. To review annually the Park and Recreation Department master plan or plans and to make recommendations for updates of such plan or plans as
appropriate.
G. To meet with the Board of Trustees and discuss issues related to parks and recreation, and to have a Park and Recreation Advisory Board
representative attend a meeting of the Committee of the Whole of the Board of Trustees or as otherwise appropriate to give an update of the activities
of the Park and Recreation Advisory Board. (Ord. 2017-2-174, 2-6-2017)
2-7-5: RECOMMENDATIONS OF BOARD:
The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall communicate all recommendations and concerns of the Board to the Board of Trustees in writing. (Ord.
2017-2-174, 2-6-2017)
Chapter 8
ADDITIONAL ADVISORY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
2-8-1: OTHER BOARDS OR COMMISSIONS:
In addition to the boards and commissions established in other chapters of this title, the village president by appointment or the board of trustees by
motion, resolution, or ordinance duly adopted may designate and establish other boards and commissions of the village advisory to the board of trustees
as the president or board of trustees deem advisable from time to time. The membership of any board or commission advisory to the board of trustees
appointed by the village president is subject to the advice and consent of the board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-10-658, 10-5-2009)
2-8-2: DUTIES; RESPONSIBILITIES:
At the time a board or commission advisory to the board of trustees is established, the village president (if the appointing authority) or the board of trustees
(if the appointing authority) must designate in writing the duties and responsibilities of that board or commission, the term of that board or commission, and
the membership of that board or commission. (Ord. 2009-10-658, 10-5-2009)
2-8-3: STAFF LIAISON:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 55/524
Each board or commission advisory to the board of trustees created under this chapter must have a staff liaison designated by the village manager. The
staff liaison will assist that board or commission with access to relevant and appropriate village information, compliance with the Illinois open meetings act
and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances, and regulations, and with other resources as appropriate. (Ord. 2009-10-658, 10-5-2009; amd. Ord. 2012-
10-861, 10-1-2012)
2-8-4: ADVISORY ONLY:
Each board or commission advisory to the board of trustees created under this chapter is advisory to the board of trustees only and has no power to take
final action on any matter. (Ord. 2009-10-658, 10-5-2009)
2-8-5: NO COMPENSATION OR GRATUITY:
Members of a board or commission advisory to the board of trustees created under this chapter must serve strictly as volunteers without monetary
compensation or gratuity from the village. No member of such a board or commission may accept any compensation or gratuity from any person or entity
doing business with, or regulated by, the village that might benefit, directly or indirectly, from the recommendation of that board or commission. (Ord. 2009-
10-658, 10-5-2009)
Title 3
BUSINESS LICENSING, REGULATION, TAXATION, AND FEES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
LICENSE: As used in this chapter shall mean a privilege granted by the village after the fulfillment of all conditions precedent that are expressly provided
herein. Every license granted by the village pursuant to this title, and every renewal thereof, shall be purely a personal privilege, shall not constitute
property, and shall not otherwise be construed in any manner to create any other right or interest to such license.
OWNER: As used in this title shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient
proprietary interest in any establishment to maintain and manage its operation.
PERSON: As used in this title shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity.
PRELICENSE INVESTIGATION1: As used in this title shall mean the investigation made by the village manager in advance of the issuance of or renewal
of any license. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or manage in any way any business or activity or occupation, for any
period of time and at any time without first obtaining a license for such business, activity or occupation and paying the required fee. This license
requirement shall not apply to the following businesses, activities, or occupations:
accountants, architects, barbers and cosmetologists, business schools, dentists, doctors, home daycare operators, insurance brokers, land surveyors, lie
detector operators, nursing homes, optometrists, pharmacists, physical therapists, podiatrists, professional engineers, psychologists, real estate brokers,
shorthand reporters, social workers, structural engineers, veterinarians, water well contractors, and such others as are exempted by operation of state law.
The test to determine whether one or more than one business, activity or occupation is being conducted shall depend on the formalities of ownership of
such business, activity or occupation. When a business, activity or occupation operates a licensable activity at more than one location, a separate license
shall be required for each location irrespective of ownership considerations. If all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses are connected or are
located on the same lot or parcel, and are operated and managed by the same person or owner, and are an establishment with the same zoning code use
classification, then the business, activity or occupation shall require only one license. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-1-3: LICENSE AND FEE SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHERS:
The licenses and fees required by this title shall be in addition to any vehicle license, building permit, inspection fees or any other licenses or fees that may
be required by any other provision of this code or any village ordinance. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-1-4: APPLICATIONS FOR NEW LICENSES:
Each application for a license required by this title shall be made in writing by the owner to the village manager on a form provided by the village for that
purpose. All applicants may be required to swear to any statement made in, or in connection with, an application for the issuance of any license. A new
application shall be required for the renewal of any license at its expiration, in accordance with the requirements of section 3-1-5 of this chapter. If at any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 56/524
time during the term of any license the information required by this section changes in any significant way, such as, but not limited to, a change of address
or the conviction of an applicant of a felony, then the applicant, within five (5) days after such change of information, shall provide the updated or revised
information to the village manager. Each application shall include the following information: (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-
2012)
A. Names And General Information: In the case of an individual or individuals: the name, residence street address, driver's license number and social
security number of each applicant; in the case of a partnership or unincorporated association: the name, residence street address, driver's license
number and social security number of each partner or member thereof; in the case of a corporation: the name and residence street address of each of
its principal officers, as well as the state of incorporation, the date qualified to do business in Illinois, and the name, street address, driver's license
number and social security number of its registered agent.
B. Business Addresses: The street address and description of the premises or place of business, activity or occupation (or the proposed premises or place
of business, activity, or occupation) that is to be operated under the requested license.
C. Character And Description: The character and general description of the business, activity or occupation for which the license is requested.
D. Experience: The length of time that the applicant has engaged in the business, activity or occupation for which the license is requested.
E. Previous Applications To Village: Whether the applicant has made any previous applications to the village for the purpose of engaging in the business,
activity or occupation for which the license is requested, and the disposition of such application.
F. Previous Applications To Others: Whether the applicant has made any previous applications to any other municipality or public entity for the purpose of
engaging in the business, activity or occupation for which the license is requested, and the disposition of such application.
G. Revocation Or Suspension Of Any License: Whether any other license from any public entity obtained by the applicant for the purpose of engaging in
the business, activity or occupation of that nature has ever been revoked or suspended for any reason by the entity that issued such license or by any
other entity with jurisdiction.
H. Violations Of Law: Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or of a violation of any federal or state of Illinois or other state law or
regulation. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
I. Other Information: Any other information that the village manager may reasonably prescribe. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-
2012)
3-1-5: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE RENEWALS:
Each application for renewal of a license shall be made in writing by the owner to the village manager on a form provided by the village for that purpose.
All applicants may be required to swear to any statement made in, or in connection with, an application for renewal of any license. Each application for
renewal of a license shall include any information that the village manager may reasonably prescribe, including, without limitation, all of the information
required for applications for new licenses pursuant to section 3-1-4 of this chapter and the following information: (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord.
2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
A. Violations Of Law: Whether the applicant's business, activity or occupation has ever been cited for a violation of federal, state of Illinois or local law
during the term of the license sought to be renewed.
B. Complaints Against Business: Whether the business, activity, or occupation has received complaints from any person, the number of such complaints,
the nature of such complaints and the resolution of such complaints. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-1-6: PRELICENSE INVESTIGATION:
After receipt of an application for any license or renewal of a license, the village manager shall cause a prelicense investigation to be made: a) to secure
information as to the applicant's character, b) to ascertain whether the applicant has complied with all of the requirements of all applicable laws,
ordinances, and regulations, and c) in the case of a license renewal, to ascertain whether the business, activity or occupation has been operated or
conducted properly or has been subject of complaints or otherwise has been operated or conducted in a manner substantially adverse to the best interests
of the village, the village's residents, and the customers or clients of such business, activity or occupation. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-
10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-7: LICENSE APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE:
A. New Licenses: If, after due consideration of the information contained in the license application, the information obtained through the prelicense
investigation, and any other information reasonably relied on, the village manager determines: 1) that the application has been properly completed and
2) that the applicant has complied with all of the requirements of all federal, state of Illinois, and local laws and regulations, including, without limitation,
the provisions of this title, then the village manager shall approve the application. The village manager shall issue the license thereafter, but only after
payment by the applicant of the applicable fee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 57/524
B. License Renewals: If, after due consideration of the information contained in the application for a license renewal, the information obtained through the
prelicense investigation (including, without limitation, information related to complaints about the operations or conduct of the business, activity or
occupation), and any other information reasonably relied on, the village manager determines: 1) that the application has been properly completed, and
2) that the applicant has complied with all of the requirements of all federal, state of Illinois and local laws and regulations, including, without limitation,
the provisions of this title, and 3) that the business, activity or occupation has been operated or conducted in a manner not substantially adverse to the
best interests of the village, the village residents and the customers or clients of such business, activity or occupation, then the village manager shall
approve the application for a license renewal. The village manager shall issue the license renewal thereafter, but only after payment by the applicant of
the applicable fee. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-8: FORM AND SIGNATURE:
All license applications and licenses shall be kept on file by the village manager. Each license issued shall bear the signature, or facsimile thereof, of the
village clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-9: LICENSE CONDITIONS:
The board of trustees of the village may impose, by ordinance, any appropriate conditions on any license issued pursuant to this title. In addition, all
licenses shall be subject to the provisions stated in this title and subject to the following conditions:
A. Quality Of Operations: Every business, activity and occupation for which a license is issued or renewed shall be operated or conducted in a manner not
substantially adverse to the best interests of the village, the village residents, and the customers or clients of such business, activity or occupation.
B. Malfeasance Or Misfeasance: No owner, employee or agent of any business, activity, or occupation for which a license is issued or renewed shall
engage in any act of malfeasance or any act of misfeasance while engaged in the operation or conduct of such business, activity or occupation. (Ord.
93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-1-10: LICENSE TERM AND EXPIRATION:
All licenses shall be valid for a period not exceeding one year. Every license shall expire on December 31 of the year within which it is issued, unless
otherwise provided by this title and on the face of the license. The village manager shall endeavor to notify each licensee of the impending expiration of
that licensee's license, which notice shall be provided at least three (3) weeks prior to the date of expiration of the license; provided, however, that under
no circumstances shall the failure of the village manager to make any such notification or of the licensee to receive any such notification excuse the
licensee from the obligation to seek renewal of its license. Nor shall any such failure create any right in the licensee to the continuation or reissuance of
any license. Nor shall any such failure be a defense in any action related to the operation of a business, activity or occupation without a license. (Ord. 93-
12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-11: LICENSE DENIAL:
A. Conditions For Denial: If the license application, prelicense investigation, or any other information reasonably relied on by the village manager reveal
any of the following circumstances, then the village manager shall promptly notify the applicant that the license or renewal of a license is denied and
that, therefore, no license or renewal of a license shall issue: (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
1. The noncompliance of the applicant, the building, the business, the activity or the occupation for which a license or renewal of a license is sought, or
the location of such building, business, activity or occupation, with this code or with any other village code, ordinance or regulation, including, without
limitation, all health, fire and safety regulations.
2. The noncompliance of the applicant with any applicable state of Illinois law or administrative regulation, including the applicant's failure to obtain any
necessary license or permit from the state of Illinois. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3. The failure of the applicant at any time to provide convenient and reasonable access to the location of the subject business, activity or occupation; or
to provide other data or information that the village manager reasonably requires as part of the prelicense investigation. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993;
amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
4. The operation by the applicant of a business, activity, or occupation for any period of time in a previous year without a license, when such business,
activity or occupation was required to have a license. This circumstance shall be deemed not to be grounds for denial of a license if, but only if, the
applicant first pays all past due license fees and all fines and penalties.
5. The operation by the applicant of a business, activity or occupation in a previous year in violation of any federal, state of Illinois or local law or
regulation, including, without limitation, the provisions of this title.
6. In the case of a license renewal, the operation or conduct of the business, activity or occupation at any time in a manner substantially adverse to the
best interests of the village, the village residents or the customers or clients of such business, activity or occupation. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
7. The previous conviction of the applicant on a felony or any other crime of moral turpitude, or the unsuccessful defense by the applicant of a criminal
or civil proceeding wherein he or she was charged with fraud, misrepresentation or unscrupulous business practices. However, if the conviction or
unsuccessful defense occurred more than four (4) years prior to the date of application, and the village manager determines that the issuance of the
requested license will not endanger the safety or welfare of the general public, then the village manager shall not disapprove the application solely on
these grounds.
8. The determination by the village manager that the business, activity or occupation for which a license or license renewal is sought will pose an
undue risk to the safety or welfare of the general public or will otherwise create a public nuisance. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-
861, 10-1-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 58/524
9. The violation by the applicant of any condition imposed on the license or licensee by, or pursuant to, this chapter. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
B. Notice Of Denial: If any license or renewal of a license is denied, then the village manager shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for such
denial.
C. Return Of Fee: If any license or renewal of a license is denied, then the village manager shall return any prepaid license fee. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-
1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-12: APPEAL OF DENIAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the village manager in denying any license or any renewal of a license may appeal such decision to the board of
trustees within ten (10) days after the village manager's denial. Such appeal shall be made by the applicant in writing submitted to the village manager.
The board of trustees, or a hearing officer appointed by the board of trustees, shall conduct a hearing on such an appeal. The applicant shall be given five
(5) days' advance notice of the hearing date. The hearing shall be public. At the hearing, the applicant may present and submit evidence and witnesses to
rebut the reasons cited by the village manager for denial of the license or the renewal of the license. The village manager may present and submit
evidence on behalf of the village. Based on the hearing record, the board of trustees may grant the license or the renewal of the license or may affirm the
village manager's decision to deny the license or the renewal of the license. The board of trustees decision shall be made at a public meeting of the board
of trustees within fifteen (15) days after the close of the hearing. The board of trustees shall cause the applicant to be notified within three (3) days after
such decision is made. If the board of trustees does not make its decision within said fifteen (15) days, or if the applicant is not notified within said three (3)
days after such decision, the applicant's appeal shall be deemed denied. The decision of the board of trustees shall be final. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993;
amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-13: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. Revocation: The village manager may revoke any license for cause, after notice and hearing as provided in this chapter. Such revocation of a license
may be in addition to any fine or penalty which may otherwise be imposed and shall not preclude prosecution or imposition of other penalties for
violation of other provisions of this code or any other applicable village code, ordinance or regulation. If a license is revoked, then the village manager
shall notify the licensee in writing of the reasons for such revocation. Any one of the following circumstances shall constitute cause for the revocation of
a license: (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
1. The licensee's intentional or careless misrepresentation of any material fact on any license application, or the existence of any false statement or
information therein.
2. The licensee's failure to continuously comply with all conditions precedent to license approval, or the licensee's violation of any provisions of this
code relating to the license, the subject matter of the license or the licensed premises.
3. The licensee's violation of any applicable regulation or provision of this code or any other village code, ordinance or regulation.
4. The licensee's refusal to admit regulatory inspectors into or unto the licensed premises, or to allow regulatory inspectors to take adequate samples
under the terms, conditions and requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
5. A determination by the village manager, after investigation, that the licensee is operating or conducting a licensed business, activity or occupation in
a manner substantially adverse to the best interests of the village, the village residents, or the customers or clients of such business, activity or
occupation.
6. A determination by the village manager, after investigation, that the licensee is operating or conducting a licensed business, activity or occupation in
such a manner as to constitute: a) a breach of peace, or b) a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or c) a disturbance of the peace or
comfort of village residents. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
7. The licensed business, activity or occupation is conducted in violation of any applicable state of Illinois law or administrative regulation, or the
licensee has failed to obtain or retain properly a necessary state of Illinois license or permit.
8. The licensee is convicted of a felony or has unsuccessfully defended a criminal or civil proceeding wherein the licensee was charged with fraud,
misrepresentation, unscrupulous business conduct or any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
9. The licensee fails to pay any fine or penalty owing to the village. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
B. Suspension: The village manager, after written notice to a licensee but prior to hearing, may suspend any license if the village manager determines that
immediate action is necessary: 1) because the licensee is operating or conducting the business, activity or occupation in a manner substantially
adverse to the best interests of the village, the village residents or the customers or clients of such business, activity or occupation, or 2) because the
continuation of the business, activity or occupation for which the respective license was issued poses a present and imminent danger to the public
health and safety. Notice to the licensee shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested. Suspension shall take effect after receipt by the licensee of
the village manager's notice of suspension. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-14: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Any person aggrieved by the village manager's suspension or revocation of a license shall have a right to appeal such decision to the board of trustees.
Within ten (10) days after receipt of the village manager's notice of suspension or revocation, the licensee may request in writing a hearing on the village
manager's decision. The licensee shall be given five (5) days' advance notice of the hearing date. The hearing shall be public. At the hearing, the licensee
may present and submit evidence and witnesses to rebut the reasons cited by the village manager for suspending or revoking the license. The village
manager may present and submit evidence on behalf of the village. Within ten (10) days after close of the hearing, the board of trustees may confirm the
village manager's suspension or revocation, or reinstate any such license. If the board of trustees does not act on the appeal within ten (10) days after the
close of the hearing, then the applicant's appeal shall be deemed denied. The decision of the board of trustees shall be final. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993;
amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 59/524
3-1-15: REGULATORY INSPECTIONS:
A. Village Inspections Authorized: Subject only to constitutional limitations, every licensee shall permit authorized village officials to enter the business,
activity or occupational premises, including those areas of the premises not open to the general public, for the purposes of conducting inspections to
determine compliance with regulations applicable under the village building, fire, safety and other codes and ordinances and for the purpose of taking
necessary samples of any commodity or material to determine whether the licensee has complied with all applicable regulatory requirements. The
costs of such inspections is part of the basis for the license fees established in section 3-1-21 of this chapter and, accordingly, no separate fee for such
inspections shall be charged except as specifically provided otherwise in said section 3-1-21 of this chapter. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
B. Village Manager Responsibility: The village manager shall determine whether a licensee is complying with all applicable regulatory requirements during
the period of the license. The village manager may authorize other village personnel to make whatever inspections of the premises of a licensed
business, activity or occupation are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any code or ordinance provision, or to detect violations thereof, or
to protect the public health and safety. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
C. Licensee Responsibility: The licensee, or the person in charge of the licensed premises, shall admit the authorized village inspector thereto for the
purpose of making inspection during all business hours and, in addition, at any other reasonable hour. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or
material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any code or ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, the licensee whose
business is governed by such provisions shall give, to any authorized village officer or employee requesting the same, sufficient samples of such
material or commodity for such analysis. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
D. Revocation Of License If Noncompliant: In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, the village manager may revoke the license of any
person who refuses to permit any authorized inspector to take adequate samples or to make inspections, or who interferes with such inspector in the
performance of his or her duties. No license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand by the village manager is made on the licensee, or
on the person in charge of the licensed premises, stating that such inspection or sample is desired, which demand shall be made at the time that such
inspection or sample is sought. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-16: POSTING OF LICENSE:
Every person conducting a licensed business, activity or occupation shall keep the applicable license posted in a prominent place on the business
premises, licensed vehicle or licensed machine or device at all times. No license that is not currently in full force and effect shall be posted or displayed.
Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis, in whole or in part, for a license fee, the village manager shall furnish the licensee with a tag or sticker
for each vehicle covered by the license. Such tag or sticker shall be posted or affixed in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-
1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-17: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business, activity or occupation may be changed after written notice served ten (10) days in advance on the village manager,
provided that the new location of the business, activity or occupation is in full compliance with all provisions of this code and all other village codes,
ordinances and regulations. The licensee, or the person in charge of the licensed premises, shall provide village personnel reasonable access to the new
location to verify compliance with all such codes, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-18: RECORDS:
The Village Manager shall cause to be kept a record of every license issued, the amount of the fee paid, the purpose for which such license was issued,
the location where the licensed business, activity or occupation is conducted, and the name of the licensee or person receiving the license. (Ord. 93-12-
627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-1-19: NO ATTACHMENT OR ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSE:
No license issued hereunder shall be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable, transferable or assignable, voluntarily or
involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. As used herein, to "alienate" or to "transfer" a license shall include the giving, selling or
conveyance of a license or of fifty percent (50%) or more of the total number of shares of stock, or securities convertible into stock, of a corporation or
entity that holds a license. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-1-20: PENALTIES:
Refer to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
3-1-21: LICENSE FEES:
A. Prepayment Of Fee Required: All license applications and license renewal applications shall be accompanied by the full amount of the fee payable for
such license as provided in section 3-1-22 of this chapter. If a license cannot be issued at the time when the application is made, then the Village
Manager shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the money paid in advance. All such receipts shall have plainly indicated thereon that the receipt of
payment of the license fee is not to be construed as the issuance of a license. No such receipt, and no payment of any license fee in advance of the
issuance of the license, shall entitle or authorize any person to any of the privileges conferred by the issuance of any license or to the opening or
maintaining of any business, activity or occupation contrary to any provision of this Code. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-
2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 60/524
B. Proration: In the case of licenses issued on an annual basis, a license for the balance of the year will be issued on or after July 1 of any year for onehalf
(1/2) of the annual fee as provided herein. When such a license is issued at any time before July 1 of any year, the entire annual fee shall be
required.
C. No Refunds Or Rebates: No license fee, or part thereof, shall be refunded or rebated by reason of the death or departure of the licensee, the nonuse of
the license, discontinuance of the business, activity or occupation for which the license was granted, change of location or occupation of the licensee,
or suspension or revocation of the license.
D. Refund If Denial: Whenever a license or the renewal of a license is not approved, the license fee paid in advance, if any, shall be refunded to the
applicant. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-1-22: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Code, each business, occupation, or activity licensed in the Village shall pay the fee set forth in title 13,
chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 98-09-927, 9-21-1998; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Chapter 2
SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR CERTAIN BUSINESSES
3-2-1: AMUSEMENTS:
A. Application For License: Each application for a license to own, promote, operate, conduct, manage or sponsor an amusement or to own, lease or
maintain a coin operated amusement device for public use shall include, in addition to the requirements of sections 3-1-6 and 3-1-7 of this title, the
square feet of the premises where the amusement is to be presented or performed and the location where the coin operated amusement device is to
be used. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
B. Investigations, Inspections:
1. In addition to the investigations, if any, conducted pursuant to chapter 1 of this title, the fire chief, the police chief, and the director of building and
zoning shall make or cause to be made such investigations as they deem necessary to determine whether the applicant's proposed operations and
premises comply with all the applicable regulations of this code and other village codes, ordinances and regulations relating to amusements, fire
prevention and building and zoning. Said village officials shall indicate on the application for a license the results of their investigations and their
approval or disapproval of said application.
2. In addition to any inspection conducted pursuant to chapter 1 of this title, the fire chief, the police chief and the director of building and zoning shall
inspect as often as they deem necessary the operations and premises of any licensee under this title to determine whether all applicable provisions
of this code are being met. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-1995)
C. Location Restrictions: No license shall be issued to any person who intends to present or perform any amusement on any premises within five hundred
feet (500') of any church, hospital or building used exclusively for educational purposes; provided, however, that if any such premises were designed
for the purpose of presenting an amusement and were built prior to the establishment of such church, hospital or building used exclusively for
educational purposes, then this restriction shall not apply; and provided further, however, that this restriction shall not apply to a church, hospital or
building used exclusively for educational purposes that has acquired a license to present or perform an amusement on its premises. (Ord. 93-12-627,
12-6-1993)
D. Gambling Prohibited: No person shall gamble, bet or partake in games of cards or dice for any purpose in any building or hall used for amusement
purposes. This restriction shall not apply to any bingo games, the sale of lottery tickets on a location licensed by the state, or to locations holding a
video gaming license pursuant to 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq. (Ord. 2014-4-963, 4-7-2014)
E. Coin Operated Amusement Devices:
1. No coin operated amusement devices shall be operated for use by the general public without the prior written consent of the village manager. The
village manager shall set the maximum number of such devices that may be operated in any one establishment, which number shall be based on the
amount of space available in such establishment, the location of the establishment, the other uses and activities located within and in the vicinity of
the establishment, and such other matters affecting the public health, safety, and general welfare as the village manager deems appropriate. The
number of coin operated amusement devices that may be operated in any single establishment shall be limited as follows; provided, however, that
the board of trustees may approve a greater number by motion, resolution, or ordinance: (Ord. 95-05-738, 5-15-1995; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-
2012)
Size Of Establishment
(Square Feet)
Number Of Devices
Permitted
0 - 1,200 1
1,201 - 2,400 3
2,401 - 3,600 5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 61/524
More than 3,600 6
2. No coin operated amusement device shall offer, allow, or award any monetary reward or prize.
3. No gambling shall be permitted in conjunction with any coin operated amusement device or in any establishment in which any such device is
located.
4. No coin operated device shall offer, allow, or award more than six (6) free replays in total, howsoever accumulated. Nor shall any such device be
equipped with any "knock off" or similar button or device that can release or cancel any free replay. (Ord. 95-05-738, 5-15-1995)
F. Theatricals: An application for a license to produce, present, conduct or sponsor a theatrical shall include, in addition to the requirements of sections 3-
1-6 and 3-1-7 of this title, the seating capacity of the premises where it is intended to produce, present, conduct, or sponsor the theatrical.
G. Circuses And Carnivals: An application for a license to operate, manage or conduct any carnival, menagerie, sideshow or circus shall include, in
addition to the requirements of sections 3-1-6 and 3-1-7 of this title, the seating capacity of the place where such amusement is to be performed or
exhibited.
H. Cabarets And Nightclubs: No license to operate or conduct a public dance shall be issued to a person who is not a person of good moral character or to
a corporation or organization which is not represented in the village by a person of good moral character.
I. Public Bathing Beaches: No person shall operate a public bathing beach where swimming is permitted unless there is on duty at all times such place is
open for business a lifeguard station facility for lifeguard use only and a lifeguard attending that facility. The lifeguard shall have no other duties at such
place other than as a lifeguard.
J. Parades: No person shall conduct any parade on any public street, alley, or other public way or place in this village unless a permit therefor is first
obtained. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
K. Video Gaming: Video gaming, as defined in the Illinois video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5, is permitted to the extent allowed by
statute and by this code. (Ord. 2014-4-963, 4-7-2014)
3-2-2: AUTOMATIC VENDING MACHINES:
A. License Required: No person shall install, keep, maintain or use an automatic vending machine in the village, or permit the installation of an automatic
vending machine in the village, without first having obtained a license therefor.
B. Gumball Machines: No person shall install, keep, maintain or use a vending machine that dispenses items such as gumballs, nuts, trinkets, novelties
and the like, commonly referred to as "gumball machines", in the village, or permit the installation of such a vending machine in the village, without first
having obtained a license therefor. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-2-3: BOAT LIVERIES:
The fee for a boat livery license shall include safety inspection permits for the first six (6) livery boats. Additional safety inspection permits for livery boats
shall be issued in accordance with title 7, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-2-4: CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES:
No person shall cause or allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase any cigarette, cigar or other tobacco product in any form. Nor
shall any person give away, sell or offer any cigarette, cigar or other tobacco product in any form to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord.
93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-2-5: ELEVATORS:
The director of building and zoning and the fire chief shall conduct the village's elevator safety and inspection program in accordance with the agreement
between the village and the state fire marshal. The elevator safety and inspection standards applicable to the village's program are those standards
established by the state fire marshal. The following standards have been on file with the village clerk for at least thirty (30) days prior to the enactment of
this section and are adopted by reference as the required standards in the village:
A. American Society Of Mechanical Engineers (ASME):
1. Safety code for elevators and escalators: ASME A17.1-2005, A17.1(a)-2005, and A17.1(s)-2005;
2. Guide for inspection of elevators, escalators, and moving walks: ASME 17.2-2004;
3. Safety code for existing elevators and escalators: ASME A17.3-2005;
4. Safety standard for platform lifts and stairway chairlifts: ASME A18.1-2005; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 62/524
5. Standard for the qualification of elevator inspectors: ASME QEI-1-2004.
B. American National Standards:
1. Safety requirements for personal hoists and employee elevators: ANSI A10.4-2004.
C. American Society Of Civil Engineers (ASCE):
1. Automated people mover standards: ASCE 21-2000.
D. Additional Standards: In addition, when an elevator is installed in a building within Lake Zurich, the following standards apply:
1. At least one elevator must be provided for fire department emergency access to all floors.
2. At least one elevator shall be designed to accommodate an ambulance stretcher with the dimensions of twenty four inches by eighty two inches
(24" x 82").
3. At least one key box must be provided for every three (3) elevators installed.
4. At least two (2) keys for firefighter emergency operation must be provided for each elevator.
5. Elevator key boxes must be located at a village approved location in the lobby area of the elevator and no further than fifteen feet (15') from any
elevator. An elevator key box must be within sight of the doors of any elevator.
6. The fire department must be provided with two (2) keys to open the elevator key boxes for every elevator key box installed.
7. Fire sprinkler protection must be provided at the top and bottom of each shaft and in all rooms containing elevator control equipment.
8. The "emergency call" features of every elevator must be directed to the Lake Zurich dispatch center by dialing 9-1-1 through a dedicated ANI/ALI
telephone line. (Ord. 2008-04-552, 4-7-2008)
3-2-6: FILLING STATIONS:
A. Dispensing Motor Fuels: No motor fuels shall be dispensed at any filling station except into the fuel tank of motor vehicles, when such tanks are
connected with the carburation system of such vehicles; provided, however, that individual sales up to five (5) gallons may be made in proper
receptacles when painted and labeled in full conformity with State of Illinois law.
B. Application of Provisions: Any person maintaining or operating any storage tank for gasoline for the use of automobiles for the owner, lessee,
employees or agents of such person shall comply with all of the regulations governing filling stations but shall not be required to pay a license fee. (Ord.
93-12-627, 12-6-93)
3-2-7: FLORISTS:
A. Sanitary Regulations: Every location, place or establishment where the business of a florist is conducted, managed or carried on shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition and free from vermin. No decayed, decaying, unwholesome, contaminated or diseased flowers or plants shall be allowed to
remain in or about said establishment. Adequate and convenient washing and toilet facilities shall be provided.
B. Prohibited Acts and Conditions:
1. No person shall engage in the business of an itinerant florist in the Village, and such itinerant activities are hereby prohibited.
2. No licensee shall sell or offer for sale any flower or plant, the sale, use or possession of which is restricted by Federal or State law. (Ord. 93-12-627,
12-6-93)
C. Inspections: In addition to any inspection conducted pursuant to Chapter 1 of this Title 3, the Director of Building and Zoning shall inspect, as often as
he or she deems necessary, all florist establishments to determine compliance with the provisions of this Code relating to health, sanitation and safety.
(Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-93; amd. Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-95)
3-2-8: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS:
Every food service establishment shall comply with the Lake County Health Ordinance regulating food and food establishments. In addition, every food
service establishment shall comply with all other Federal, State of Illinois, and local codes, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-93)
3-2-9: HOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES:
A. Building and Premises Regulations: No building or structure hereafter constructed in the Village shall be used or occupied as a hotel or as a rooming
house, and no existing building or structure not now used or occupied as a hotel or as a rooming house shall be converted into, used as, or leased for a
hotel or a rooming house except only if such building or structure and every part thereof shall conform to all of the requirements of this Title 3 and to all
other applicable requirements of the building, zoning, housing, fire prevention, health and sanitation regulations of this Code and of every other Village
code, ordinance and regulation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 63/524
B. Register: The landlord, proprietor, manager, keeper or clerk of every hotel and rooming house shall keep a register in which shall be entered the name
and, if a transient, the permanent address and license plate number, if any, of every person who becomes a roomer, boarder, lodger or paying guest
therein. Such register also shall show the number and location of the room or bed occupied by such person, the date of his or her arrival, and the
period for which the guest engaged board or lodging. The register shall be accessible at all times to the Police Chief, to any police officer, and to the
Fire Chief, and to any of their duly authorized representatives. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-93)
3-2-10: JUNK DEALERS AND PEDDLERS:
A. Separate Licenses Required: Any person engaged as a junk dealer and a junk peddler shall obtain a separate license for each.
B. Stolen Goods: Every junk dealer or junk peddler who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things that may have been lost or
stolen, or are alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall on demand exhibit the same to any member of the Police Department for
examination.
C. Restrictions on Sales: No junk dealer or junk peddler shall expose for sale, or sell or dispose of, any goods, articles or things whatsoever within two (2)
days after the date of purchasing, receiving or collecting the same, until the same have been in the premises wherein the same are offered, exposed or
sold at least two (2) days; provided, however, that a junk peddler may dispose of junk collected by him or her in bulk sales from day to day to a junk
dealer whose duty it is to hold such purchases for two (2) days in conformity with the provisions of this Section 3-2-10.
D. Purchase from Minors: No junk dealer or junk peddler shall purchase any articles whatsoever from any person under eighteen (18) years of age without
the written consent of a parent or guardian of such person.
E. Prohibited Acts and Conditions:
1. No person shall keep, maintain or conduct a place or premises for the purchase, reception or keeping of stolen goods.
2. No article, thing or substance included within any junk purchased, received or collected at retail shall be melted, vulcanized or otherwise changed or
its identity destroyed within two (2) days after the same was purchased, received or collected.
3. No junk dealer or junk peddler shall receive any article or thing by way of pledge or pawn, nor shall such junk dealer or junk peddler loan or advance
any sum of money on the security of any article or thing.
4. It shall be unlawful to maintain any junk yard any place in the Village.
F. Vehicle Requirements: Each junk wagon shall be permanently marked in legible characters with the name of the licensee, together with the street and
number of the licensee's place of business.
G. Inspections: In addition to the inspection conducted pursuant to Chapter 1 of this Title 3, the place of business, junk wagons and all junk of every junk
dealer and junk peddler shall be open at all reasonable times to the inspection of any member of the Police Department. Whenever there shall be filed
with the Police Chief by the owner or agent of the owner a sworn written statement that such owner or such agent has reason to believe that certain
stolen goods or things specifically described in said sworn statement are in the possession of any junk dealer or junk peddler, any member of the
Police Department shall have the right to inspect the premises of said junk dealer or junk peddler at any time and view all junk that has been
purchased, received, collected or stored in the premises occupied by such business. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-93)
3-2-11: LAUNDRIES, LAUNDROMATS, AND DRY CLEANERS:
A. Compliance with all Codes: All laundries, laundromats and dry cleaners shall comply with all regulations, ordinances, safety codes, fire codes and
zoning and building codes that are in effect or as may be adopted or changed by the Village from time to time.
B. Hours of Operation: No laundromat shall, remain open between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day unless an
attendAnt is on duty. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-93)
3-2-12: RAFFLES:
A. Application for License: In addition to the application requirements established in Sections 3-1-6 and 3-1-7 of this Title, the application for license to
conduct a raffle shall specify the area or areas within the Village in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle
chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances, and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined.
The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by an
officer and attested to by the secretary of that organization.
B. Qualifications of Licensee: Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, fraternal, labor, educational or veterans organizations as
defined under applicable State law and operated without a benefit to their members and which shall have been in existence continuously for a period of
five (5) years immediately before making an application for a license and which has had during that entire five (5) year period bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out its object.
C. Ineligibility for License: The following are ineligible for any license under this Section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 64/524
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter.
3. Any person who is not of good moral character.
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection C1, C2 or C3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which
such a person is active or employed.
5. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection C1, C2 or C3 of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not.
6. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection C1, C2 or C3 of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as
defined in this section.
D. Validity Of License: Each license is valid for the conducting of only one raffle. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
E. Approval Or Disapproval Of License: The village manager or his designee, within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application to conduct a raffle as
provided for herein, shall evaluate and either approve or disapprove of said application. Any failure of the village manager or his designee to act within
said thirty (30) day period shall be deemed to be a decision disapproving the application. The decision of the village manager or his designee shall be a
final decision pursuant to the administrative review act. (Ord. 2012-05-832, 5-21-2012; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
F. Conduct Of Raffles: The conducting of a raffle is subject to the following restrictions:
1. All proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purpose of the organization permitted to conduct the raffle.
2. No person except a member of the sponsoring organization may preside in the management or operation of the raffle.
3. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
4. A licensee may rent premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which also is licensed
under this section.
5. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at that location
specified on the license.
6. No person younger than eighteen (18) years of age may participate in the conduct of a raffle. A person younger than eighteen (18) years of age may
be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-
6-1993)
G. Raffles Manager: All operations of and the conducting of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single manager designated by the organization in its
application. (Ord. 2012-05-832, 5-21-2012)
H. Limitations On Prizes And Chances:
1. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle under this section and in accordance with applicable
state of Illinois law is limited to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
2. The retail value of any single prize awarded by a licensee in a raffle shall not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00).
3. The maximum price that may be charged for each raffle or chance issued or sold is limited to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and the maximum
number of days during which chances may be issued or sold is ninety (90) days.
I. Records: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep such records and shall handle receipts from the operation of such raffles as required in
accordance with applicable state of Illinois law. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-2-13: SCAVENGERS:
Only one public scavenger license shall be issued and be outstanding at any one time for the collection of waste from single-family residential structures in
the village. Such public scavenger license shall be issued to the person who is awarded the contract with the village to perform such waste collection
services. This section shall not prohibit the continuation of existing scavenger service within newly annexed territory for a period of one year following
annexation if the public scavenger serving such area secures a license from the village, nor shall it prohibit the licensing of public scavengers or offal
scavengers for the sole purpose of removing refuse from building contractors' operations, commercial or industrial properties. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-2-14: SECONDHAND DEALERS:
A. Definition Of Secondhand Dealer: The term "secondhand dealer" as used in this chapter shall not include junk dealers as licensed by other provisions of
this code, and shall not include sales or exchanges of used articles and materials conducted by charitable or religious organizations. (Ord. 93-12-627,
12-6-1993)
B. Investigation Of Applicant; Approval Or Disapproval Of License: In addition to any inspection conducted pursuant to the provisions of chapter 1 of this
title, the police chief or any other village official designated by the village manager shall make or cause to be made such investigation as he or she
deems necessary to determine the character and reputation of the applicant for a secondhand dealer's license. No license shall be issued to any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 65/524
applicant who is not found to be a person of good character and reputation, and no license shall be issued to any applicant who has been convicted of
receiving stolen goods, burglary or robbery. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
C. Records Required: Every secondhand dealer doing business in the village shall keep a record of every article received, purchased, sold or exchanged,
including identification numbers thereon, if any. Such records and the articles shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at all reasonable
times.
D. Stolen Goods: Every secondhand dealer shall report to the police any article received by him or her if he or she shall have reason to believe that the
article was lost or stolen. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
E. Minors:
1. No secondhand dealer's license shall be issued to any person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, and no secondhand dealer shall employ a
person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to assist him or her in the secondhand dealer's business.
2. No secondhand dealer shall have any business dealing as a secondhand dealer with any person under eighteen (18) years of age, except on the
written consent of the parent or guardian of such person for each particular transaction. (Ord. 2013-11-929, 11-18-2013)
F. Prohibited Acts And Conditions:
1. No secondhand dealer shall purchase or receive any revolver, pistol, blackjack, shotgun or other firearm, and no secondhand dealer shall display in
his or her window any such weapons for sale.
2. No secondhand dealer shall purchase or receive from any person appearing to be intoxicated, or from any person known to be a thief or to have
been convicted of larceny or burglary. When any person is found to be the owner of stolen property which has been purchased or received, such
property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the amount advanced by the secondhand dealer thereon or any costs or
charges of any kind which the secondhand dealer may have placed upon the same.
3. No secondhand dealer shall make use of any property, private or public, not included within the licensed premises for the storage, handling or
display of any secondhand article.
G. Pawnbrokers And Junk Dealers:
1. Pawnbrokers: No secondhand dealer shall engage in the business of a pawnbroker, as licensed by other provisions of this code, without first having
obtained a pawnbroker's license in addition to a secondhand dealer's license.
2. Junk Dealers: No secondhand dealer shall engage in the business of junk dealer. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-2-15: SOLID FUEL AND FUEL OIL DEALERS:
A. License Required For Coal Yards, Fuel Oil, Etc.: No person shall keep, engage in the business of coal yard operator, or engage in the business of fuel
oil dealer, or keep on hand or store fuel oil for use in any business in the village, other than the business of fuel oil dealer, without first having obtained
a license therefor for each location, place or premises where such matters are being conducted; provided, however, that no license shall be required of
any person who keeps on hand or stores fuel oil at any location in the quantity of less than two thousand (2,000) gallons for use exclusively in the
heating of any building at the same location.
B. Separate Licenses Required: Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, any person engaging or proposing to engage in one or more of the
businesses or activities described in this section shall obtain a separate license for each such business or activity.
C. Applications For Licenses: Each application for any location for such business or activity described in this section shall include, in addition to the
requirements of sections 3-1-6 and 3-1-7 of this title, a statement describing whether the applicant engages in or proposes to engage in the business or
activity of coal yard owner, dealer in solid fuel, fuel oil dealer or fuel oil storer. In addition, each application shall include the following:
1. Each application for a coal yard owner's license or dealer in solid fuel's license shall state the number of vehicles, if any, to be used in connection
with said business.
2. Each application for a fuel oil dealer's license shall state whether the applicant uses or proposes to use storage facilities in connection with the
business of fuel oil dealer and, if so, the location where such storage facilities are located or are to be located, their capacity and the number of
vehicles, if any, to be used in connection with said business.
3. Each application for a fuel oil storer's license shall state the location at which the applicant desires or intends to store fuel oil for use in applicant's
business, the maximum aggregate quantity to be so stored or used, a description of the business to be conducted, the location and capacity of each
container of fifty (50) gallons or more used for the storage of fuel oil, and such other information as may be required by the fire chief. (Ord. 93-12-
627, 12-6-1993)
D. Investigation Of Applicant: In addition to any inspection conducted pursuant to chapter 1 of this title, the director of building and zoning and the fire chief
shall make or cause to be made such investigations as they deem necessary to determine whether the applicant's proposed place of business and the
methods and equipment intended to be used by such applicant comply with all the applicable provisions of this code and other applicable village codes,
ordinances and regulations, including particularly, but without limitation, those relating to building, zoning and fire prevention. No license shall be issued
to any applicant whose proposed place of business and methods and equipment do not comply with the applicable provisions of such laws. (Ord. 93-
12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 66/524
E. Location Within Fire Limits: No person shall establish or maintain a coal yard or store fuel oil within the fire limits of the village, and no license shall be
issued for the establishment or maintenance of any such coal yard or for the storage of any such fuel oil; provided, however, that this restriction shall
not apply to any coal yard located within the fire limits of the village on and prior to the effective date hereof, nor to the storage of fuel within the fire
limits of the village on or prior to the effective date hereof.
F. Additional Regulations For Fuel Oil Dealers And Fuel Oil Storers:
1. All places of business of fuel oil dealers and fuel oil storers shall be kept in a clean condition, free from accumulation of rags, wastepaper and other
combustible waste material. Rags, wastepaper and other combustible waste materials shall be kept in metal containers pending removal from the
premises.
2. No person shall smoke at the place of business of a fuel oil dealer or in that part of the premises where fuel oil is stored.
3. All containers or tanks used for the storage of fuel oil and all buildings and premises where fuel oil is stored shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the regulations of the building and fire prevention codes of the village, and all of the licensee's activities shall comply with such
regulations.
4. No fuel oil dealer or fuel oil storer shall refill any fuel oil storage container or tank used in connection with an oil burning heater, boiler or furnace
unless such storage container or tank is equipped with an automatic or return vent pipe, or unless the fill pipe of such storage container or tank is
equipped with a screw or automatic cap. Every such dealer and storer, after filling or refilling any fuel oil storage container or tank, shall replace the
screw cap on such fill pipe or, if equipped with an automatic cap, ensure that said cap is properly closed.
5. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to permit the establishment of any coal yard or storage facility in any place where such coal
yard or storage facility is prohibited by any village code, ordinance or regulation, including, without limitation, any zoning regulation of the village.
(Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-2-16: SOUND AMPLIFIERS:
A. Application For License: An application for a license to maintain or operate any loudspeaker or amplifier shall include, in addition to the requirements of
sections 3-1-6 and 3-1-7 of this title, a statement of the manner in which any said loudspeaker or amplifier shall be used, the name and address of the
applicant, the name of the owner of said loudspeaker or amplifier, the date on which said loudspeaker or amplifier is intended to be used, and such
other information as may be requested by the village manager. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
B. Use Restrictions:
1. No person shall use, operate or employ any such device which is mobile within the village limits at any time on a Sunday or between eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on any other day.
2. No person shall use, operate or employ any such device within a radius of two (2) blocks from any church or educational institution at any time while
services, classes or other functions are being conducted at such church or educational institution.
C. Exceptions To Provisions:
1. This section shall not apply to radios in homes or in private pleasure vehicles, when the same are operated in such, a manner as not to be audible at
a distance of fifty feet (50') from such home or vehicle. Nor shall this section apply to noise devices, bands or other musical devices used in any
public parade or procession that is operated under a permit in accordance with applicable village codes, ordinances and regulations. Nor shall this
section apply to any governmental entity engaged in the exercise of its public duties.
2. This section shall not apply to any political party as defined in the election code of the state of Illinois for a period of sixty (60) days prior to the date
of any national, state of Illinois, or municipal election as defined therein. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
3-2-17: TAXICABS:
A. Restrictions On Issuance Of License: No taxicab license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person of good character or who has
been convicted of a felony, nor shall such license be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer thereof would be ineligible for license under the
foregoing conditions.
B. Bond Or Insurance Required: No taxicab shall be operated unless it is covered by a bond or public liability policy as required by statute.
C. License Tag Or Sticker: The village clerk shall issue suitable tags or stickers for the number of cabs covered by each license. Such tag or sticker shall
be displayed in a prominent place on each taxicab when in use, and may be transferred to any other taxicab put into service to replace one withdrawn
from service. The licensee shall notify the clerk of the motor number and state license number of each cab operated and of the corresponding village
tag or license sticker number.
D. Driver's License Required: No person shall drive a taxicab or be hired or permitted to do so unless he is duly licensed by the state of Illinois and the
police chief. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
E. Operation Of Taxicabs:
1. If any licensee on whose behalf a license tag or sticker has been issued shall fail to operate all or any of the taxicabs covered by such license tag or
sticker for a period of six (6) consecutive days, regardless of any intent to resume such operation or any intent not to abandon such operation, then
such license tag or sticker may be revoked or modified by the village manager so as to cover and authorize only the number of cabs actually
operated. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 67/524
2. Every driver of a taxicab shall obey all traffic rules established by statute or ordinance.
3. Every driver of a taxicab shall accept as a passenger any person who seeks to use the taxicab, provided such person is not intoxicated and provided
that such person conducts himself or herself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the
consent of the passenger. The driver of a taxicab shall take the passenger to his or her destination by the most direct available route from the place
where the passenger enters the taxicab.
4. No person shall knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the perpetration of a crime or misdemeanor.
5. No driver of a taxicab while on duty shall drink any alcoholic beverage, or use any profane or obscene language, or shout or call to prospective
passengers, or disturb the peace in any way. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
F. Rates Of Fare; Payment: No passenger shall fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the termination of the trip. No driver of a taxicab shall charge more
than shown in title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. Fare and one-half (1/2) may be charged for service given between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Waiting time may be charged at a rate shown in title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord.
93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
G. Vehicle Requirements:
1. No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a State license duly issued, and no such taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper
brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror and windshield wiper, all in good condition. The Police Chief shall inspect each taxicab so often
as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this subsection.
2. Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on each side, in letters readable from a distance of twenty feet (20'), the name of the licensee operating it. If
more than one taxicab is operated by a different number, then such number also shall appear on each side of such taxicab.
H. Cab Stands:
1. Locations for cab stands shall be such as are from time to time provided by the Board of Trustees.
2. Each cab stand shall be appropriately marked by signs erected under the supervision of the Police Chief.
3. No person shall park any vehicle other than a licensed taxicab in any cab stand. A licensed taxicab may be parked in any cab stand only while such
taxicab is in the immediate charge of its driver awaiting a fare. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993)
I. Revocation Of Taxicab Driver's License: The Village Manager may revoke any taxicab license for repeated violations of Traffic Laws or ordinances or for
the violation of any provision regulating the conduct of a taxicab driver. (Ord. 93-12-627, 12-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-2-18: SALES AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
A. Definitions: The following terms shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: Any product or device not consisting or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, vaporizing or by any other means. The term alternative
nicotine product includes any electronic device that provides a gas or vapor derived from nicotine and/or other chemicals and inhaled by the user to
simulate smoking, such as e-cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah pipes, vape pens, advanced personal vaporizers, box
mods, or other devices capable of delivering aerosolized nicotine or other chemicals through inhalation. The term alternative nicotine product excludes
any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a
tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
MINOR: A person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, association, or other legal entity.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any item, product, or substance containing tobacco leaf, including, without limitation, cigarettes, cigars, snuff, pipe tobacco,
chewing tobacco, and dipping tobacco.
B. Sales To Persons Under Twenty One Years Of Age Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, offer to sell, offer to give away, or
deliver any tobacco product or alternative nicotine product to a person under twenty one (21) years of age. It also shall be unlawful for any person to
cause or allow any person under twenty one (21) years of age to purchase any tobacco product or alternative nicotine product within the corporate
limits of the Village.
C. Sale By Persons Under Twenty One Years Of Age Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to sell any tobacco
product or alternative nicotine product within the corporate limits of the Village, except only that tobacco products and alternative nicotine products may
be sold by any employee of a business properly licensed to sell tobacco products and alternative nicotine products so long as such employee sells
such tobacco products and alternative nicotine products only on the licensed premises, only during regular business hours, and only to a person legally
authorized to purchase such tobacco products and alternative nicotine products.
D. Purchase By Persons Under Twenty One Years Of Age Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to purchase
any tobacco product or alternative nicotine product within the corporate limits of the Village.
E. Possession By Persons Under Twenty One Years Of Age Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to possess
any tobacco product or alternative nicotine product within the corporate limits of the Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 68/524
F. Free Distribution Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, give away, or deliver any tobacco product or alternative nicotine product free
of charge to any person on any public right-of-way or any Village owned property for the purpose of advertising or promoting any tobacco product or
alternative nicotine product.
G. Sales Prohibited In Certain Locations: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, offer to sell, offer to give away, or deliver any tobacco
product or alternative nicotine product within one hundred feet (100') of the property of any school or the property intended for use by minors for
education or recreational purposes.
H. Responsibility For Agent Or Employee: Every act constituting a violation of this section by an agent or employee of any person shall be deemed and
held to be the act of such person, and such person shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act had been done by such person personally.
(Ord. 2018-11-275, 12-3-2018)
I. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each
offense.
J. Payments To Avoid Prosecution For Penalties Under Subsection C, D, Or E: Any person who receives a citation for a violation of subsection C, D, or E
of this section may avoid prosecution by paying a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2018-11-275, 12-3-2018; amd.
Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Any such fines are subject to adjudication by and through the Village administrative hearing system. (Ord. 2018-11-275, 12-3-2018)
Chapter 3
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER
3-3A-1: PRESIDENT DESIGNATED AS LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The Village President is hereby designated as the Lake Zurich Liquor Control Commissioner. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-18-94)
3-3A-2: POWERS, FUNCTIONS, AND DUTIES OF COMMISSIONER:
The Lake Zurich Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers, functions, and duties:
A. To administer the appropriate provisions of this Chapter, all other ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by the Board
of Trustees, and all legislation as may become applicable within the Village with respect to the sale or use of alcoholic liquor.
B. To issue or renew local liquor licenses in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
C. To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a local liquor license to any applicant that the Liquor Control Commissioner has determined to be
ineligible therefor in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
D. To suspend for cause for not more than thirty (30) days, or to revoke for cause, any local liquor license in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
E. To receive and act on complaints from citizens that any of the provisions of this Chapter or of any other applicable rules or regulations have been or are
being violated, and to act on such complaints in the manner provided in this Chapter.
F. To enter, or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter, at any time any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of
this Chapter or any other applicable rules or regulations have been or are being violated, and at the time of such entry to examine such premises in
connection with such determination.
G. To notify the Illinois Secretary of State when a club incorporated under the Illinois General Not for Profit Corporation Act, 805 Illinois Compiled Statutes
105/101 et seq., or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in Illinois under a certificate of authority issued under that Act has violated the Illinois
Liquor Control Act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes, by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquor without a retailer's license.
H. To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local liquor license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee on whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served as provided by law, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant
or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof of information in the performance of his or her duties; and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which
shall be effective in any part of the State.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 69/524
I. To keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses issued under this Chapter and to furnish the Village Clerk with a copy thereof; and, on the
issuance of any new license, or the revocation or suspension of any existing license, to give notice of such action to the Village Clerk within three (3)
days after such action.
J. To report whenever requested by the Board of Trustees all of his or her acts taken to enforce this Chapter and all acts taken in regard to the collection of
liquor license fees.
K. To require, two (2) sets of fingerprints of any applicant for a local liquor license or for a renewal thereof, one for the Village files and one to deliver to the
Illinois department of state police, and for purposes of obtaining such fingerprints to collect from the applicant and properly deliver such fee as may be
required by the Illinois department of state police.
L. To levy fines in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for violations of the state liquor control act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes, any applicable
rule or regulation established by the state liquor control commission, or any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-18-1994)
M. To the extent video gaming is permitted under this chapter, all references to the authority and duties conferred by this section for liquor control
enforcement shall also apply to video gaming enforcement to the extent permitted by state law. (Ord. 2014-4-963, 4-7-2014)
3-3A-3: COMPENSATION:
The Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner shall be compensated as provided in section 1-4-2 of this code. Compensation, if any, for persons, if any,
appointed to assist the liquor control commissioner in the exercise of his or her powers and the performance of his or her duties shall be as established by
the board of trustees by motion. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-18-1994)
ARTICLE B. LIQUOR LICENSES
3-3B-1: UNLICENSED SALE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person not having a current, valid license, authorized and issued pursuant to this chapter, to sell or offer for sale in the village
any alcoholic liquor. Further, no business shall allow the possession, dispensing or consumption of any alcoholic liquor on its premises without a current,
valid license, authorized and issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-2: SALE IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, or dispense in the village any alcoholic liquor except in the manner authorized by and in
compliance with the terms and restrictions of a license issued pursuant to this chapter and except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-3: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any instance when alcoholic liquor is sold, dispensed, possessed, stored, distilled, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a valid license
required by the Illinois liquor control act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes, and a valid license required by this chapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-4: APPLICATION FOR LIQUOR LICENSE:
A. Application Generally: Each application for a license hereunder shall be made to the Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner, in writing, signed by the
applicant if an individual, or by one of the partners on behalf of all partners if a partnership, or by the duly authorized agent thereof on behalf of all
officers, directors, and managers if a club or corporation, verified by an oath or affidavit. Each application shall specifically identify the applicant in the
form to which a license would be issued.
B. Background Information: Each application shall include the following background information:
1. The name, age and address of the applicant; in the case of a partnership, also of the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a
corporation for profit or a club, also of the officers and directors and persons controlling in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the voting
shares of stock.
2. The citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization.
3. The character of business of the applicant and, in the case of a club or corporation, the place of incorporation and the objects for which it was
formed.
4. The length of time that the applicant has been in the business of the character specified in response to subsection B3 of this section or, in case of a
club or corporation, the date on which its charter was issued.
5. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license and the specific name of the business.
6. The specific class of license for which the applicant is applying.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 70/524
7. The names of each governmental body from which the applicant has received a liquor license within ten (10) years immediately prior to the date of
the present application.
C. Statements Required: Each application must include the following statements:
If the applicant is a partnership, then each partner shall provide all statements required below pertaining to an individual applicant; provided, however,
that if the applicant is organized as a limited partnership, then the statement concerning active involvement provided in subsection C15 of this section
shall be required only of all general partners.
If the applicant is a corporation, then each officer, manager or director thereof (or authorized representative if no officer, manager or director) and any
stockholder or stockholders controlling in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the voting stock of such corporation shall provide all statements
required below pertaining to an individual applicant; provided, however, that the statement concerning village residency provided in subsection C12 of
this section and the statement concerning active involvement provided in subsection C15 of this section shall not be required of such officers,
managers, directors, and five percent (5%) aggregate stockholders, and provided further, however, that the statement concerning the issuance of a
federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current taxable year provided in subsection C8 of this section shall be required only of
a stockholder or stockholders who control in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the voting stock of such corporation.
1. A statement as to whether the applicant has a current license issued by the Illinois liquor control commission.
2. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
3. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law or local ordinance concerning the
manufacture, possession, sale or dispensation of alcoholic liquor, or has ever forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any
such violation.
4. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any state or federal law or regulation.
5. A statement as to whether the applicant has had revoked a similar license issued under state or federal law or under the ordinances of any
municipality within ten (10) years immediately prior to the date of the present application.
6. A statement as to whether the applicant has had suspended more than once a similar license issued under state or federal law or under the
ordinances of any municipality within one year immediately prior to the present application.
7. A statement as to whether the applicant is a village employee or a law enforcing official of any government or government agency.
8. A statement as to whether the applicant has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period.
9. A statement as to whether a federal gaming device stamp has been issued for the current taxable year with respect to the premises for which the
license is sought.
10. A statement as to whether the premises for which a license is sought comprises a store or other place of business where the majority of customers
are under the age of twenty one (21) years or where the principal business transacted consists of the sale of schoolbooks, school supplies, food,
lunches or drinks for such customers.
11. A statement as to whether the retail sale of alcohol on the premises for which a license is sought will violate any provision of the Lake Zurich zoning
code or this code and as to whether such premises are within one hundred feet (100') of the property of any school, hospital, senior citizen housing,
daycare center, orphanage, transitional service facility, nursing or personal care facility, home for veterans and their spouses or children, or any
military or naval station or within one hundred feet (100') of the nearest part of any church building used for worship or educational purposes.
12. A statement as to whether the applicant is a permanent resident of the village.
13. A statement as to whether the applicant beneficially owns the premises for which a license is sought or has a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued.
14. A statement as to whether the applicant is the beneficial owner of the business to be licensed.
15. A statement as to whether the applicant will be personally, actively involved in the operation of the business to be licensed.
16. A statement as to whether the business is or will be managed by a manager or agent and, if so, statements from every such manager or agent to
the same extent as required from every individual applicant.
17. A statement as to the nature of the business and the amount of anticipated alcoholic liquor sales as a percentage of gross annual sales of the
business.
18. A statement that the applicant is not disqualified from receiving a license by reason of any matter or item contained in the laws of the state of
Illinois, this chapter or any other code or ordinances of the village.
19. A statement that the applicant will not violate any federal or state of Illinois laws, or this chapter, or any other code or ordinances of the village in the
conduct of the applicant's business.
20. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, whether it is qualified under the Illinois business corporations act, 805 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/101 et
seq., to transact business in Illinois.
21. A statement that, if the business to be operated pursuant to the license is operating under an assumed name, then the applicant has complied with
the Illinois assumed business name act and other applicable laws.
22. A statement by the applicant certifying that any person who sells or serves alcoholic beverages, anyone whose job description entails checking of
identification cards of patrons for the purchase of alcohol or for entry into a licensed premises, and all management personnel, have completed a
state certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training ("BASSET") certification and that any new owner, manager, employee, or
agent requiring BASSET training, shall within one hundred twenty (120) days from the beginning of their employment with that licensee, complete an
ILCC BASSET approved seller/server training program and shall until completion of the BASSET program work under the supervision of a person
who has completed BASSET training.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 71/524
For purposes of this subsection, "currently certified" shall mean that the employee possesses a responsible alcohol service training certificate from a
BASSET licensed program that is not more than three (3) years old and otherwise meets legal requirements. Failure to retain such a BASSET
certified employee during all such times as required herein shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-5: INVESTIGATION AND DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION CONTAINED IN APPLICATION; WAIVER OF CLAIMS:
By applying for a license pursuant to this chapter, each applicant thereby authorizes any person to disclose, and the village to investigate, all information
pertaining to such applicant's application. Each applicant thereby waives any and all claims against the village and thereby agrees to indemnify and hold
harmless the village and its elected and appointed officials, officers, boards, commissioners, attorneys, employees and agents from any and all claims
resulting from, or arising out of, or alleged to result from or arise out of the aforesaid activities. Each applicant shall consent to and sign any written
authorization, waiver and indemnification agreement as the village may require in connection with the aforesaid activities. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-6: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license of any kind shall be issued or renewed to:
A. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, if the Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner determines, after
investigation, that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
B. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law or local ordinance concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of
alcoholic liquor or shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
C. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any state or federal law or regulation.
D. A person whose liquor license issued under state law or any municipal ordinance has been revoked for cause within ten (10) years immediately prior to
the date of the present application.
E. A person whose liquor license issued under this chapter has been suspended more than once for cause within one year immediately prior to the
present application if the Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner determines that the applicant is no longer worthy of the public trust.
F. Any village employee or law enforcing official or the village president and any member of the board of trustees; provided, however, that nothing herein
shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a bona fide not for profit private club or charitable or educational organization owned and operated by its
members, one or more of which members is a village employee or law enforcing public official or the village president or a member of the board of
trustees.
G. A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
H. A person applying for a license with respect to premises for which a federal gaming device stamp has been issued for the current taxable year.
I. A person applying for a license with respect to any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are under the age of twenty one (21)
years or where the principal business transacted consists of the sale of schoolbooks, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such customers.
J. A person applying for a license with respect to premises on which the retail sale of alcoholic liquor will violate any provision of the Lake Zurich zoning
code or this code or which premises are within one hundred feet (100') of the property of any church, school, hospital, senior citizen housing, daycare
center, orphanage, transitional service facility, nursing or personal care facility, home for veterans and their spouses or children, or any military or naval
station, except only as allowed by state law. The following standards apply to these prohibitions:
1. In measuring the distance from a church, the nearest part of any building for worship or educational purposes is used rather than property
boundaries.
2. No distance is required with respect to a state university or other institution of higher learning.
3. This subsection J does not apply to any application for renewal of a license when any church, school, hospital, senior citizen housing, daycare
center, orphanage, transitional service facility, nursing or personal care facility, home for veterans and their spouses or children, or any military or
naval station has been established within one hundred feet (100') of the licensed premises after the issuance of the original license.
4. The one hundred foot (100') limitation in this subsection J does not prohibit the issuance of a class G single public event license or G-1 multi-day
public event license to any church, school, hospital, senior citizen housing, daycare center, orphanage, transitional service facility, nursing or
personal care facility, home for veterans and their spouses or children, or any military or naval station.
K. A person who is not a permanent resident of the village.
L. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
M. A person who is not the beneficial owner of the business to be licensed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 72/524
N. A person who will not be personally, actively involved in the operation of the business to be licensed.
O. A person whose place of business is managed by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the qualifications required of an
individual licensee.
P. A partnership, unless all members thereof shall be qualified to obtain a license; provided, however, that the requirement of active involvement in
subsection N of this section shall apply only to one such partner.
Q. A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders controlling in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of
the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible, except by reason of the village residency requirement in subsection K of this section or the
requirement of active involvement in subsection N of this section, to receive a license hereunder; provided, however, that the ineligibility of a corporate
applicant premised on a stockholder or stockholders having received a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current
taxable year in subsection G of this section shall apply only to the extent that such stockholder or stockholders control in the aggregate more than
twenty percent (20%) of the stock of such corporations.
R. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois business corporations act, 805
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/101 et seq., to transact business in Illinois.
S. A person who is not of good character and reputation. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-7: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned on the acquisition and maintenance in good standing by the applicant of a license issued
by the Illinois liquor control commission. No license shall authorize the retail sale of any alcoholic liquor until proof of acquisition of such Illinois license is
furnished to the Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner. If any license is refused, suspended or revoked by the Illinois liquor control commission, then any
license issued or conditionally issued under this chapter shall immediately become null and void without further action by the village or the Lake Zurich
liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-8: ENFORCEMENT OF STATE ORDERS:
The Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner, on complaint of the state of Illinois department of revenue, shall refuse the issuance or renewal of any
license, or suspend or revoke any license, for any of the following violations of any tax act administered by the Illinois department of revenue:
A. Failure to make a tax return.
B. Filing of a fraudulent return.
C. Failure to pay all or any part of any tax or penalty finally determined to be due.
D. Failure to keep proper books and records.
E. Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificate of registration.
F. Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the state of Illinois department of revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability. (Ord.
2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-9: TERMS OF LICENSES:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter other than a class B-2, F, G, or G-1 license are operative and valid, unless terminated, revoked, or suspended,
for one year commencing on January 1 of each year and terminating on December 31 of that same year. The licenses that are excluded from the one year
term are operative and valid for the period of time specified in the license. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-10: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
A. General Provisions:
1. The classes of liquor licenses in the village are those classes set forth in this section. There are no other classes of liquor licenses in the village.
2. No liquor license of any class may be issued by the village unless a license is authorized by section 3-3B-14 of this article and has not already been
issued.
3. No liquor license may be issued by the village until after the applicable fee for the license has been paid in full.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 73/524
4. Licensed locations that serve alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption, other than event licensees, shall provide service with employees no
less than twenty one (21) years of age that have completed the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program or
training for intervention for procedures (TIPS) program or their recognized equivalent. That training must take place before the person engages in the
activity for which training is required. In addition to every other penalty provided by this code, any failure to comply with this subsection will be cause
for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a liquor license.
5. Alcoholic beverages shall only be sold by individuals no less than twenty one (21) years of age. The serving of alcoholic beverages of establishment
employees at least eighteen (18) years of age is permitted.
6. The sale and service of alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise stated within a license class is limited to the hours between six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. (the following day).
B. Liquor License Classes:
Class A: Restaurant full service license. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by restaurants for on premises and off
premises consumption when such sales are incidental to and complementary to the sale and service of food.
Class A-1: Restaurant outdoor cafe full service license. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption at an outdoor
cafe accessory to a restaurant that holds a class A license. This license requires the specific prior approval of the Lake Zurich liquor control
commissioner, who may establish standards for the service of alcoholic beverages at the outdoor cafe as a condition for issuance of this license.
Class B: Retail sales and delivery license. This license authorizes the retail sale and delivery of alcoholic beverages, in original package form, for
consumption off the premises where sold. This license is not available for gas stations or convenience stores.
Class B-1: Annual tasting license. This license authorizes an unlimited number of tasting events for a class B establishment subject to the following
conditions:
1. Service is incidental and complementary and related to the business purposes of the establishment.
2. The sale or service of alcoholic beverages must be supervised by a full time employee of the licensee and may occur only within the licensed
area.
3. Alcoholic beverages may be sold or served only to patrons within the licensed area.
4. All alcoholic beverages must be served in a container that must be disposed of before the patron leaves the premises or area designated in the
license where alcoholic beverages are authorized to be sold or served.
Class B-2: Single event tasting license. This license authorizes a onetime tasting event during the license term for a class B establishment subject to
the same conditions as the class B-1 license.
Class C: Retail sales at gas stations and convenience stores license. This license authorizes the sale, in original package form, for consumption off
the premises where sold subject to the following conditions:
1. Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the total floor area of the licensed premises may be devoted to the storage and display of alcoholic
beverages.
2. At least one store employee of twenty one (21) years of age or older must be present on the licensed premises when alcohol is being sold.
Class E: Club license. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverage by clubs organized under the laws of Illinois that are not for
pecuniary profit and that are for charitable, service, or fraternal purposes, for consumption on the premises where sold only: 1) to members or 2) to
members and invited public at an event that is related to the charitable, service, or fraternal mission of the club.
Class F: Single private event license. This license authorizes the retail sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages on public or private grounds at
events rented for one group with no general public admission, for consumption only on the premises specified in the license. This license is valid for
twenty four (24) hours.
Class G: Single public event license. This license authorizes the retail sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages on public or private grounds at
events for consumption only on the premises specified in the license. This license is subject to the following conditions:
1. The license is valid for a twenty four (24) hour period.
2. For events using public land, a copy of a certificate of liquor liability insurance, naming the village as additional insured in the amount of two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for the period during which liquor will be served.
Class G-1: Multi-day public event license. This license authorizes the retail sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages on public or private grounds at
events for consumption only on the premises specified in the license. This license is subject to the following conditions:
1. The license is valid for a twenty four (24) hour period and is limited to fifteen (15) events annually.
2. For events using public land, a copy of a certificate of liquor liability insurance, naming the village as additional insured in the amount of two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for the period during which liquor will be served.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 74/524
Class H: License to permit complimentary dispensing of beer, wine, sparkling alcoholic beverage at a retail establishment without another liquor
license, where the service is incidental and complementary to the operations of the business. This license is subject to the following limitations:
1. The dispensation of alcoholic beverages must be supervised by a full time employee of the licensee and may occur only within the licensed
area.
2. No signage is allowed indicating the dispensation of alcohol is available.
Class K: Gift boutiques license. This license authorizes the retail sale and delivery of alcoholic beverages as a component of a gift basket, in original
package form, for consumption off the premises where sold.
Class M: BYOB - corkage license (beer and wine only). A class M liquor license shall authorize restaurants to permit consumption of beer or wine
brought onto the premises of a restaurant by an adult patron for personal consumption, including consumption by their adult dining guest(s), while
the patron and dining guest(s) are being served a complete meal in the restaurant, subject to all of the following conditions:
1. Consumption of beer and wine is permitted by patrons who order and are served a meal by the licensee, but is restricted to the licensed
premises, and only those portions of the premises designated (i.e., if outdoor dining or banquet area(s) are not included, it cannot be used for
BYOB under license). "Wine" shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables,
containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.01
and 5/1-3.02.
2. Where the licensee and/or its agents uncork, pour, place on ice or store alcoholic beverages, the licensee shall take and successfully complete
a beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) or training for intervention for procedures (TIPS) program or their
recognized equivalent.
3. Patrons are prohibited from taking any opened alcoholic beverage outside of the premises, except for a recorked wine bottle that has been
sealed in a carryout bag in accordance with state law1.
4. Beer and wine may be consumed on the licensed premises, between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. (the following day).
5. The restaurant may charge a corkage fee to the patron.
Class N: Craft distillery alcoholic liquor license. "Distiller" means a person who distills, ferments, brews, makes, mixes, concocts, processes, blends,
bottles or fills an original package with any alcoholic liquor. A class N license shall authorize the on site production and storage of alcohol in
quantities not to exceed one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per year, the sale of such alcohol to persons of at least twenty one (21) years of
age for consumption off premises, and on site sampling of such alcohol. Sales of alcohol manufactured outside the facility, other than as provided
below, are prohibited. This license is subject to the following conditions:
1. Offer samples of the alcohol permitted to be produced and sold pursuant to this classification. Licensees shall not provide more than four (4)
free samples, each of which shall not exceed one-fourth (0.25) fluid ounce, to any person in a day.
2. Sale of on premises produced alcohol for off premises consumption.
3. Sale of alcoholic beverages from spirits (products) manufactured on premises for consumption on premises when packaged or prepared foods
are available.
4. Ancillary sale of beer and wine in conjunction with products manufactured on premises for consumption on premises when packaged or
prepared foods are available.
5. Must have a valid craft distiller license from the State of Illinois.
Class O: Off site catering license. An "off site catering" license shall be required for any person or business who serves alcoholic beverages for
consumption at an event and at a location within the Village along with a planned food service. Catered events are those serving prepared meals and
alcoholic beverages at a prearranged rate or fixed price to an invitation only group of persons. Such service of alcohol can include premeal, meal and
postmeal service. "Off site" catering means the preparation of food at one location for service at another. The following conditions shall apply to this
license:
1. Class O licenses authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where served and approved in the license, solely to
guests invited to the private, catered function.
2. Under this license, alcoholic beverages are allowed only along with a planned food service.
3. The service of alcoholic beverages shall be by employees of the licensed catering business.
4. Class O licensees shall serve alcohol only to invited guests at catered functions.
Class P: Craft brewery license. "Craft brewer" means a licensed brewer or licensed nonresident dealer who manufactures up to nine hundred thirty
thousand (930,000) gallons of beer per year and who may make sales and deliveries to importing distributors and distributors and to retail licensees
in accordance with the conditions set forth in paragraph (18) of subsection (a) of section 3-12 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act. A craft brewery Class
P liquor license shall authorize a licensee to produce at the licensed premises and store craft beer in quantities not to exceed thirty thousand
(30,000) barrels of beer annually (or 930,000 gallons), the sale of such craft beer for consumption on and off premises, on site sampling and
consumption of such craft beer by persons of at least twenty one (21) years of age. Sale of craft beer manufactured outside the licensed premises is
prohibited. The following conditions shall apply to this license:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 75/524
1. Class P license holders may, during authorized hours of business, offer samples of the beer permitted to be produced and sold pursuant to this
classification. Licensees shall not provide more than four (4) free samples, each of which shall not exceed three (3) fluid ounces, to any person in
a day.
2. May offer retail sales of products manufactured on premises for consumption on premises when packaged or prepared foods are available.
3. Every Class P licensee must have a valid craft brewer's license from the State of Illinois. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
Class R: Establishments licensed for outdoor concession/beer garden license. Authorizes the retail sale and consumption of alcoholic beverage for
on-premises consumption at an outdoor cafe under the following conditions:
1. The license holder shall make available packaged or prepared foods.
2. The license holder shall maintain hours of operation approved by the Lake Zurich Liquor Control Commissioner. (Ord. 2018-5-260, 5-21-2018)
Class V: Establishments licensed for video gaming license. For a licensed truck stop establishment, a licensed fraternal establishment and
establishments holding a current liquor license when such establishment, business or applicant also holds an active license authorizing video
gaming/video gaming terminals at or within the establishment. The following conditions shall apply to this license:
1. Establishments shall be equipped with a commercial grade, multitap draft beer system for the sale of beer on tap. Existing 2016 and prior Class
V license holders are exempt from this requirement.
2. This license shall be required in conjunction with and in addition to annual liquor license already required to be held by the establishment for the
service, sale, production or consumption of alcohol hereunder.
Class Y: Brewpub license. A brewpub license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises and retail sales for off
premises consumption. A Class Y license shall be issued subject to the applicant's compliance with the following conditions:
1. Beer service is via a draft beer system.
2. The manufacture of no more than one hundred fifty five thousand (155,000) gallons (5,000 barrels) per year only at a designated licensed
premises to make sales to distributors, and to nonlicensees for use and consumption only, who stores beer at a designated premises and who is
allowed to sell at retail from the licensed premises provided that a brewpub licensee shall not sell for off premises consumption more than one
hundred fifty five thousand (155,000) gallons (5,000 barrels) per year2.
3. The retail sale of beer intended for off premises consumption shall only occur if the container is sealed for transport. Containers intended for off
premises consumption shall not be opened or consumed on premises.
4. Retail sales for off premises consumption are limited to fifty five thousand (55,000) gallons per year.
5. The brewpub shall make available packaged or prepared foods.
6. Complimentary tastings shall not exceed four (4) servings of three (3) ounces each to any person in a day. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-11: LICENSE FEES:
A. Standard Fees: Every applicant for a license or license renewal for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the Village must pay to the Village, at the time the
application for a license is submitted, the following fees: (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
1. Administrative Processing Fee: A nonrefundable fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code immediately, plus, at the time of
license issuance, a fee sufficient to cover all additional Village costs in processing the application. No such fee is required for a Class F, G, G-1, or H
license. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
2. Fees: See title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
B. License Language: All licenses shall contain the following language:
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance. This license shall not constitute property and provided
further that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the board of trustees or
village president and board of trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the Village. This license therefore will remain subject
to a change in its terms, as well as the provisions of all Ordinances now in force and that may hereafter be passed by the Village.
(Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-12: PRORATION OF FEES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, new applications received between January and June will be charged one hundred percent (100%) of the
annual license fee. New applications received between July and December will be charged fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee. License renewals
will be charged one hundred percent (100%) of the annual fee. Nor shall any such fee, except as provided in subsection 3-3B-11A of this article, be
reduced in proportion to the number of calendar months which have expired in the license year prior to the issuance of the license. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-
5-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 76/524
3-3B-13: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
If a license applied for is denied, then any fee submitted, except the nonrefundable fee provided in subsection 3-3B-11A of this article, shall be returned to
the applicant. If a license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by
the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
3-3B-14: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The following is the maximum number of licenses that may be issued for each class. These numbers may be amended only by the Board of Trustees:
(Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
A Restaurant 19
A-1 Outdoor add-on 14
B Retail sales 19
B-1 Annual tasting add-on 5
B-2 Single event add-on 0
C Retail sales convenience 4
E Club 2
F Single private event 0
G Single public event 1
G-1 Multiple public event 1
H Complimentary dispensing of beer and wine 0
K Gift boutique 0
M BYOB corkage 1
N Craft distillery 1
O Off-site catering 1
P Craft brewery 1
R Outdoor concession/beer garden 1
V Video gaming 16
Y Brew pub 1
(Ord. 2018-10-272, 10-15-2018)
The number of Class F, G and G-1 licenses are determined from time to time by the Lake Zurich Liquor Control Commissioner.
A. The premises that is the subject of the Class B license and the premises that is the subject of a Class A or A-1 license must have separate storefronts
and separate public entrances. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-15: BOND REQUIRED:
Before any license may be issued, the applicant shall furnish a surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the Village. Such bond
shall be forfeited automatically on revocation of the license for which the bond was furnished if revocation was for cause. This bond shall not be required
for any special Class F, G, or G-1 license. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-16: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Before any license may be issued, the applicant shall furnish a certificate by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State certifying that
the applicant has an insurance policy in force for the full period for which the license is to be issued that provides general liability coverage in the amounts
of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury or death to any one person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per
occurrence, and one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) per occurrence and one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) aggregate for
damage to property, and that provides dramshop liability coverage at least to the maximum amount recoverable under applicable Illinois Statutes, as such
may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-17: EMPLOYEE GUIDELINES REQUIRED:
Class Description Maximum Number Issued
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 77/524
Before any license may be issued, the applicant shall furnish a copy of a written employee policy manual together with a certificate of the applicant that it
shall require all employees to know and to abide by the procedures and policies contained in the manual. The manual shall contain mandatory procedures
and policies in a form acceptable to the Village, including, but not limited to, procedures and policies regarding service to intoxicated patrons, disturbances
on the licensed premises, checking required identification, withholding service of alcoholic liquor to persons under the age of twenty one (21) years,
reporting violations to appropriate authorities and the like. This requirement shall not apply to applicants for a Class E, F, G, or G-1 license. (Ord. 2016-12-
168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-18: LICENSE IS PERSONAL PRIVILEGE ONLY:
A license issued under this article shall be purely a personal privilege to expire on December 31 next following the issuance thereof and shall not
constitute property. Nor shall any such license be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution. Nor shall any such license be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. No such license shall descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution
but every such license shall, except as provided in section 3-3B-19 of this article, cease on the death of the licensee, provided that executors or
administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic
liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or
insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but no longer than six
(6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-19: CHANGES IN PERSONNEL:
A. Reporting; Fee; Qualifications: Any changes in a partnership or in officers, directors or persons holding directly or beneficially more than five percent
(5%) of the stock of a corporation or ownership interest, or managers, of establishments licensed under this article shall be reported in writing to the
Lake Zurich Liquor Control Commissioner within ten (10) days after the change. Such report shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as provided
in subsection 3-3B-11A of this article. All new persons shall meet all of the standards of this chapter and shall otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license.
All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
B. Termination If Partnership Change: When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of ownership occurs resulting in a partnership
interest by any person who is not eligible to hold a liquor license, the license shall terminate immediately.
C. Termination If Corporate Change: When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes place in the corporate manager or in the
officers, directors or stockholders of more than five percent (5%) of the stock, resulting in the holding of office or such shares of stock by any person
who is not eligible for a license, the license shall terminate immediately.
D. Termination If Individual Change: When a license has been issued to an individual who is or becomes not eligible for a license, the license shall
terminate immediately. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3B-20: VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS:
A. The following definition is applicable to this section:
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including, but not limited to, video poker, line up and blackjack, authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in
which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins,
cash or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
B. Unless otherwise provided for in this section:
1. It is unlawful to keep, place, maintain or operate any gambling device in and upon the premises used or occupied as a place where alcoholic liquor is
sold or given away.
2. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or his agent and/or employee, to give or award a cash prize or equivalent to any person playing any gambling
device.
C. Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, video gaming terminals shall be permitted in and upon the premises used or occupied as a place where
alcoholic liquor is sold or given away if each of the following conditions is first met:
1. The use and placement thereof is in compliance with the provisions of the Video Gaming Act3, as amended; and
2. The use and placement thereof is in compliance with the provisions of all rules promulgated by the Illinois Gaming Board pursuant to the Illinois
Administrative Procedures Act; and
3. The licensee or agent of the licensee:
a. Obtains a Class V liquor license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. This license shall be required in conjunction with and in addition to the
liquor license already required to be held by the establishment for the service, sale, production, or consumption of alcohol hereunder;
b. Files with the Village Clerk a copy of the licensee's written use agreement with the terminal operator for placement of the video gaming terminals
and a copy of the license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board; and (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
c. Pays to the Village an annual fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each video gaming terminal upon the premises.
(Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 78/524
D. No video gaming terminal that is permitted under the provisions of this section may be played except during the legal hours of operation allowed for the
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises.
E. No licensee shall cause or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to use or play a video gaming terminal that is permitted under the
provisions of this section.
F. In those licensed video gaming locations where separation from minors under twenty one (21) is required, a physical barrier to the gaming area is
required, which may consist of a short partition, gate or rope or other means of separation. No barrier shall visually obscure the entrance to the gaming
area from an employee of the licensed video gaming location who is over the age of twenty one (21).
G. The owner, manager or employee of the licensed video gaming location who is over twenty one (21) years of age shall be present during all hours of
operation, and the video gaming terminals or the entrance to the video gaming terminal area must be within the view of at least one owner, manager or
employee.
H. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or his agent and/or employee, to permit or allow anyone to play for money, or other valuable thing, at any game
with cards, dice or chips, or with any other article, instrument or other thing whatsoever, which may be used for the purpose of playing or betting upon
or winning or losing money, or any other thing or article of value, or to get on any game others may be playing, upon any premises licensed under this
section, unless otherwise properly licensed to do so by the State of Illinois.
I. If a licensee violates any provision of the Video Gaming Act or any provision related to video gaming terminals contained in this section, such violation
shall be deemed a violation of the licensee's liquor license. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
ARTICLE C. SALES
3-3C-1: SALES RESTRICTED TO AUTHORIZED PREMISES; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in or from the premises described in the application and license and only in the manner therein
authorized and in compliance with the terms thereof. Such location may be changed only after the issuance of a written permit to make such change
issued by the Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state, this chapter, and other codes and ordinances of the village. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-2: DISPLAY OF LICENSE; BASSET CERTIFICATE:
A. Every licensee shall cause his or her current alcoholic liquor license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises.
B. Every licensee shall ensure that any person who sells or serves alcoholic beverages, anyone whose job description entails checking of identification
cards of patrons for the purchase of alcohol or for entry into a licensed premises, and all management personnel, have completed a state certified
beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training ("BASSET") certification. A state certified BASSET training program shall be defined as a
BASSET program licensed by the state of Illinois liquor control commission (ILCC) as required by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-12 (11.1) and 6-27
and title 77 Illinois administrative code, chapter XVI, section 3500. Any new owner, manager, employee, or agent requiring BASSET training, shall
within one hundred twenty (120) days from the beginning of their employment with that licensee, complete an ILCC BASSET approved seller/server
training program and shall until completion of the BASSET program work under the supervision of a person who has completed BASSET training.
Every licensee shall maintain copies of the BASSET certification for each of his or her employees required to be certified, on the licensed premises
and, on the request of a Lake Zurich police officer, or the Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner or his or her designee, shall immediately produce
such copies for inspection. Failure to retain BASSET certified employees during all such times as required herein shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-3: DISPLAYING OF BIRTH DEFECTS WARNING SIGN:
Every licensee shall cause a sign at least eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") in size to be framed and hung in plain view which shall
read as follows:
GOVERNMENT WARNING: ACCORDING TO THE SURGEON GENERAL, WOMEN SHOULD NOT DRINK ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING
PREGNANCY BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF BIRTH DEFECTS.
Every licensee shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Illinois liquor control commission and the Illinois department of alcoholism and substance
abuse regarding this requirement. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-4: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
A. Consumption On The Premises: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor for consumption on any premises in the village
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day. It shall be unlawful to serve or to consume alcoholic liquor in, or to
admit the public to, any premises in or on which alcoholic liquors are sold at retail during the hours within which the sale of such alcoholic liquors is
prohibited. Other business or social functions of restaurant, club, hotel and motel establishments may continue beyond such hours, provided that no
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 79/524
alcoholic liquors are sold to, offered for sale to, served to or consumed by the public, patrons, employees or membership during such hours. Sale hours
for outdoor cafes are provided in subsection 3-3C-5I of this article.
B. Consumption Off The Premises: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in its original package for consumption off the
premises in the village between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day.
C. Service During Restaurant Operation: In restaurants, it shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or dispense any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises at any time when the food service operations of the restaurant are not operating. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-5: SALES AT OUTDOOR CAFES:
Sale of alcoholic liquor at restaurants for consumption at tables and chairs placed outdoors pursuant to a class A-1 license, whether on private property or
on public property, is permitted only if all of the following conditions are met in addition to every other applicable provision of this chapter:
A. Description Of Premises: The licensee shall provide an accurate description of the location of each table and chair placed outdoors.
B. Incidental Use Only: The use of a sidewalk shall be permitted only incidentally to the operation of a restaurant on private property contiguous to such
sidewalk.
C. Insurance: If any part of the outdoor cafe is located on public property, then the licensee shall furnish to the village evidence of public liability insurance,
including the village as a party insured and insuring the village against any and all liability resulting from the uses permitted under this section, in an
amount to be determined and specified by the board of trustees from time to time but in no event less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00).
D. Indemnification: If any part of the outdoor cafe is located on public property, then the licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless the village from all
liability, lawsuits and costs and shall furnish such an indemnification agreement to the village in a form approved by the village attorney.
E. Open Space: In no event shall a use permitted by this section on a public sidewalk reduce the open portion of such sidewalk to less than six feet (6') in
width. For the purposes of this subsection, "open portion" shall be defined as that area of sidewalk lying between the outermost restaurant table or
chair placed in its normal position for use by restaurant patrons and the curb or, if closer, the nearest obstruction including, but not limited to, any
parking meter, traffic sign, tree well, bicycle rack or other natural or manmade object located on the sidewalk.
F. Cordoned Area: The area in which tables and chairs are set outdoors shall be cordoned off from abutting areas by decorative ropes, chains or other
suitable barriers.
G. Clean And Safe Condition: The applicant shall maintain the outdoor cafe areas in a clean and safe condition at all times.
H. Outdoor Music: Exterior outdoor music may be allowed between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. so long as the
volume level does not unreasonably disturb another. As a condition of the grant of this privilege allowing outdoor music, the village reserves the sole
discretion, as determined by its chief of police, or his or her designee, to determine when the volume of exterior outdoor music is at a level to cause an
unreasonable disturbance to another.
I. Hours Limited: No sales or service of alcoholic liquor shall be conducted or provided for consumption at an outdoor cafe after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday; or after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday or Saturday; or before eleven o'clock (11:00)
A.M. on any day.
J. Other Conditions: The liquor control commissioner may impose any other condition judged by the commissioner as necessary to protect the general
welfare and to assure that any class A-1 license issued pursuant to this chapter shall benefit the general public. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-6: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times and kept in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, regulations, rules and other provisions governing the condition
of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-7: HEALTH OF EMPLOYEES:
It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any contagious,
infectious or venereal disease under such conditions where a serious or substantial risk of transmission is presented. It shall be unlawful for any person
who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or engage in any way in
the handling, preparation or distribution of such products under conditions presenting such a risk. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-8: SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 80/524
A. Sales Prohibited: No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee, shall sell, give or deliver any
alcoholic liquor to any person who is, or who appears to be, intoxicated.
B. Secondary Transfer Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, to sell, give or deliver such
alcoholic liquor to an intoxicated or apparently intoxicated person. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-9: PEDDLING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-10: FREE DISPENSATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to give away or otherwise dispense free of charge within the village, by individual drink or in any other manner, any alcoholic
liquor with the intent of promoting the sale of any alcoholic liquor, except pursuant to a class H license. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-11: RETAIL SALES FROM ORIGINAL PACKAGES ONLY:
No licensee shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor. No
person shall have in his or her possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other containers containing alcoholic liquor, except original packages.
(Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-12: CIVIL RIGHTS IN LICENSED PREMISES:
No licensee shall deny, or permit his or her agents or employees to deny, any person the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodation, advantages,
facilities and privileges of any premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold, subject only to the conditions and limitations established by
law and applicable alike to all citizens. This provision shall not be construed to prevent the good faith refusal to serve alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated
person or to any person who reasonably appears to be intoxicated or mentally disabled. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-13: DANCING RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit dancing on the licensed premises by employees or performers who are paid for their performances or who
accept money from patrons for their performances. All dancing shall be only in areas of the premises specifically designed for dancing and separated from
areas containing tables and chairs, provided, however, that this prohibition regarding separation of dancing areas and areas for tables and chairs is not
applicable to events held on village or other public property. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-14: CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to conduct or to permit on the licensed premises any lingerie or fashion show or exhibit or any contest, show or exhibit
involving the removal, alteration or wetting of any clothing. It also shall be unlawful for any licensee to conduct or to permit on the licensed premises any
contest, exhibition, demonstration, competition, activity or amusement that poses a threat to the health or safety of the participants or any other person,
including, without limitation, wrestling or boxing matches, arm wrestling, throwing, rolling or otherwise propelling objects or any person, activities involving
animals and activities involving running, jumping or leaping. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-15: CERTAIN PROMOTIONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for the holder of a liquor license to advertise or otherwise actively promote the sale, availability, dispensing or consumption at the licensed
premises of any product, goods, wares, device, food, or nonalcoholic beverage when that advertisement or promotion is intended to attract purchasers of,
and promote the sale of, alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-16: PROMOTIONAL PRICING:
A. Price Schedule Required: All holders of a class A, A-1, or E license must maintain a current schedule of prices being charged for all alcoholic liquor
served and consumed anywhere within the licensed premises. Every hotel or multiuse establishment that operates more than one licensed
establishment at which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail must maintain at each establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for that alcoholic
liquor. The schedules of prices need not be posted, but must be made available for inspection by village officials during all business hours.
B. Reduced Prices Prohibited: It is unlawful for any holder of a class A or E license, or his or her officers, associates, members, representatives, agents or
employees to:
1. Sell more than one drink of alcoholic liquor for the price of one drink of alcoholic liquor; or
2. Sell, offer to sell, or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at
private functions not open to the general public or as provided in subsection C of this section; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 81/524
3. Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price
regularly charged for the drink on that day; or
4. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest that involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
5. Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited by this subsection.
C. Permitted Happy Hours And Meal Packages, Party Packages And Entertainment Packages:
1. Definitions:
DEDICATED EVENT SPACE: A room or rooms or other clearly delineated space within a retail licensee's premises that is reserved for the
exclusive use of party package invitees during the entirety of a party package. Furniture, stanchions and ropes, or other room dividers may be
used to clearly delineate a dedicated event space.
MEAL PACKAGE: A food and beverage package, which may or may not include entertainment, where the service of alcoholic liquor is an
accompaniment to the food, including, but not limited to, a meal, tour, tasting, or any combination thereof for a fixed price by a retail licensee or any
other licensee operating within a sports facility, restaurant, winery, brewery, or distillery.
PARTY PACKAGE: A private party, function, or event for a specific social or business occasion, either arranged by invitation or reservation for a
defined number of individuals, that is not open to the general public and where attendees are served both food and alcohol for a fixed price in a
dedicated event space.
RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSE HOLDER: A business/person holding a license and selling alcohol for use or consumption and not for resale.
2. Allowed Activities: A retail liquor license holder can:
a. Provide free food or entertainment, if otherwise authorized by village ordinance, license or regulation.
b. Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package.
c. Sell or offer for sale a party package only if the retail liquor license holder:
(1) Offers food in the dedicated event space;
(2) Limits the party package to no more than three (3) hours;
(3) Distributes wristbands, lanyards, shirts, or any other such wearable items to identify party package attendees so the attendees may be granted
access to the dedicated event space; and
(4) Excludes individuals not participating in the party package from the dedicated event space.
d. Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package.
e. Negotiate drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package.
f. Provide room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel.
g. Sell pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to, buckets of bottled beer), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily
sold in such manner, or sell bottles of spirits.
h. Advertise events permitted under this subsection C.
i. Discount any drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time period only if:
(1) The price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is not changed during the time that it is discounted;
(2) The period of time during which any drink of alcoholic liquor is discounted does not exceed four (4) hours per day and fifteen (15) hours per
week; however, this period of time is not required to be consecutive and may be divided by the licensee in any manner;
(3) The drink of alcoholic liquor is not discounted between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and the licensed premises' closing hour; and
(4) Notice of the discount of the drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time is posted on the licensed premises or on the licensee's publicly
available website at least seven (7) days prior to the specified time. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-17: SALES TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE YEARS:
A. Sales Prohibited: No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee, shall sell, give or deliver any
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
B. Secondary Transfer Prohibited: No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years; provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person
under the age of twenty one (21) years in the performance of a religious ceremony or service, and provided further, however, that this provision shall
not prevent the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor in his or her own home pursuant to the condonation and supervision of his or her parent or
legal guardian.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 82/524
C. Identification Required: If a licensee or his or her officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee believes or has reason to believe that a
sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient may be under the age of twenty one (21) years, then that person
shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand adequate written evidence of age. For the purpose of preventing a violation of this section, any
licensee, or his or her agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is twenty one (21) years of age or older. "Adequate written evidence of age and identity" of the person
means a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor
vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal selective service act, or an identification card issued to a member of the
armed forces. Proof that the licensee, or his or her officer, associate, member, representative, employee or agent, demanded, was shown and
reasonably relied on such written evidence in any transaction forbidden by this section is an affirmative defense in any proceeding for the suspension
or revocation of any license based on the occurrence of such forbidden transaction. However, it shall not be an affirmative defense if the licensee,
officer, associate, member, representative, employee or agent accepted the written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent.
D. Warning Required: In any place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold or distributed, there shall be displayed at all times, in a prominent and
conspicuous place, a printed card supplied by the village clerk reading substantially as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER 21:
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $500 UNDER THE LAW OF THE VILLAGE OF LAKE ZURICH IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR OR IF YOU MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
(Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-18: PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE YEARS:
A. Purchase Or Acceptance Prohibited: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or have
alcoholic liquor in his or her possession, and no person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall have any alcoholic liquor in his or her possession
on any street or highway or in any public place or in any place open to the public; provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit the
consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years in the performance of a religious ceremony or service, and provided
further, however, that this provision shall not prevent the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor in his or her own home pursuant to the condonation
and supervision of his parent or legal guardian, and provided further, however, that this provision shall not apply to possession by a person under the
age of twenty one (21) years making a delivery of alcoholic liquor in pursuance of the order of his or her parent or legal guardian or in pursuance of his
or her employment.
B. Misrepresentation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose
of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the village. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
present or offer to any licensee, or his or her agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age or identity which is false, fraudulent
or not actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure the
serving of any alcoholic beverage, or to have in his or her possession any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of age or identity.
C. Transfer, Alteration Of Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to transfer, alter or deface an
identification card or to obtain an identification card by means of false information, when such card may enable such person to circumvent the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Conveyance Of Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or to sell, give or furnish to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years evidence of age and identification of any other person. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-19: PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE YEARS IN LICENSED PREMISES OR MIXING DRINKS:
A. Presence Prohibited: No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee, shall suffer or permit any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years to be or remain on any licensed premises, or in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to any
licensed premises; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who is accompanied
by his parent or guardian or to any licensed premises in which the principal business involves the sale of services or commodities other than alcoholic
liquor, and provided further, however, that this subsection shall not apply to establishment employees at least sixteen (16) years of age whose duties do
not include the handling or serving of alcoholic liquors or to establishment employees at least eighteen (18) years of age whose duties are limited to
serving of alcoholic liquors and food.
B. Handling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to pour, mix or otherwise prepare alcoholic liquors for
sale or distribution on any licensed premises. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
3-3C-20: SOCIAL HOSTING:
A. Definitions:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which contains onehalf
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 83/524
CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for the transportation of persons or property.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit an event or gathering.
ILLICIT DRUGS: Any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by law, including drugs prescribed by a physician that are in the possession of or
used by someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
As a natural, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
As a legal guardian; or
As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.
REASONABLE STEPS: Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the event or gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present
at the event or gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the event or gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government issued
identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the event or gathering; and supervising the activities of minors
at the event or gathering, calling for police assistance in the event people under twenty one (21) are in possession of alcohol at the event or
gathering or advising law enforcement in advance of departing one's residence that the owner will be away and no underage person is authorized to
be present and consume alcohol at the owner's residence.
RELIGIOUS CEREMONY: The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any
bona fide rite or religious ceremony.
RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or
meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual less than twenty one (21) years of age.
B. Certain Events And Gatherings Prohibited:
1. It is unlawful for any person to host, permit, allow, or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent an event or gathering at any residence or premises, or
on any other property whether private or public, or in any conveyance, over which that person has control or a reasonable opportunity for control
where illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages are present when that person knows or reasonably should know that an underage person will or does
consume or possess any illicit drugs or alcoholic beverage.
2. It also is unlawful for any person to fail to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages by an
underage person at any such event or gathering. A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to
be in violation of this subsection B.
C. Other Responsible Persons:
1. A person is responsible for violating subsection B of this section if that person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, conspires with, or solicits
another person to commit a violation of subsection B of this section.
2. A person is responsible for violating subsection B of this section if that person knows or should have known about the committing of a prohibited act
and failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the prohibited act.
D. Exceptions:
1. A person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in violation of this chapter if he or she undertakes one of the following steps before any other
person makes a complaint about the event or gathering:
a. Seeks assistance from the Lake Zurich Police Department or other law enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by the
host's performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, or
b. Terminates the event or gathering because the host has been unable to prevent underage persons from consuming illicit drugs or alcoholic
beverages despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so.
2. This section does not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or that is exclusively between an
underage person and his or her parent, as permitted by Illinois State law. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016)
E. Fines; Penalties: Any person who violates or assists in the violations of any provision of this section shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense
and shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each such violation. Each day on which, or during which, a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
1. The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 84/524
2. A second violation of this section by the same person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1,
"Fee Schedule", of this Code.
3. A third or subsequent violation of this section by the same person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine pursuant to title 13,
chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2016-12-168, 12-5-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
ARTICLE D. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-3D-1: CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES:
Except as permitted by license issued by the village pursuant to this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, consume or possess open
containers of alcoholic liquor or nonalcoholic beer on any village park property, or in any village building, or on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public
place in the village; provided, however, that the sale, consumption and possession of open containers of alcoholic liquor specifically authorized by a
license issued pursuant to this chapter and confined to the premises for which such license is issued is authorized.
This section shall not apply to those businesses or vendors which are official participants in village sanctioned and approved outdoor events which take
place on public property of the village, or to those persons who consume or possess open containers of alcoholic liquor or nonalcoholic beer purchased
from or provided by an approved business or vendor operating as an official participant in such a village sanctioned or approved outdoor activity on village
property. Any and all businesses or vendors which participate in such outdoor events shall still be required to abide by all other requirements of, and
secure a proper liquor license under, the village's liquor control provisions in order to sell or serve alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 2013-09-908, 9-3-2013)
3-3D-2: PROHIBITED ACTIVITY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, while intoxicated, any act or activity that creates, causes, continues, or maintains a public nuisance on
any park, street, sidewalk, alley, or other public property within the village.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition in any private house or place to the disturbance of any other person. (Ord. 2004-11-
318, 11-1-2004)
ARTICLE E. VIOLATIONS; DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
3-3E-1: VIOLATION DETERMINED BY COMMISSIONER:
A. The liquor control commissioner may suspend, for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke any license if the liquor control commissioner determines
that there has been: 1) any violation of any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor; 2) any violation of any provision of this chapter; 3) any
violation of any applicable rules or regulations established by the liquor control commissioner or the Illinois liquor control commission; or 4) a failure to
pay any license cost or fee or any tax imposed on alcoholic liquor or the sale of alcoholic liquor. In addition to any suspension of a license, the local
liquor commissioner may levy a fine and issue decisions as provided in subsection 3-3E-2C of this article.
B. Notwithstanding the requirements of section 3-3E-2 of this article, if the liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation
of any particular licensed premises will threaten the welfare of the community, then the liquor control commissioner, on the issuance of a written order
stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, may order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days pending
a hearing on the suspension or revocation of the license therefor. Such order shall contain notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing, which
hearing, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard, shall commence not less than three (3) nor more than seven (7) days after the date of service.
This notice shall be served personally or by certified United States mail on the licensee or his or her agent or any employee thereof in charge of the
licensed premises. If the licensee also is engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, the initial closing order
shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses. (Ord. 2010-11-738, 11-15-2010)
3-3E-2: HEARINGS BEFORE THE LIQUOR COMMISSIONER:
A. Notice Of Hearing: Whenever a hearing is required by law before the liquor control commissioner or the liquor control commissioner acts affirmatively
concerning an application, a license or licensee, the applicant or licensee shall be afforded reasonable notice of such hearing. Such notice shall be
sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal delivery to the address of the licensee contained on the liquor license application and shall
state:
1. The time, place and nature of the hearing.
2. A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held.
3. A reference to the particular sections of the ordinances or statute(s) involved.
4. A statement informing the licensee of his or her ability to respond by presenting evidence and argument.
B. Conduct Of Hearings:
1. A hearing required under this chapter shall be held in accordance with the following rules:
a. A hearing shall be held at a reasonable time, date and place.
b. No cause shall be heard earlier than three (3) days after receipt by a licensee of the notice required under this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 85/524
c. A licensee may present evidence and argument.
d. The liquor control commissioner may limit, but not prohibit, the presentation of evidence and argument. Evidence not admissible under the rules of
evidence and privilege as applied in civil cases in the circuit courts of this state may be admitted if it is of a type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
2. Where a licensee has received the requisite notice under this chapter and fails to appear at a hearing, the liquor control commissioner may act ex
parte. The liquor control commissioner may also have an informal hearing where the liquor license will not be affirmatively acted on at such hearing.
C. Decisions Of The Liquor Control Commissioner: Any decision, order or determination rendered by the liquor control commissioner which affects the
rights, duties or privileges of an applicant for a license or a licensee, shall be in writing and notice of the decision shall be by personal service or by
certified mail to the applicant or the licensee. Any decision, order or determination may include an assessment of all costs, fees and expenses as
determined by the liquor control commissioner and the reimbursement to the village for all fees incurred, including attorney fees, as a result of the
prosecution of the offending licensee. This reimbursement shall not be required for hearings that are conducted to determine whether an applicant is
eligible to obtain a license under this chapter.
D. Waiver: Compliance with any or all of the provisions of this chapter concerning procedure may be waived by written stipulation of all parties.
E. Continuances For Hearings:
1. A request for a continuance of any hearing in any matter before the liquor control commissioner will not be allowed by the liquor control
commissioner unless for a good and valid reason in writing and unless made at least two (2) days prior to the date set for hearing.
2. The liquor control commissioner may, in his or her discretion, grant a continuance if extenuating and unusual circumstances are presented in support
of the request for continuance.
3. Any continuances requested by the licensee shall be contingent upon payment by the licensee of all costs, fees and expenses as determined by the
liquor control commissioner.
F. Appeal From Commissioner: Appeals from any decision of the liquor control commissioner shall be taken to the Illinois liquor control commission in the
manner provided by law. Every review by the Illinois liquor control commission shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the
liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 2010-06-721, 6-21-2010)
3-3E-3: VIOLATION DETERMINED BY COURT:
A. Conviction Of Licensee: Whenever any licensee shall be convicted in court of any violation of state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, or of
any provision of this chapter, or of any applicable rules or regulations established by the Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner or the Illinois liquor
control commission, or of any law or regulation pertaining to liquor license fees or taxes, then the license of said licensee may in the discretion of the
Lake Zurich liquor control commissioner be immediately revoked. Such revocation need not be preceded by notice or a hearing for such licensee. Such
licensee shall have a right to a public hearing before the liquor control commissioner for the purpose of showing cause for reissuing the revoked license
by petitioning for such a hearing within fifteen (15) days after the revocation of such license. The hearing shall be held within a reasonable time and
shall allow the licensee an opportunity to be heard. The liquor control commissioner shall make his or her decision within the time specified by law.
B. Conviction Of Other Person: Whenever an officer, director or manager or other employee of any licensee under this chapter shall be convicted of any
violation of any law, ordinance or provision as provided in subsection A of this section while engaged in the course of his or her employment or while on
the premises described in said license, said license may be immediately revoked in the discretion of the Lake Zurich Liquor Control Commissioner,
subject to a subsequent hearing as provided in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-18-1994)
3-3E-4: COMPLAINTS:
Any person may file a complaint with the Lake Zurich Liquor Control Commissioner alleging that any licensee has been or is violating State law pertaining
to the sale of alcoholic liquor, or the provisions of this chapter, or the rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. Such complaint shall be in writing, in the
form prescribed by the Liquor Control Commissioner, and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular
law, provision, rule or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail on which such belief is based. If the Liquor Control Commissioner is
satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation and finds probable cause to believe the same, then the Liquor Control Commissioner shall set
the matter for hearing and shall serve notice on the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charges in the complaint, such
hearing to take place not sooner than five (5) days after the date on which such notice is mailed to the licensee at the address of the licensed premises, by
United States mail. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-18-1994)
3-3E-5: FINES:
A. General Offense: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord.
2004-11-318, 11-1-2004; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
B. Payments To Avoid Prosecution: Any person who receives a citation pursuant to this chapter for a violation of subsection 3-3C-18A, section 3-3C-17, 3-
3D-1 or 3-3D-2 of this chapter may avoid prosecution by paying a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
Time runs beginning on the day after the date of issuance of the citation. If payment is not made within thirty (30) days after the date of issuance of the
citation, then a court appearance shall be required. (Ord. 2016-9-145, 9-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 86/524
3-3E-6: SEPARATE OFFENSES:
Each day on which or during which any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter, and each separate act or transaction in violation of this
chapter, shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-18-1994)
3-3E-7: VICARIOUS LIABILITY:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any employer or licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer and licensee, and such employer and licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done by that employer or licensee personally. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-18-1994)
3-3E-8: BASSET TRAINING:
In addition to any other penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter, any person who violates any regulation of this chapter may be required to complete the
beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training ("BASSET") program. Failure to complete the BASSET program when so required shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-11-318, 11-1-2004)
ARTICLE F. GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-3F-1: SEVERABILITY:
The sections, subsections and paragraphs of this Chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and the invalidity of any provision of this Chapter shall not
affect the validity of the remaining provisions. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-18-94)
3-3F-2: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
All of the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes, and the rules and regulations issued by the Illinois Liquor Control
Commission pertaining to local control of alcoholic liquor, as the same may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated into and declared to be
a part of this Chapter as if expressly set forth herein, except only those provisions that are specifically contrary to or inconsistent with applicable provisions
of this Chapter. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-18-94)
3-3F-3: CONSTRUCTION WITH OTHER PROVISIONS:
The provisions of Chapters 1 and 2 of Title 3 of this Code apply to this Chapter except that, in the case of a conflict between the provisions of said
Chapters 1 and 2 and the provisions of this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply and prevail. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-18-94)
3-3F-4: COMPLIANCE WITH ALL REGULATIONS REQUIRED:
Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse or release the owner, proprietor, licensee or person in charge of any licensed premises in the Village from compliance
with the restrictions and requirements of any other provision of any Federal, State of Illinois or Village Code, ordinance or regulation. (Ord. 94-07-680, 7-
18-94)
Chapter 4
SOLICITATION
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
APPLICANT: Any person that files an application for a solicitation permit as provided for in this chapter.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE: Any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose.
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION: Solicitation engaged in for a charitable purpose.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The Lake Zurich chief of police or his or her appointee or designee.
PERSON: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, trust, or any combination of the foregoing.
PREMISES: Any occupied building or structure, or any separate dwelling unit contained within any occupied building or structure, of any type within the
village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 87/524
SOLICIT OR SOLICITING: The act of engaging in solicitation.
SOLICITATION: Seeking to sell, offer for sale, deliver, barter, exchange, or obtain a gift, a contribution, a subscription, or any other goods or services,
whether for a charitable, political, commercial, or noncommercial organization or purpose, except when such activity is conducted within a building zoned
to permit such activity and under the ownership or control of the solicitor.
SOLICITOR: A person engaged in solicitation. (Ord. 94-03-652, 3-7-1994)
3-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except only as provided in section 3-4-3 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation in the village without having first applied
for and obtained a valid solicitation permit therefor. (Ord. 94-03-652, 3-7-1994)
3-4-3: PERMIT EXEMPTIONS:
Persons under the age of seventeen (17) years shall not be required to obtain a solicitation permit to engage in solicitation within the village. However, any
such person shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
Persons engaged in solicitation at a private retail mercantile establishment with the permission of the property owner shall not be required to obtain a
solicitation permit. (Ord. 2016-9-151, 9-19-2016)
3-4-4: SOLICITATION PERMIT:
A. Application Procedure And Contents: Each applicant for a solicitation permit shall file with the chief of police a properly completed application therefor
on a form provided for such purpose by the chief of police. Every such application shall be filed at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the first day for
which authorization to solicit is sought. Each applicant shall verify under oath all statements made on or in connection with the application. A new
application shall be required to solicit after the expiration of any permit issued hereunder. Each application shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information and materials:
1. Two (2) copies of a two inch by two inch (2" x 2") photograph showing the full facial features of the applicant. Such photograph shall have been taken
within thirty (30) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application.
2. The applicant's name, date of birth, and current residence address, and the length of time the applicant has resided at such address.
3. The applicant's business address, if different than the applicant's residence address.
4. Each of the applicant's residence addresses in the previous three (3) years, if other than the applicant's current residence address.
5. The applicant's social security number and driver's license number, or, if the applicant has neither, then some other official form of identification from
which the applicant's identity can be readily established by the chief of police.
6. The applicant's marital status and, if married, the name and residence address of the applicant's spouse.
7. The applicant's physical description, including height, weight, hair color, and eye color.
8. The name and address of the applicant's current employer, and the length of the applicant's employment with such employer.
9. The name and address of each of the applicant's employers in the previous three (3) years, if other than the applicant's current employer.
10. The name, address, and telephone number of a principal officer or director of the applicant's business or organization who has authority to act on
matters related to the application, and the business's or organization's registered agent for service in Illinois, if any.
11. If more than one solicitor shall be soliciting on behalf of a business or organization, then the name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the
person(s) who will be in direct charge of the solicitors on behalf of such business or organization.
12. A description of the subject matter and purpose of the applicant's solicitation.
13. The date(s) for which the applicant seeks a solicitation permit.
14. The solicitation methods that the applicant and the applicant's business or organization will employ within the village.
15. Whether the applicant will receive any monetary compensation or commission from the solicitation and, if so, the form that compensation or
commission will take.
16. Information regarding the use or revocation, within the previous five (5) years, of any prior solicitation permit issued by the village to the applicant or
the business or organization the applicant represents.
17. Information regarding the applicant's violation, currently or at any time in the previous five (5) years, of any of the provisions of this chapter, or of
any local, state, or federal solicitation regulation.
18. Information regarding whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois, any other state, or the United
States, and the nature of any such conviction.
19. If the applicant seeks a permit to conduct charitable solicitation on a public right of way within the village, then a written statement by the Illinois
attorney general, made within six (6) months immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, that the business or organization represented by
the applicant is in full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Illinois solicitation for charity act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/0.01 et seq.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 88/524
B. Issuance: The chief of police shall issue a solicitation permit to an applicant within ten (10) days after the chief of police receives the application if, but
only if, the chief of police finds and determines all of the following:
1. The applicant has properly provided all information required by the chief of police and the application and the material statements made on the
application are true.
2. The applicant has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois, or any other state, within ten (10) years immediately prior to
the date of filing of the application.
3. The applicant has not had a village solicitation permit revoked or suspended within five (5) years immediately prior to the date of filing of the
application.
4. The applicant has not been convicted of violating any provision of this chapter, or of any provision of any previous village solicitation regulation,
within five (5) years immediately prior to the date of filing of the application.
5. The applicant has not been convicted of any theft, deceptive practice, fraud or sexual offense in the state of Illinois, or any other state.
C. Denial: If the chief of police determines that the applicant has not met one or more of the conditions set forth in subsection B of this section, then the
chief of police shall deny issuance of the solicitation permit and shall give the applicant a written notification and explanation of such denial. The chief
of police's notice of denial shall be delivered in person or by first class U.S. mail addressed to the applicant's current residence address as set forth in
the application. The solicitation permit shall be deemed denied on the day that the notice of denial is delivered or is placed in the U.S. mail as provided
in this subsection. If the chief of police does not issue or deny the solicitation permit within ten (10) days after the chief of police receives the
application, then the permit applied for shall be deemed to have been issued. The applicant may appeal the denial of a solicitation permit pursuant to
the provisions of section 3-4-10 of this chapter.
D. Form And Display Of Permit: A solicitation permit shall be issued by the chief of police and shall consist of a plastic enclosed pin-on or clip-on card,
approximately two inches by four inches (2" x 4") in size, containing the full facial photograph of the solicitor that was submitted with the application.
The name of the solicitor and the business or organization the solicitor represents, if any, the date(s) solicitation shall occur under the permit, and the
effective dates of the permit shall be printed on the solicitation permit in easily readable form. Solicitation permits also shall bear the name of the
village, the signature of the chief of police or the chief of police's duly authorized designee, and the relevant permit application number. Each solicitor
shall prominently display the solicitation permit issued to the solicitor pursuant to this chapter on the front of his or her person at all times while soliciting
within the village. (Ord. 2016-9-151, 9-19-2016)
3-4-5: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SOLICITATION:
All solicitors shall comply with the following regulations:
A. "No Solicitation" Notices: No person shall solicit at or in any premises that has posted on or near its principal entrance a sign bearing the words "No
Trespassing", "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or any other similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises desire not to be
solicited or to have their right to privacy disturbed, unless the occupants have specifically requested such solicitation. The chief of police or the chief of
police's duly authorized designee may make available weatherproof cards bearing a notice of the type herein described for posting on or near the
principal entrance to any premises.
B. Principal Approach And Entrance Only: Every solicitor shall approach a premises only by using the principal approach route thereto, and every solicitor
shall attempt to make contact with the occupants thereof only at the principal entrance to such premises.
C. Discontinuance On Request: No solicitor shall solicit any person or premises at any time after any such person or the occupant of such premises
requests that the solicitor leave the premises or otherwise cease soliciting.
D. Hours When Solicitation Prohibited: Except only as provided in subsection 3-4-6B of this chapter, no person shall solicit anywhere in the village at any
time between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
E. Immediate Identification: Every solicitor shall immediately identify himself or herself and the purpose of the solicitation to each person being solicited.
F. Prominent Display Of Permit: Every solicitor shall prominently display the solicitation permit issued to the solicitor pursuant to this chapter on the front of
his or her person, and the outside of all clothing, at all times while soliciting within the village.
G. Impeding Traffic Prohibited: No person shall solicit anywhere in the village in a manner that completely or substantially impedes the flow of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic in, on, or around any sidewalk or public property, way, or place. No person engaged in solicitation shall have the exclusive right to
any sidewalk or other public property, way, or place, nor the right to establish a permanent stationary location for such solicitation.
H. Soliciting Rides or Business on Public Rights of Way: No person shall stand in a public right of way within the Village for the purpose of soliciting a ride
from the driver of any vehicle, or for the purpose of soliciting employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
I. Fraud or Misrepresentation: No person shall perpetrate a fraud or misrepresentation of any kind while engaged in solicitation within the Village.
J. Public Health and Safety: No person shall engage in solicitation within the Village in such a manner that creates a danger or threat of any kind to the
public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 94-03-652, 3-7-94)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 89/524
3-4-6: CHARITABLE SOLICITATION ON PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
Charitable solicitation on public rights of way within the Village shall be allowed only if such charitable solicitation is conducted in strict compliance with all
applicable provisions of this Chapter, including without limitation Section 3-4-5, and only if such charitable solicitation also complies with the following
regulations:
A. Permit Required: No person shall engage in charitable solicitation on any public right of way within the Village without first having applied for and
obtained a valid solicitation permit therefor pursuant to this Chapter.
B. Application for Permit: Solicitation on a public right of way does not involve door-to-door activities and contact and thus does not involve the same
considerations related to public health, safety, and welfare as are raised by door-to-door solicitation. Accordingly, the application for a permit to solicit
on a public right of way shall be made only by the charitable organization on behalf of all of the individuals who shall be soliciting. Such application shall
include the names and addresses of all such individuals and shall conform to the requirements of subsections 3-4-4A2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 19 of this
Chapter.
C. Hours When Permitted: No person shall engage in charitable solicitation on any public right of way within the Village at any time between the hours of
seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M.
D. Locations: Charitable solicitation on public rights of way within the Village shall be engaged in only at intersections at which all traffic is required to come
to a full and complete stop. Neither the solicitor nor the business or organization represented by the solicitor shall engage in charitable solicitation at
any more than four (4) such intersections at one time within the Village.
E. Annual and Consecutive Days Limitations: No solicitor, nor the business or organization represented by the solicitor, shall engage in charitable
solicitation on public rights of way within the Village on more than four (4) days within any one calendar year. Such solicitation shall not be conducted
on more than two (2) consecutive days. Such solicitation shall not be conducted on more than one such two (2) day period in any four (4) month period.
F. Minimum Age: No person younger than sixteen (16) years of age shall engage in charitable solicitation on any public right of way within the Village.
G. Protective Clothing: Every person engaged in charitable solicitation on any public right of way within the Village shall at all times while engaged in such
solicitation wear a high-visibility vest.
H. State Registration: Every business or organization represented by a solicitor engaged in charitable solicitation on any public right of way within the
Village shall be registered with the Illinois Attorney General as a charitable organization pursuant to the Illinois Solicitation For Charity Act, 225 ILCS
460/0.01 et seq.
I. Statewide Activity: Every business or organization represented by a solicitor engaged in charitable solicitation on any public right of way within the
Village shall be engaged in Statewide fund raising activity.
J. Liability: Every solicitor engaged in charitable solicitation on any public right of way within the Village, and the business or organization represented by
the solicitor, shall be liable for all injuries to any person or property that occurs during or as a result of the solicitation and that is causally related to an
act of ordinary negligence of the solicitor or the business or organization the solicitor represents.
K. Insurance: Before engaging in any charitable solicitation pursuant to this section, the solicitor shall provide to the chief of police a certificate of insurance
issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in Illinois indicating that the insurance company will insure the solicitor and the business or
organization represented by the solicitor against any injury to any person or property during the solicitation that is causally related to an act of ordinary
negligence of the solicitor or of the business or organization represented by the solicitor. Such certificate of insurance shall name the village as an
additional insured, shall state that the insurance policy shall not be amended or canceled during the period of the permitted solicitation, and shall reflect
that at least the following coverage has been provided:
1. Personal injury coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person.
2. Property damage coverage of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). (Ord. 94-03-652, 3-7-1994)
3-4-7: VIOLATIONS DECLARED TO BE NUISANCES:
Every violation of any term, provision, condition, restriction, or duty stated in this chapter or in any solicitation permit issued pursuant thereto is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 94-03-652, 3-7-1994)
3-4-8: EFFECTIVE PERIOD:
Each solicitation permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of time set by the chief of police but not to exceed sixty (60) consecutive
calendar days. An expiration date shall be printed on the face of each solicitation permit. (Ord. 94-03-652, 3-7-1994)
3-4-9: REVOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 90/524
The chief of police shall revoke immediately any solicitation permit issued pursuant to this chapter if the chief of police determines that the solicitor is in
violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter or of the solicitation permit issued pursuant hereto, or if the solicitor made a false material
statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a solicitation permit under the terms of this chapter. Immediately after
such revocation, the chief of police shall take custody of the solicitation permit. The chief of police shall give written notice of the revocation to the solicitor
as soon as practicable thereafter, in the form of a citation that states the reason for the permit revocation or such other form approved by the chief of police
that clearly states the reason for such revocation. The chief of police shall serve notice on the solicitor in person or by first class U.S. mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the residence address set forth in the solicitor's application. The permit shall become null and void immediately on service of the
notice of revocation as provided in this section. (Ord. 94-03-652, 3-7-1994)
3-4-10: APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
Any person aggrieved by the chief of police's denial or revocation of a solicitation permit shall have a right to appeal such decision to the village manager
as provided in this section. Within ten (10) days after receipt of the chief of police's notice of denial or revocation, the applicant or permit holder may make
a written request for a hearing regarding the denial or revocation. The village manager, after receipt of the written request for a hearing, shall set a time
and date certain for such hearing within ten (10) days after such receipt. The village manager shall give written notice of such hearing to the applicant or
permit holder at least five (5) days in advance of the hearing date. At the hearing, the applicant or permit holder may present and submit evidence and
witnesses to rebut the reasons cited by the chief of police for revoking or denying the permit. Within five (5) days after the close of the hearing, the village
manager shall render a decision in writing. The village manager may reinstate a revoked permit, grant the requested permit or a renewal thereof, or affirm
the chief of police's decision. The action taken by the village manager shall be final. (Ord. 94-03-652, 3-7-1994; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-4-11: CHANGE IN INFORMATION:
During the pendency of an application for, or during the term of, any solicitation permit, the applicant or permit holder shall promptly notify the chief of
police in writing of any change in any material information given by the applicant or permit holder in the application for such permit. (Ord. 94-03-652, 3-7-
1994)
3-4-12: ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD:
The chief of police shall cause to be kept in the chief of police's office an accurate record of every solicitation permit application received and acted on,
together with all relevant information and material pertaining thereto. Permit applications shall be numbered as determined by the chief of police, and every
permit issued pursuant to this chapter and any renewal thereof shall be identified with the number of the application on which it was issued. (Ord. 94-03-
652, 3-7-1994)
3-4-13: PENALTY:
A. Penalty For Noncompliance: Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with, or assists in the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, or of any order, solicitation permit, or notice issued pursuant hereto, shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor and shall be fined
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each such violation. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. The Chief of Police shall give written notice to any such person of any such violation and the fine imposed by serving a citation in person or by
certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested.
B. Payment Without Prosecution: Within ten (10) days after the date of the citation, any person served with a citation issued by the Chief of Police
pursuant to subsection A of this section may avoid prosecution for the violation(s) identified in the citation by surrendering the citation to the Village and
paying at the same time to the Village the sum pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. After such ten (10) day period but before
legal action is brought against the violator, the violator may avoid prosecution by surrendering the citation to the Village and paying at the same time to
the Village the sum pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. The Village shall issue a receipt to any person making payment
pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. (Ord. 94-03-652, 3-7-1994; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Chapter 5
OCCUPATION TAXES
3-5-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the village at a rate of
one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from sales made in the course of such business in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes, paragraph 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
B. Report Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the fifteenth day of each calendar month the report
to the state department of revenue required by paragraph 3 of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property to purchasers for use or consumption"1, approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (1989 Code)
3-5-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 91/524
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%)
of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real
estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes, paragraph 5/8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal
code.
B. Report Required: Every supplier or serviceman required to account for the municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of the village shall file on or
before the last day of each calendar month the report to the state department of revenue required by paragraph 9 of the service occupation tax act2.
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time the report required above is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of the tax hereby
imposed. (1989 Code)
3-5-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes, paragraph 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal
code upon the privilege of using in the village any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and
which is titled or registered with an agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible
property, with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the use tax act3, approved July 14, 1955.
B. Collection Of Tax: Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for all municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the
title or certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (1989 Code)
3-5-4: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this village at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes, paragraph 5/8-11-7 of the Illinois municipal code.
B. Report Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the
Illinois department of revenue required by paragraphs 2 and 3 of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property to purchasers for use or consumption"4, approved June 29, 1933, as amended.
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the Illinois department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (1989 Code)
3-5-5: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government in this village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while
this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes, paragraph 5/8-11-8 of the Illinois municipal code.
B. Persons Responsible For Tax: The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration
purposes is given as being in this village.
C. Payment Of Tax: The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois department of revenue. (1989 Code)
3-5-6: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: Every corporation, company, or association that is not incorporated under the laws of the state of Illinois and that is engaged in effecting
fire insurance in the village shall pay to the treasurer of the Lake Zurich foreign fire insurance board, or any agent designated by the treasurer, for the
maintenance, use, and benefit of the Lake Zurich fire department, a sum of money equal to two percent (2%) per year of the gross receipts received as
premiums on fire insurance policies by any and all agents of such corporation, company, or association during the year ending on July 1 in each year
for all fire insurance effected or agreed to be effected on property located within the village by or with such corporation, company or association.
B. Report Of Agents; Payment Of Tax: Every person who acts in the village as agent, or otherwise, for or on behalf of any such corporation, company, or
association must, on or before July 15 of each year, render to the treasurer of the Lake Zurich foreign fire insurance board and to the village clerk a full
and true account, verified by such person's oath, of all of the premiums on fire insurance policies on property located within the village which, during
the year ending July 1 preceding such report, were received by him or her or by some other person on behalf of such corporation, company, or
association. Such agent also must pay to the treasurer of the Lake Zurich foreign fire insurance board, at the time of rendering the report, the sum of
money for which the corporation, company, or association is chargeable under this section. The treasurer of the Lake Zurich foreign fire insurance
board must promptly deposit all fees collected pursuant to this section to the authorized foreign fire insurance account.
C. Collection Of Fees: The sum of money for which every such corporation, company, or association effecting fire insurance is chargeable may be
recovered from the corporation, company, or association, or its agent or agents, by an action in the name of and for the use of the village as for money
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 92/524
had and received. Nothing in this section may be held, construed, or applied to exempt any person, corporation, company, or association from
conviction under the provisions of section 11-10-3 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-3.
D. Compliance With Provisions: It is unlawful for any corporation, company, or association not incorporated under the laws of the state of Illinois to engage
in effecting fire insurance, or to transact any business of fire insurance in the village, while in noncompliance with any of the requirements of this
section and until such corporation, company, or association has fully complied with every such requirement; except that, this provision may not be held,
construed, or applied to relieve any corporation, company, or association from the payment of any loss on any risk that may be taken in violation of this
section. (Ord. 2010-02-696, 2-1-2010)
3-5-7: LAKE ZURICH FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish procedures and standards for the management and administration of foreign fire insurance taxes
collected by the village pursuant to section 3-5-6 of this chapter and sections 11-10-1 and 11-10-2 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-10-1 and 11-10-2 (the "state act").
B. Foreign Fire Insurance Board:
1. Establishment Of Board, Composition: There is hereby established a Lake Zurich foreign fire insurance board comprised of seven (7) trustees, the
fire chief, and six (6) members of the fire department elected at large by the sworn members of the fire department. All full time members of the fire
department are eligible to be elected as officers of the board. No member may hold any office after termination or resignation from the fire
department. The members of the board shall annually elect a chairman, a treasurer, and a secretary of the board.
2. Rules; Bylaws: The trustees of the board shall make all needful rules and regulations with respect to the board and the management of the money to
be appropriated to the board. No rules or bylaws of the board may be adopted, modified, or amended without the prior approval of the board of
trustees.
3. Powers And Duties Of Officers; Treasurer's Bond: The officers of the board shall develop and maintain a listing of those items that the board feels
are appropriate expenditures under the state act. The treasurer of the board shall give a sufficient bond to the village. That bond must be approved
by the village president, conditioned on the faithful performance by the treasurer of his or her duties under this section and state law. The treasurer of
the board shall receive the appropriated money and shall pay out the money upon the order of the board for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the
fire department. (Ord. 2010-02-696, 2-1-2010)
4. Fire Chief Approval: No equipment, fixture, appliance, article, or other item (collectively "equipment") may be introduced into any fire station, and no
equipment may be used by any member of the fire department, without the prior approval of the fire chief. The decisions of the fire chief relating to
introduction or use of equipment may be appealed within fifteen (15) days by the board to: a) the village manager if the fire chief's decision relates to
use of equipment or introduction of equipment into a fire station owned by the village or b) to the Lake Zurich fire protection district ("LZFPD") board
of trustees if the fire chief's decision related to introduction of equipment into a fire station owned by the LZFPD. The decisions of the village
manager and the LZFPD board of trustees are final. (Ord. 2010-02-696, 2-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
C. Receipt And Management Of Taxes: The treasurer of the Lake Zurich foreign fire insurance board will receive the foreign fire insurance funds paid to
the board in accordance with section 3-5-6 of this chapter and must deposit all those funds into a dedicated foreign fire insurance account, to be
administered in accordance with the following standards:
1. Use Of Funds: Money deposited into the foreign fire insurance account: a) must be used solely for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the fire
department and b) may be paid out by the treasurer only upon the order of the board. The board may not enter into any contract or agreement
obligating expenditures from the account in excess of the amount of money currently on deposit in and currently available for use from the account.
Any firefighting equipment purchased with money from the account becomes the property of the fire department.
2. Designation Of Uses:
a. Meeting Required; Notice: The board may authorize use of money from the foreign fire insurance account only at a meeting conducted at the fire
department in accordance with the open meetings act and open to all members of the fire department. Notice of each such meeting must be given
at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of such meeting by posting an agenda therefor in a prominent location at the fire department.
b. Necessary Vote: An affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the board is required to authorize any use of money from the foreign fire
insurance account.
3. Records: The treasurer of the board must keep accurate and current records of the foreign fire insurance account, including all deposits thereto,
withdrawals or disbursement therefrom, balances, and the like. The secretary of the board must keep accurate and current minutes of the meetings
conducted by and decisions made by the officers of the board related to the foreign fire insurance account.
4. Annual Report: The treasurer of the board must make and file with the village clerk and the village treasurer, within thirty (30) days after the end of
each fiscal year, an annual report giving a full and detailed account of all receipts and disbursements made from the foreign fire insurance account
during the preceding fiscal year.
5. Audit: As part of the village's annual audit, funds in the foreign fire insurance account must be audited to verify that purchases from that account
have been made only for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the fire department. (Ord. 2010-02-696, 2-1-2010)
3-5-8: GAS UTILITY TAX:
A. Establishment Of Tax: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at a rate of 2.5 percent of the gross receipts therefrom for the first six (6)
months of the tax and at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom after the first six (6) months of the tax.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 93/524
B. Limitations: No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which that business
may not be made the subject of taxation by the state of Illinois or this village under the constitution and statutes of the United States. Nor will any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas within the corporate limits of the village be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this section for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Illinois municipal
retailers' occupation tax act.
C. Taxes In Addition To Other Compensation: The tax enumerated in this section is in addition to the payment of money or value of products or services
furnished to the village as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon, or
thereunder of poles, wires, pipes, or other equipment.
D. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services, and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and which are determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of the service, product, or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; except
that "gross receipts" does not include any amounts specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts in section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois municipal
code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2(d) or as otherwise required by law.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
E. Effective Date Of Tax: The tax provided for in subsection A of this section will be based on the "gross receipts", as herein defined, actually paid to the
person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for services billed on or after May 1, 2014, with an increase
scheduled for November 1, 2014.
F. Returns: On or before May 1, 2014, each person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas must make a return to the
Village Treasurer for the month of April 2014, stating:
1. The person's name;
2. The person's principal place of business;
3. The person's gross receipts during those months on the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. The amount of tax; and
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the Board of Trustees may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas must
make a similar return to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding one month period.
The person making a return pursuant to this subsection F must pay, at the time of making that return, the Village Treasurer the amount of tax herein
imposed; except that in connection with any return the person, if the person so elects, may report and pay an amount based on the person's total
billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt
adjustments of later payments based on any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
G. Credits For Overpayment; Limitation: If it appears that an amount of tax has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then that amount will be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the
person who made the erroneous payment on a filing of a claim for a credit by that person with the Village, except that no amount erroneously paid will
be credited if that amount was paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim for a credit.
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section may be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of that
amount. (Ord. 2014-4-968, 4-21-2014)
H. Violations; Penalty: Any person that fails to make a return, or that makes a fraudulent return, or that wilfully violates any other provision of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, may be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code, and in addition may be
liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 2014-4-968, 4-21-2014; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
3-5-9: ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX:
A. Establishment Of Tax: A tax at the rates specified pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code is hereby established and levied by the
Village on all persons engaged in the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the Village, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser. (Ord. 2014-4-968, 4-21-2014; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
B. Limitations: No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which that business
may not be made the subject of taxation by the State of Illinois or this Village under the Constitution and Statutes of the United States. Nor will any
persons engaged in using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the Village be
subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the
Illinois Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 94/524
C. Tax In Addition To Other Compensation: The tax enumerated in this section is in addition to the payment of money or value of products or services
furnished to the Village as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon, or
thereunder of poles, wires, pipes, or other equipment.
D. Definition: For the purposes of this section, the following definition applies:
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the State or any of its political subdivisions, any State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
E. Effective Date Of Tax: Any amount of taxes due and payable for any tax levied for any tax period prior to the effective date of this section will remain
due and payable in the manner provided at such time for such taxes regardless of the provisions of this section. The tax provided for in subsection A of
this section will be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity, beginning with the first bill issued to customers on or after May 1,
2014, with an increase scheduled for November 1, 2014.
F. Credits For Overpayment; Limitation: If it appears that an amount of tax has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then that amount will be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the
person who made the erroneous payment on a filing of a claim for a credit by that person with the Village, except that no amount erroneously paid will
be credited if that amount was paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim for a credit.
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section may be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of that
amount.
G. Collection Of Tax: The person maintaining a place of business in the State of Illinois who delivers the electricity to the purchaser shall collect the tax
authorized by subsection A of this section from the purchaser and shall file a return with, and pay the amount of the tax collected to, the Village. This
tax constitutes a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same
manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to subsection A of this section and any such tax
collected by a person delivering electricity constitutes a debt owed to the Village by the person delivering the electricity. With respect to such debt owed
to the Village, the person delivering electricity may be allowed a credit against such debt to the extent the tax related to deliveries of electricity is not
collected because the charges for such electricity are written off as uncollectible; except that if such charges are thereafter collected by the person
delivering electricity, then that person must remit the tax to the Village. Any partial payment not specifically identified by the purchase will be deemed to
be for the delivery of electricity. Persons delivering electricity may collect the tax from the purchaser by adding the tax to the gross charge for delivering
the electricity. Persons delivering electricity also are authorized to add to the gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to
reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax,
and supplying data to the Village on the Village's request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the
purchaser will be required to pay the tax directly to the Village by filing a tax return in the form and manner that the Village will prescribe. The person
delivering electricity who files returns pursuant to this section must pay the Village, at the time of filing such return, the amount of the tax collected
pursuant to subsection A of this section.
H. Books And Records: The person maintaining the place of business in the State of Illinois who collects the tax authorized by subsection A of this section
from the purchaser is required to keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting
the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this section. The books and records are subject to and available for
inspection by the Village at reasonable times during normal business hours. (Ord. 2014-4-968, 4-21-2014)
I. Violations; Penalty: Any person that fails to make a return required of that person by this section, or that makes a fraudulent return, or that wilfully
violates any other provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction may be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of
this Code, and in addition may be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due and may be subject to the penalties provided in section 3-1-20 of this
title. (Ord. 2014-4-968, 4-21-2014; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Chapter 6
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of every
kind or nature, which shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross
charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination point within this village, charges for the portion of the interoffice
channels provided within the village. Charges for that portion of the interoffice channel connecting two (2) or more channel termination points, one or more
of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of the village, shall be determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for
the interoffice channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary
of the village and the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points connected by the interoffice channel. However, "gross charge"
shall not include any of the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 95/524
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added
tocustomers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to
customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax
liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the village;
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
E. Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the department of commerce and community affairs or the successor to its responsibilities;
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
G. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on thatportion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made);
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication devices;
I. Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act; or
J. Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable, 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or invoice, and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges
on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross
charge from the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable
services or telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, or limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities
created by statute, or any village, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption, or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this chapter. The department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state who, to the satisfaction
of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to
collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state
in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state. The permit maybe revoked by the
department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an
office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within
this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems,
and maritime systems, "service address" means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act.
For air to ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 96/524
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through her or his agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the village and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it and including, without limitation, messages, or information transmitted
through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer exchange
services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and
portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among
points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one
or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. Thedefinition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications. Carrier access
charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a
component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements
shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, "prepaid telephone calling
arrangements" means that term as defined in section 2-27 of the retailers' occupation tax act.
VILLAGE: The village of Lake Zurich, Illinois. (Ord. 2004-02-267, 2-2-2004)
3-6-2: TAX IMPOSED1:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
A. The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of the
gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail. To prevent actual multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation
under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall be allowed a credit against
any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this chapter to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the other municipality that was
not previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax.
B. The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of the
gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail. To prevent actual multistate or multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege that is
subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this chapter to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other
state or such tax properly due and paid in a municipality in this statewhich was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in
this state.
C. The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such acts or privileges to the extent such acts or privileges may not, under the constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the village. (Ord. 2004-02-267, 2-2-2004)
3-6-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
A. The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be remitted by
such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such retailer
and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to this state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer
by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed
by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at
law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be
required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided by the department.
B. Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for
telecommunications. (Ord. 2004-02-267, 2-2-2004)
3-6-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before August 31, 2004, and on or before the last day of every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication retailers
shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax
act2 and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement the act. (Ord. 2004-04-278, 4-5-2004)
3-6-5: RESELLERS:
A. If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized
by this chapter onany of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require.
B. After approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number that is obtained through misrepresentation, or that is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free
when such actions in fact are not for resale, or that no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 97/524
C. Except as provided above in this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax-free on
the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2004-02-267, 2-2-2004)
3-6-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not
affect, impair, or invalidate other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or
its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord.
2004-02-267, 2-2-2004)
Chapter 7
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
3-7-0: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as, and may be referred to as, the LAKE ZURICH ADULT USE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meanings given herein:
ADULT BOOTH: Any area of an adult entertainment establishment set off from the remainder of such establishment by one or more walls or other dividers
or partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any of the following commercial establishments, as defined herein:
A. Adult Cabaret: Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides any of the following:
1. Persons who appear seminude.
2. Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas
or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
3. Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or
simulation of specified sexual activities.
B. Adult Store: Any commercial establishment: 1) that contains one or more adult booths; 2) that as a substantial or significant portion of its business
offers for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials; or 3) that has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of adult materials.
C. Adult Theater: Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides films, motion pictures,
video or audio cassettes, slides, or other visual representations or recordings that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT EMPLOYEE: Any individual, including entertainers, who work in or at, or render any services directly related to the operation of,
an adult entertainment establishment; provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult
materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE: A license issued for an adult entertainment establishment pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT PATRON: Any individual, other than an adult establishment employee, present in or at any adult entertainment establishment at
any time when such adult entertainment establishment is open for business; provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering
goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises.
ADULT MATERIAL: Any of the following, whether new or used:
A. 1. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or digitally stored materials; or
2. Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind, that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or
simulation of specified sexual activities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 98/524
B. Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or describe
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT USE COMMISSION: A commission appointed by the Adult Use Commissioner pursuant to Section 3-7-2 of this Chapter.
ADULT USE COMMISSIONER: The President of the Village, pursuant to Section 3-7-2 of this Chapter.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where admission, services, performances, or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of
consideration.
DAYS: Calendar days, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this Chapter.
LICENSED PREMISES: The place or location described in an adult establishment license where an adult entertainment establishment is authorized to
operate. No sidewalks, streets, parking areas, public rights of way, or grounds adjacent to any such place or location shall be included within the licensed
premises.
LICENSEE: Any person or entity that has been issued an adult establishment license pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
NUDE OR STATE OF NUDITY: A state of dress or undress that exposes to view: a) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic
region; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast
exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed; or b) human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
REVIEWING DEPARTMENTS: The Lake Zurich police department, the Lake Zurich building department, and the Lake Zurich office of the village manager.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor accessory apparel such as hats, gloves, and socks.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following:
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
wearing apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed.
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACT: Any unlawful lewd, indecent, or immoral sexual conduct, including specifically, but without limitation, any of the lewd,
indecent, or immoral sexual criminal acts specified in any of the following statutes:
A. Article II of the Illinois criminal code (sex offenses).
B. Section 26-4 of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/330 (unauthorized videotaping).
C. Section 33D-1 of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/330-1 (contributing to the criminal delinquency of a juvenile).
D. The obscene phone call act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 135/0.01 et seq.
E. The wrongs to children act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 150/0.01 et seq.
F. The improper supervision of children act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 640/0.01 et seq.
G. The sale of immoral publications to children act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 670/0.01 et seq.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
A. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts.
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated.
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 99/524
E. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A through D of this definition.
STRADDLE DANCE: The use by any person, including specifically, but without limitation, an adult establishment employee, of any part of his or her body
to touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast of any adult establishment patron or any other person, or the touching of the genitals,
pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast of any person by any adult establishment patron. Conduct shall be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether
the "touch" or "touching" occurs while the person is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. Conduct shall also be a "straddle dance"
regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" is direct or through a medium. Conduct commonly referred to by the slang terms "lap dance", "table dance",
and "face dance" shall be included within this definition of "straddle dance".
VILLAGE ZONING ORDINANCE: The ordinance known and referred to as the Lake Zurich zoning code, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord.
99-07-974, 7-19-1999; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3-7-2: ADULT USE COMMISSIONER AND ADULT USE COMMISSION:
A. Adult Use Commissioner: The president of the village is hereby designated as the adult use commissioner pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
chapter. The adult use commissioner shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To administer and rule upon the applications for, and the issuance, renewal, suspension, and revocation of, adult establishment licenses as set forth
in this chapter.
2. To conduct or provide for such inspections of adult entertainment establishments as shall be necessary to determine and ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of law.
3. To periodically review the provisions of this chapter and the conduct and operation of adult entertainment establishments and adult establishment
licensees, and to make such related reports and recommendations to the board of trustees as the adult use commissioner shall deem necessary.
4. To appoint members of the board of trustees to serve on the adult use commission as set forth in subsection B of this section.
5. To direct the adult use commission to conduct such hearings, studies, and reports on adult entertainment establishments, and the regulations
relating thereto, as the adult use commissioner shall deem necessary.
6. To take such further actions as the adult use commissioner shall deem necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter and to exercise
such additional powers in furtherance thereof as are implied or incident to those powers and duties expressly set forth in this chapter.
B. Adult Use Commission:
1. Creation: A commission entitled "adult use commission" is hereby created and established for the purposes set forth in this chapter.
2. Composition: The adult use commissioner may, but shall not be required to, appoint one or more current members of the board of trustees from time
to time to serve at the will of the adult use commissioner and to advise the adult use commissioner on matters relating to the implementation and
enforcement of the regulations set forth in this chapter and to the exercise of the adult use commissioner's powers and duties under this chapter. The
person or persons appointed by the adult use commissioner, along with the adult use commissioner, shall comprise the adult use commission.
3. Filing Of Appointments: The adult use commissioner shall file a written appointment of each of the members of the adult use commission in the office
of the village clerk.
4. Duties: The adult use commission shall have the following powers and duties:
a. At the direction of the adult use commissioner, to recommend to the adult use commissioner such further regulations regarding adult entertainment
establishments and adult establishment licenses as the members of the commission may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare or to otherwise carry out the purposes and objectives of the regulations established pursuant to this chapter.
b. To conduct and prepare hearings, studies, and reports upon matters referred to the commission by the Adult Use Commissioner and to make such
reports and recommendations relating thereto as are requested by the Adult Use Commissioner.
c. To conduct such hearings on the revocation or suspension of an adult establishment license as required pursuant to section 3-7-15 of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-3: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES GENERALLY:
A. Adult Establishment License Required: An adult establishment license shall be required to establish, operate, or maintain an adult entertainment
establishment within the Village.
B. Operation Without License Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person not having a current and valid adult establishment license to establish,
operate, or maintain an adult entertainment establishment within the Village at any time after the effective date of this chapter.
C. Operation In Violation Of License Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to establish, operate, or maintain an adult entertainment establishment
within the Village except in the manner authorized by, and in compliance with, the provisions of this chapter and the licensee's adult establishment
license.
D. Content And Display Of License: Every adult establishment license shall be provided by the Village and shall, at a minimum, prominently state on its
face the name of the licensee, the expiration date, and the address of the adult entertainment establishment. Every licensee shall cause the licensee's
adult establishment license to be framed, covered by glass, and hung at all times in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises so that
it can be easily seen and read at any time by any person entering the licensed premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 100/524
E. License Term: Except as hereinafter provided, adult establishment licenses shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended, or revoked,
only for a term commencing on the date of issuance and terminating on December 31 of that same year.
F. Renewal: An adult establishment license may be renewed only by making application as required for an initial license pursuant to section 3-7-4 of this
chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the then-current license term. The expiration of the
license shall not be affected or extended by a renewal application that is made less than thirty (30) days before expiration. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-4: FORM AND SUBMITTAL OF LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. Required Form: An application for an adult establishment license, or the renewal thereof, shall be made in writing to the Adult Use Commissioner on a
form prescribed by the Adult Use Commissioner and shall be signed: 1) by the applicant, if the applicant is an individual; 2) by at least one of the
persons entitled to share in the profits of the organization and having unlimited personal liability for the obligations of the organization and the right to
bind all other such persons, if the applicant is a partnership (general or limited), joint venture, or any other type of organization where two (2) or more
persons share in the profits and liabilities of the organization; 3) by a duly authorized agent, if the applicant is a corporation; or 4) by the trustee, if the
applicant is a land trust. The application shall be verified by oath or affidavit as to all statements made on or in connection with the application and any
attachments thereto. Each application shall specifically identify the applicant and the licensed premises for which an adult establishment license is
sought. Each initial or renewal application shall be accompanied by seven (7) identical copies. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
B. Administrative Processing Fee: Every applicant for an adult establishment license or for the renewal of an existing adult establishment license shall pay
an administrative processing fee in the amount pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code by certified check to the Village at the time
of filing such application. The administrative processing fee shall be nonrefundable in all cases and shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund
of the Village. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
C. Required Information And Documents: Each application shall include the following information and documents:
1. a. Individuals: The applicant's legal name, all of the applicant's aliases, the applicant's business address and social security number, written proof of
the applicant's age, the citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of the applicant's naturalization.
b. Corporations: The applicant corporation's complete name and official business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, business
addresses, and social security numbers of all of the directors, officers, and managers of the corporation and of every person owning or controlling
more than fifty percent (50%) of the voting shares of the corporation; the corporation's date and place of incorporation and the objects for which it
was formed; proof that the corporation is a corporation in good standing and authorized to conduct business in the State; and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.
c. Partnerships (General Or Limited), Joint Ventures, Or Any Other Type Of Organization Where Two Or More Persons Share In The Profits And
Liabilities Of The Organization: The applicant organization's complete name and official business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the
ages, business addresses, and social security numbers of each partner (other than limited partners) or any other person entitled to share in the
profits of the organization, whether or not any such person is also obligated to share in the liabilities of the organization.
d. Land Trusts: The applicant land trust's complete name; the legal name, all aliases, and the business address of the trustee of the land trust; the
legal name, all aliases, and the ages, business addresses, and social security numbers of each beneficiary of the land trust and the specific
interest of each such beneficiary in the land trust; and the interest, if any, that the land trust holds in the licensed premises.
2. If a corporation or partnership is an interest holder that must be disclosed pursuant to subsection C1b or C1c of this Section, then such interest
holders shall disclose the information required in said subsections with respect to their interest holders.
3. The general character and nature of the business of the applicant.
4. The length of time that the applicant has been in the business of the character specified in response to subsection C3 of this Section.
5. The location, including street address and legal description, and telephone number, of the premises for which the adult establishment license is
sought.
6. The specific name of the business that is to be operated under the adult establishment license.
7. The identity of each fee simple owner of the licensed premises.
8. A diagram showing the internal and external configuration of the licensed premises, including all doors, windows, entrances, exits, the fixed
structural internal features of the licensed premises, plus the interior rooms, walls, partitions, stages, performance areas, and restrooms. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; provided, however, that each diagram
shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches (.6") and sufficient to show clearly the various interior dimensions of all areas of the licensed premises and to
demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted for the license sought to be renewed and if the licensee certifies that the licensed premises
has not been altered since the immediately preceding issuance of the license and that the previous diagram continues to accurately depict the
exterior and interior layouts of the licensed premises. The approval or use of the diagram required pursuant to this subsection shall not be deemed to
be, and shall not be interpreted or construed to constitute, any other Village approval otherwise required pursuant to applicable Village ordinances
and regulations.
9. The names of each governmental body from which, within five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the present application, the applicant, or any
of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsection C1 or C2 of this Section, has received a license or other authorization to conduct
or operate a business substantially the same as an adult entertainment establishment, and the names and addresses of each such business.
10. The specific type or types of adult entertainment establishment(s) that the applicant proposes to operate in the licensed premises.
11. A copy of each adult establishment license or any license substantially the same as an adult entertainment establishment currently held by the
applicant or any of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsection C1 or C2 of this Section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 101/524
12. Whether the applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsection C1 or C2 of this Section, has been, within five (5)
years immediately preceding the date of the application, convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, any specified criminal act. As to each
conviction, the applicant or other individual shall provide the conviction date, the case number, the nature of the misdemeanor or felony violation(s) or
offense(s), and the name and location of the court.
13. Whether the applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsection C1 or C2 of this Section, has had a license or
other authorization to conduct or operate a business substantially the same as an adult entertainment establishment revoked or suspended, and, if
so, the date and grounds for each such revocation or suspension, and the name and location of the establishment at issue.
14. The name of the individual or individuals who shall be the day to day, on-site managers of the proposed adult entertainment establishment. If the
manager is other than the applicant, the applicant shall provide, for each manager, all of the information required pursuant to subsections C1a, C9,
C11, C12, and C13 of this Section.
15. For the individual or individuals executing the application and the individual or individuals identified pursuant to subsection C14 of this Section, a
fully executed waiver on a form prescribed by the County to obtain criminal conviction information pursuant to the Illinois Uniform Conviction
Information Act.
D. Incomplete Applications Returned: Any application for an adult establishment license that does not include all of the information and documents
required pursuant to subsection C of this Section as well as the administrative processing fee required pursuant to subsection B of this Section, shall
be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be acted on or processed by the Village. The Adult Use Commissioner shall, within five (5) days of such
submittal, return the incomplete application to the applicant along with a written explanation of the reasons why the application is incomplete. (Ord. 99-
07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-5: PROCESSING OF LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. Reviewing Departments: Within three (3) days after receipt of a complete application for an adult establishment license that includes all of the
information and documents required pursuant to subsection 3-7-4C of this Chapter, as well as the administrative processing fee required pursuant to
subsection 3-7-4B of this Chapter, the Adult Use Commissioner shall transmit a copy of the application to the reviewing departments.
B. Reviewing Department Reports: Each of the reviewing departments shall, within twenty five (25) days after transmittal of the application thereto: 1)
review the application; 2) conduct such inspections of the proposed licensed premises and background investigations of the applicant and any of the
individuals identified in the application pursuant to subsection 3-7-4C1 or C2 of this Chapter, regarding matters within their respective jurisdictions, as
shall be reasonably necessary to verify the information set forth in the application and to determine whether the proposed adult entertainment
establishment and licensed premises comply with the requirements of this Chapter and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations; and 3) prepare and submit to the Adult Use Commissioner a written report regarding the results and findings of such reviews, inspections,
and investigations.
C. Adult Use Commissioner Review: The Adult Use Commissioner shall also conduct such inspections and investigations as the Adult Use Commissioner
shall deem reasonably necessary to verify the information set forth in the application and to determine whether the proposed adult entertainment
establishment and licensed premises comply with the requirements of this Chapter and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations.
D. Reliance On Diagram: In the event that the licensed premises has not yet been constructed or reconstructed to accommodate the proposed adult
entertainment establishment, the Adult Use Commissioner and the reviewing departments shall base their respective written reports, investigations,
and inspections to the extent necessary, on the diagram submitted pursuant to subsection 3-7-4C8 of this Chapter. Any adult establishment license
issued prior to the construction or reconstruction necessary to accommodate the proposed adult entertainment establishment shall contain a condition
that the adult entertainment establishment shall not open for business until the licensed premises has been inspected and determined to be in
substantial compliance with the diagram submitted with the application.
E. Applicant Cooperation Required: An applicant for an adult establishment license shall cooperate fully in the inspections and investigations conducted by
the Adult Use Commissioner and the reviewing departments. The applicant's failure or refusal: 1) to give any information reasonably relevant to the
investigation of the application; 2) to allow the licensed premises to be inspected; 3) to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under
oath regarding the application; or 4) to otherwise cooperate with the investigation and inspection required by this Chapter, shall constitute an admission
by the applicant that the applicant is ineligible for an adult establishment license and shall be grounds for denial of the license by the Adult Use
Commissioner.
F. Time For Issuance Or Denial: The Adult Use Commissioner shall, within thirty (30) days after submittal of a properly completed application, either issue
an adult establishment license pursuant to the provisions of subsection 3-7-6A of this Chapter or deny issuance of the adult establishment license
pursuant to the provisions of subsection 3-7-6B of this Chapter. The Adult Use Commissioner shall issue or deny the license within said thirty (30) day
period regardless of whether or not the Adult Use Commissioner has received all of the reviewing department reports.
G. Decision Final: The action taken by the Adult Use Commissioner to issue or deny an adult establishment license shall be final and shall be subject to
judicial review; provided, however, that the denial of the renewal of an existing license shall not take effect until the tenth day after the adult use license
has been deemed denied pursuant to subsection 3-7-6B of this Chapter. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-6: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
A. Issuance: The Adult Use Commissioner shall issue an adult establishment license to an applicant if, but only if, the Adult Use Commissioner finds and
determines all of the following, based on the reports, investigations, and inspections conducted by the Adult Use Commissioner and the reviewing
departments and on any other credible information on which it is reasonable for the Adult Use Commissioner to rely:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 102/524
1. All information and documents required by Section 3-7-4 of this Chapter for issuance of an adult establishment license have been properly provided
and the material statements made in the application are true and correct.
2. For adult stores and adult theaters, all persons identified in the application pursuant to subsections 3-7-4C1 and C2 of this Chapter are at least
eighteen (18) years of age and not under any legal disability. For adult cabarets, all persons identified in the application pursuant to subsections 3-7-
4C1 and C2 of this Chapter are at least twenty one (21) years of age and not under any legal disability.
3. No person identified in the application pursuant to subsections 3-7-4C1 and C2 of this Chapter has been convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere
to, any specified criminal act within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
4. No person identified in the application pursuant to subsections 3-7-4C1 and C2 of this Chapter has been convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere
to, any violation of a provision of this Chapter within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
5. No person identified in the application pursuant to subsections 3-7-4C1 and C2 of this Chapter is overdue on payment to the Village of taxes, fees,
fines, or penalties assessed against, or imposed on, any such individual in connection to any adult entertainment establishment.
6. No person identified in the application pursuant to subsections 3-7-4C1 and C2 of this Chapter is residing with, or married to, a person: a) who has
been denied an adult establishment license within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of the application, b) whose adult
establishment license has been revoked within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of the application, or 3) whose adult
establishment license is under suspension at the time of application.
7. The adult entertainment establishment and the licensed premises, and the proposed operation of the adult entertainment establishment, comply with
all then-applicable building, health, and life safety codes and regulations and have received all necessary zoning approvals required pursuant to the
then-applicable provisions of the Village Zoning Ordinance, including specifically, but without limitation, the special use permit required for the adult
entertainment establishment.
8. The applicant has confirmed in writing and under oath as part of the application that the applicant has read this Chapter and all provisions of the
Village Zoning Ordinance applicable to adult entertainment establishments, that the applicant is familiar with their terms and conditions, and that the
licensed premises and the proposed adult entertainment establishment and its proposed operation are and shall be in compliance therewith.
B. Denial: If the Adult Use Commissioner determines that the applicant has not met any one or more of the conditions set forth in subsection A of this
Section, then the Adult Use Commissioner shall deny issuance of the adult establishment license and shall give the applicant a written notification and
explanation of such denial. The Adult Use Commissioner's notice of denial shall be delivered in person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return
receipt requested, addressed to the applicant's address as set forth in the application. The adult establishment license shall be deemed denied on the
day that the notice of denial is delivered in person or three (3) days after it is placed in the U.S. mail as provided in this subsection.
C. License Deemed To Be Issued: If the Adult Use Commissioner does not issue or deny the adult establishment license within thirty (30) days after the
properly completed application is submitted, then the adult establishment license applied for shall be deemed to have been issued. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-
19-1999)
3-7-7: INSPECTIONS BY THE VILLAGE:
A. Authority: The Adult Use Commissioner and other Village representatives and departments with jurisdiction shall periodically inspect all adult
entertainment establishments as shall be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable law.
B. Licensee Cooperation: A licensee shall permit representatives of the Village to inspect the licensed premises and the adult entertainment establishment
for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable law at any time during which the licensed
premises is occupied or the adult entertainment establishment is open for business.
C. Interference Or Refusal Illegal: It shall be unlawful for the licensee, any adult establishment employee, or any other person to prohibit, interfere with, or
refuse to allow, any lawful inspection conducted by the Village pursuant to this Chapter or any other authority.
D. Suspension Or Revocation: Any such prohibition, interference, or refusal shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the adult establishment
license pursuant to Section 3-7-15 of this Chapter. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-8: CHANGE IN INFORMATION:
During the pendency of any application for, or during the term of, any adult establishment license, the applicant or licensee shall promptly notify the Adult
Use Commissioner in writing: a) of any change in any material information given by the applicant or licensee in the application for such license, including
specifically, but without limitation, any change in managers of the adult entertainment establishment or in the individuals identified in the application
pursuant to subsections 3-7-4C1 and C2 of this Chapter; or b) if any of the events specified in subsection 3-7-15A of this Chapter occur. (Ord. 99-07-974,
7-19-1999)
3-7-9: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. General Compliance: All licensed premises and adult entertainment establishments shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter; all other applicable
Village ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations; and all other applicable Federal, State, and local laws.
B. Hours Of Operation: No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business at any time between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on any weekday or Saturday. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business at any time on any
Sunday or on any legal State or Federal holiday.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 103/524
C. Animals: No animals, except only for seeing eye dogs required to assist the vision-impaired persons, shall be permitted at any time at or in any adult
entertainment establishment or licensed premises.
D. Restrooms: All restrooms in adult entertainment establishments shall be equipped with standard toilets, sinks, and other traditional lavatory facilities. No
adult materials or live performances shall be provided or allowed at any time in the restrooms of an adult entertainment establishment. Separate male
and female restrooms shall be provided for and used by adult establishment employees and adult establishment patrons.
E. Restricted Access: No adult establishment patron shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of any adult entertainment
establishment, including specifically, but without limitation, any storage areas or dressing or other rooms provided for the benefit of adult establishment
employees. This subsection shall not apply to persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to
the licensed premises; provided, however, that any such persons shall remain in such nonpublic areas only for the purposes and to the extent and time
necessary to perform their job duties.
F. Specific Prohibited Acts:
1. No adult establishment employee or any other person at any adult entertainment establishment shall appear, be present, or perform while nude.
2. No adult establishment employee or any other person at any adult entertainment establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual activity
with or for any adult establishment patron or any other adult establishment employee or any other person. No adult establishment patron or any other
person at any adult entertainment establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any adult establishment employee
or any other adult establishment patron or any other person.
3. Straddle dances shall be prohibited at all adult entertainment establishments.
G. Exterior Display: No adult entertainment establishment shall be maintained or operated in any manner that causes, creates, or allows public viewing of
any adult material, or any entertainment depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from any sidewalk,
public or private right of way, or any property other than the lot on which the licensed premises is located. No portion of the exterior of an adult
entertainment establishment shall utilize or contain any flashing lights, searchlights, or spotlights, or any other similar lighting systems, or any words,
lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent specifically allowed pursuant to subsection
H of this section with regard to signs. This subsection shall apply to any advertisement, display, promotional material, decoration, or sign; to any
performance or show; and to any window, door, or other opening.
H. Signage Limitations: All signs for adult entertainment establishments shall be flat wall signs. The maximum allowable sign area shall be one square foot
of sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street, but in no event exceeding thirty two (32) square feet. The maximum number of signs shall be one per
street frontage. Signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this chapter shall contain only: 1) the name of the adult entertainment establishment, and/or 2)
the specific type of adult entertainment establishment conducted on the licensed premises. Temporary signage shall not be permitted in connection
with any adult entertainment establishment.
I. Noise: No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the licensed premises shall be used at any time. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
J. Gambling And Related Devices Prohibited: No adult entertainment establishment shall contain any video, pinball, slot, bagatelle, pigeonhole, pool, or
any other games, machines, tables, or implements except if otherwise permitted pursuant to the Illinois video gaming act1 and any other provisions for
video gaming in this code. (Ord. 2014-4-963, 4-7-2014)
K. Manager's Station: Each adult entertainment establishment shall have one or more manager's stations. The interior of each adult entertainment
establishment shall be configured in such a manner that there is a direct and substantially unobstructed view from at least one manager's station to
every part of each area, except restrooms, of the establishment to which any adult establishment patron is permitted access for any purpose.
L. Alcohol Prohibition: No alcoholic liquor of any kind shall be sold, used, consumed, or possessed at any time on any licensed premises or at any adult
entertainment establishment. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-10: ADULT BOOTHS, SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
A. Prohibited Except In Adult Stores: Adult booths shall be prohibited in all adult entertainment establishments except adult stores.
B. Occupancy And Prohibited Acts: Only one individual shall occupy an adult booth at any one time. No individual occupying an adult booth shall engage
in any specified sexual activities. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of an adult booth.
C. Open Booth Requirement: In addition to satisfying the manager station requirements of subsection 3-7-9K of this Chapter, all adult stores containing
adult booths shall be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of each adult booth shall be visible from the common area of
the adult store. To satisfy this requirement, there shall be a permanently open and unobstructed entranceway for each adult booth and for the
entranceway from the area of the adult store that provides other adult materials to the area of the adult store containing the adult booths. Each of these
entranceways shall not be capable of being closed or obstructed, entirely or partially, by any door, curtain, partition, drapes, or any other obstruction
whatsoever that would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring the area of the adult store containing the adult booths or any person situated in an
adult booth. It shall be unlawful to install adult booths within an adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of providing secluded viewing of adult
materials or live performances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 104/524
D. Aisle Required: There shall be one continuous lighted main aisle alongside the adult booths provided in any adult store. Each person situated in a booth
shall be visible at all times from the aisle.
E. Holes Prohibited: Except for the open booth entranceway, the walls and partitions of each adult booth shall be constructed and maintained of solid walls
or partitions without any holes or openings whatsoever.
F. Signage: A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entranceway to each adult booth that states: 1) that only one person is allowed in
an adult booth at any one time, 2) that it is unlawful to engage in any specified sexual activities while in an adult booth, and 3) that it is unlawful to
damage or deface any portion of an adult booth.
G. Age Limitations:
1. No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an adult booth or a licensed premises that includes an adult booth shall be under
the age of eighteen (18).
2. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be admitted to any adult booth or any licensed premises that includes an adult booth.
3. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult booth or at any licensed premises that includes an
adult booth.
4. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult booth or any licensed premises that includes an adult booth. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-11: ADULT CABARETS, SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
A. Performance Area: The performance area of an adult cabaret shall be limited to one or more stages or platforms permanently anchored to the floor (a
"cabaret stage"). Each cabaret stage shall be at least eighteen inches (18") in elevation above the floor level of the patron seating areas. Each cabaret
stage shall be separated by a distance of at least eight feet (8') from all areas of the premises to which adult entertainment patrons have access. A
continuous barrier at least three feet (3') in height and located at least eight feet (8') from all points of each cabaret stage shall separate each cabaret
stage from all patron seating areas. The barrier shall consist of horizontal or vertical members spaced no more than nine inches (9") apart and nine
inches (9") from the floor or the walls to which it is attached.
B. Lighting: Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the adult cabaret so that all objects are plainly visible
at all times. A minimum lighting level of not less than 30 lux horizontal, measured at thirty inches (30") from the floor and on ten foot (10') centers shall
be maintained at all times for all areas of the adult cabaret where adult establishment patrons are admitted.
C. Tipping: No tip or gratuity from any adult establishment patron may be offered or accepted for any performance by an adult establishment employee on
any adult cabaret stage at any time prior to the completion of any such performance. No adult establishment patron shall offer, and no adult
establishment employee having performed on any cabaret stage shall accept, any form of tip or gratuity offered directly to the employee by the adult
establishment patron. Rather, following completion of a performance, all tips and gratuities to adult establishment employees performing on any
cabaret stage shall be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of such tips and gratuities by the adult entertainment establishment.
D. Notice Of Select Rules: A sign at least two feet by two feet (2' x 2'), with letters at least one inch (1") high shall be conspicuously displayed on or
adjacent to every cabaret stage stating the following:
THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE VILLAGE OF LAKE ZURICH. ENTERTAINERS ARE:
1. NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT.
2. NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR IN A STATE OF NUDITY.
3. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS OR GRATUITIES FOR ANY PERFORMANCE UNTIL AFTER COMPLETION OF THE PERFORMANCE.
4. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS DIRECTLY FROM PATRONS EVEN AFTER COMPLETION OF THE PERFORMANCE. ANY SUCH
TIPS MUST BE PLACED INTO THE RECEPTACLE PROVIDED BY MANAGEMENT.
E. Age Limitations:
1. No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an adult cabaret or a licensed premises used for an adult cabaret shall be under
the age of twenty one (21).
2. No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall be admitted to any adult cabaret or to any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret.
3. No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult cabaret or any licensed premises used for an adult
cabaret.
4. No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material
or other goods or services at or from any adult cabaret or any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-12: ADULT STORES, SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 105/524
A. Windows And Signs: Window areas for adult stores shall not be covered or obstructed in any way. No signs or other obstructions shall be placed in the
windows.
B. Age Limitations:
1. No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an adult store or a licensed premises used for an adult store shall be under the
age of eighteen (18).
2. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be admitted to any adult store or to any licensed premises used for an adult store.
3. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult store or any licensed premises used for an adult store.
4. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult store or any licensed premises used for an adult store. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-13: ADULT THEATERS, SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
A. Seating: Each adult theater shall provide seating only in individual chairs with arms or in seats separated from each other by immovable arms and not
on couches, benches, or any other multiple person seating structures. The number of seats shall equal the maximum number of persons who may
occupy the adult theater.
B. Aisle: Each adult theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating area in order that each person seated in the adult theater shall be
visible from the aisle at all times.
C. Sign: Each adult theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entranceway to the auditorium or similar area that lists the
maximum number of persons who may occupy the auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats in the auditorium area.
D. Specific Prohibited Acts: No person shall appear seminude in any adult theater. No adult theater shall present, conduct, or allow any live performance
that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or
simulation of specified sexual acts.
E. Age Limitations:
1. No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an adult theater or a licensed premises used for an adult theater shall be under
the age of eighteen (18).
2. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be admitted to any adult theater or to any licensed premises used for an adult theater.
3. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any adult theater or any licensed premises used for an adult
theater.
4. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult theater or any licensed premises used for an adult theater. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-14: LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY FOR EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission by an adult establishment employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to be the act or
omission of the licensee if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, or as a result of the licensee's
negligent failure to supervise the adult establishment employee. The licensee shall be punishable for any such act or omission in the same manner as if
the licensee committed the act or caused the omission. Accordingly, any such act or omission of any such employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed, for purposes of determining whether the licensee's adult establishment license shall be revoked, suspended,
or renewed, to be the act or omission of the licensee. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-15: LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
A. Grounds: Pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection B of this Section, the Adult Use Commissioner shall suspend for not more than thirty (30)
days, or revoke, any adult establishment license if the Adult Use Commissioner, based on credible and reasonably reliable information and evidence,
determines that any one or more of the following has occurred:
1. The licensee has violated any of the provisions or requirements of this Chapter or the adult establishment license issued pursuant hereto, or the
provisions of the Village Zoning Ordinance applicable to the licensed premises or the adult entertainment establishment.
2. The licensee: a) knowingly or negligently furnished false or misleading information or withheld information on any application or other document
submitted to the Village for the issuance or renewal of any adult establishment license, or b) knowingly or negligently caused or suffered any other
person to furnish or withhold any such information on the licensee's behalf.
3. The licensee has committed a felony or specified criminal act on the licensed premises.
4. The licensee authorizes, approves, or, as a result of the licensee's negligent failure to supervise the licensed premises or the adult entertainment
establishment, allows, an adult establishment employee, an adult establishment patron, or any other person to: a) violate any of the provisions or
requirements of this Chapter or of the provisions or requirements of the adult establishment license issued pursuant hereto, or b) commit any felony
or specified criminal act on the licensed premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 106/524
5. The licensee, or any person identified pursuant to subsections 3-7-4C1 and C2 of this Chapter becomes disqualified for the issuance of an adult
establishment license at any time during the term of the license at issue.
B. Procedure: An adult establishment license shall be suspended for not more than thirty (30) days or revoked pursuant to the terms and conditions set
forth in this subsection.
1. Notice: Upon determining that one or more of the grounds for suspension or revocation under subsection A of this Section may exist, the Adult Use
Commissioner shall serve a written notice on the licensee in person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to
the licensee's address as set forth in the licensee's application. The written notice shall, at a minimum: a) state that the Adult Use Commissioner has
determined that the adult establishment license may be subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to subsection A of this Section; b) identify the
specific grounds for the Adult Use Commissioner's determination; and c) set a date for a hearing regarding the Adult Use Commissioner's
determination as to the possibility of suspension or revocation of the adult establishment license. The date of the hearing shall be no less than five
(5) days after service of the Adult Use Commissioner's notice, unless an earlier or later date is agreed to by the licensee and the Adult Use
Commissioner.
2. Hearing: The hearing shall be conducted by the Adult Use Commissioner, or, at the Adult Use Commissioner's direction, by the Adult Use
Commission. At the hearing, the licensee may present and submit evidence and witnesses to refute the grounds cited by the Adult Use
Commissioner for suspending or revoking the license and the Village and any other persons may submit evidence to sustain such grounds. The
administrative record compiled on the adult entertainment establishment pursuant to Section 3-7-16 of this Chapter shall be made part of the hearing
record. Within three (3) days after the close of the hearing, the Adult Use Commissioner shall, having considered the record made at the hearing,
render a decision in writing, setting forth the reasons for the decision. The action taken by the Adult Use Commissioner shall be final and shall be
subject to judicial review pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Law and all other available provisions of law.
3. Notice And Effective Date Of Suspension Or Revocation: The Adult Use Commissioner's written decision shall be posted at the office of the Adult
Use Commissioner and shall be served on the licensee in person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to
the licensee's address as set forth in the licensee's application. In order to allow an aggrieved licensee an opportunity to obtain judicial relief, any
suspension or revocation, as the case may be, shall take effect on the tenth day after: a) the Adult Use Commissioner's written decision is delivered
in person, or b) the third day after it is placed in the U.S. mail as provided in this subsection.
4. Surrender Of License: Upon the suspension or revocation of an adult establishment license pursuant to this Chapter, the Adult Use Commissioner
shall take custody of the suspended or revoked license. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-16: ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD:
The Adult Use Commissioner shall cause to be kept in the Adult Use Commissioner's office an accurate record of every adult establishment license
application received and acted on, together with all relevant information and material pertaining to such application, any adult establishment license issued
pursuant thereto, and any adult entertainment establishment operated pursuant to such adult establishment license. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-17: EMPLOYEE REGISTER:
The licensee of every adult entertainment establishment shall maintain a register of all of its adult establishment employees. For each such employee, the
register shall include the following information:
A. Legal name.
B. Any and all aliases.
C. Current residential address and telephone number.
D. Date of birth.
E. Gender.
F. Social security number.
G. Date of commencement of employment.
H. Date of employment termination, if applicable.
I. Specific job or employment duties.
The register shall be maintained for all current employees and all employees employed at any time during the preceding thirty six (36) months. The
licensee shall make the register of its adult establishment employees available for inspection by the Village immediately upon demand at all reasonable
times. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-18: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 107/524
Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or assists or participates in any way in the violation of, any of the provisions or requirements of
this chapter or of any of the provisions or requirements of any adult establishment license, shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of
this Code for each such violation. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The Adult Use Commissioner shall give written
notice to any such person of any such violation and the fine imposed by serving a citation in person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return
receipt requested, addressed to the licensee's address as set forth in the licensee's application. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-
3-2018)
3-7-19: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any adult entertainment establishment established, operated, or maintained in violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter or of any
adult establishment license shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The Village may, in addition to or in lieu of any other
remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove, or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other
steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin
any person from establishing, operating, or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-
19-1999)
3-7-20: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this chapter, the time within which any act required by this chapter is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal or State holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. If the
day immediately following such Saturday, Sunday, or holiday is also a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
3-7-21: SEVERABILITY:
In the event that any provision of this chapter, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect the validity
or effectiveness of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance or of said
provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the Village that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective provisions not been included herein. (Ord. 99-07-974, 7-19-1999)
Chapter 8
TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any village tax. The term "taxpayer" generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the village tax to the village.
VILLAGE TAX: A tax imposed, and collected or administered, by the village. "Village tax" does not include a tax imposed upon real property under the
Illinois property tax code or fees collected by the village, except, however, that "Village tax" does include the village's infrastructure maintenance fees.
VILLAGE TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's finance director/treasurer or his or her authorized designee. (Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
3-8-2: APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS:
The village shall apply any payment or remittance received pursuant to a village tax for a tax period in the following order:
A. First: to any past due payments; and
B. Second: to the tax due for that period; and
C. Third: to interest due for the period; and
D. Fourth: to penalties due for the period. (Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
3-8-3: LIMITATIONS:
A. Limitation On Determination Of Tax Or Assessment: Subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section, and unless a specific section of the code
provides for a shorter time period, the village shall not issue a determination of tax due or assessment:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 108/524
1. More than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year that the return for the period was filed, or the end of the calendar year that the return for
the period was due, whichever occurs later; or
2. More than six (6) years after the end of the calendar year that the return for the period was due or the end of the calendar year that the return for the
period was filed, whichever occurs later, if a taxpayer failed to file a tax return, or if the taxpayer paid or remitted less than seventy five percent (75%)
of the tax due during any four (4) year period that the village may issue a notice of tax determination or assessment.
B. Exception If Fraud: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, there shall be no time limitation imposed on a determination or
assessment of a village tax if the taxpayer filed a fraudulent tax return. (Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
3-8-4: AUDIT PROCEDURES:
A. Notice: The village shall notify a taxpayer in writing of a proposed village audit of that taxpayer's books and records.
B. Content Of Notice: Such notice shall specify the tax and time period to be audited and shall detail the minimum documentation or books and records
that the taxpayer must make available to the village auditor.
C. Audit Timing: Audits shall be held only during reasonable times of the day and, unless impracticable, at times agreed to by the taxpayer.
D. Overpayments: A village auditor who determines that there has been an overpayment of tax during the course of the audit shall identify the
overpayment to the taxpayer so that the taxpayer can take the necessary steps to recover the overpayment. If the overpayment is the result of the
application of some or all of the taxpayer's tax payment to an incorrect village entity, then the auditor shall notify the correct village entity of the
taxpayer's application error. (Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
3-8-5: NOTICE OF TAX ASSESSMENT:
A. Notice Of Rights: Whenever the village sends a protestable notice of: 1) tax due, or 2) a bill, or 3) a claim denial, or 4) a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax to a taxpayer, such notice shall include a written statement of rights, which shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment; and
2. The amount of the village tax liability proposed; and
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during the audit appeal, refund, and collection process; and
5. A statement that the taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after service of the notice to protest a notice of tax determination or notice of tax liability;
and
6. A statement that the taxpayer may request a hearing with the village tax administrator.
B. Delivery; Receipt: The village shall send such notice by United States registered or certified mail. Such notice shall be deemed received by the taxpayer
upon actual receipt or on the third business day after the village deposits the notice in any main or branch United States post office.
C. Time Extension If Good Cause: Upon a showing of good cause by the taxpayer satisfactory to the village tax administrator, the village tax administrator
may extend the forty five (45) day protest period by an additional period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days. The village tax administrator, upon a
showing of good cause, also may open up any closed protest period, but only for a period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-
18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
3-8-6: APPEALS PROCESS FOR CREDITS, REFUNDS, AND PROTEST:
A. Appeal; Procedure: Any taxpayer who desires to seek a credit or a refund or desires to appeal a determination of tax due or an assessment pursuant to
a village tax shall adhere to the following procedures:
1. File a request for credit or refund with the village tax administrator on a form provided by the village or, within forty five (45) days after receipt of the
village's protestable notice, file a written protest on a form provided by the village; and
2. Provide any supportive documents or other evidence that may display that the village's assessment of the tax was unauthorized, and direct such
protest or request to the village tax administrator; and
3. Make any books or records of its business or activityavailable for audit or inspection upon the written request of the village.
B. Hearing: Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a request for credit or refund or a timely written protest, and has requested a hearing, the
village tax administrator shall conduct a hearing in the following manner:
1. The village tax administrator shall fix the time and place for a hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for
a date within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the request for the hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
2. No continuances of the hearing shall be granted after it has been scheduled, except in cases when a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect
the rights of the taxpayer. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 109/524
3. The village tax administrator shall preside at the hearing and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit,
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
C. Village Determination: The village tax administrator, by United States registered or certified mail, shall send to the taxpayer the tax administrator's
written determination regarding the taxpayer's protest within forty five (45) days after receiving the taxpayer's written protest or credit or refund form if
the taxpayer does not request a hearing, or within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of a hearing. Such determination shall include:
1. A ruling as to whether the village tax as a whole or any portion of it was unauthorized; and
2. A written determination as to why the village tax or any portion of it was authorized; and
3. If appropriate, a certified check equaling the unauthorized amount paid by the taxpayer and the applicable amount of interest.
D. No Refund If Voluntary Payment: The village shall not be required to refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of
payment in the event that a village tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall
not be deemed to have paid a village tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the village taxes at the time of
payment or if the taxpayer paid such taxes under duress.
E. No Credits Or Refunds If No Remittance: The village shall not be required to grant a credit, refund of taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has
not paid or remitted the amountsdirectly to the village.
F. Four Year Limitation: Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code or other village ordinance authorizing a village tax, no claim for a credit or
refund shall be made more than four (4) years after the date of the erroneous payment.
G. Interest If Overpayment: The village shall pay interest in the amount of five percent (5%) per year for a taxpayer's overpayment of tax. (Ord. 2000-12-
84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
3-8-7: INTEREST:
Interest in the amount of twelve percent (12%) per year shall be assessed against all late payments, underpayments, and nonpayments of a village tax.
(Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
3-8-8: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
If the village shall enter into an agreement allowing a taxpayer to make payments by installments, then the village shall not cancel such installment
agreement except if:
A. The taxpayer fails to pay any amount due on time and fails to cure the delinquency in the allowable time provided by the village; or
B. The taxpayer fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment agreement.
Nothing in this section shall be construed or applied to require the village to enter into any installment agreement. (Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-
1-2001)
3-8-9: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
A. Application: A taxpayer may file an application, on a form prepared by the village, with the village tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax
due for any village tax that a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the village tax administrator.
B. Payment And Interest Required: A taxpayer who files a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of the village tax due, plus
interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application, but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the
application.
C. No Extra Liability: Except for the payment of the full amount of tax and interest due under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application shall not be liable forany additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed; provided, however, that if
the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due as provided in this section, then the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax
along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax. If the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, then the application shall be
deemed invalid and void.
D. Time Limitation For Payment: The payment of tax and interest required under this section shall be made within ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application, or the date agreed to in writing by the village tax administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final
determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed, or the date agreed to by the village tax administrator, whichever is
longer. (Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
3-8-10: REVIEW OF LIENS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 110/524
The village tax administrator shall establish, by administrative order of the village, a process of reviewing liens filed by the village against taxpayers. If any
lien is determined to be improper, then the village tax administrator shall cause such lien to be removed at the village's own expense, shall correct the
taxpayer's credit record, and shall correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
3-8-11: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
The village shall publish its taxing ordinances and shall make copies of its taxing ordinances readily available to the public on request. The posting of such
tax ordinances on the internet shall be deemed to satisfy the publication requirement of this section. (Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
3-8-12: PENALTIES:
A. Late Filing And Payment Penalty: If a return is filed late, then the taxpayer shall pay a penalty for such late filing of five percent (5%) of the amount of
tax required to be shown as due on a return. If the taxpayer makes a late payment, then the taxpayer shall pay a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax
due and not timely paid or remitted. Late filing and payment penalties shall not apply to a particular taxpayer if, but only if, a failure to file penalty is
imposed on that taxpayer by the village. The village tax administrator may determine, in the sole exercise of his or her sound judgment, that the late
filing or late payment was due to a reasonable cause and abate some or allthe penalty.
B. Failure To File Penalty: If no return is filed before the issuance of a notice of tax deficiency or of tax liability to the taxpayer, then the penalty for such
failure to file shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to have been
filed. The village tax administrator may determine, in the sole exercise of his or her sound judgment, that the failure to file a return was due to
reasonable cause and abate some or all of the penalty.
C. Criminal Penalties: Criminal penalties shall be imposed on any taxpayer for noncompliance with the provisions of a village tax only in the event that the
noncompliance is a result of wilful or fraudulent disregard of the village tax laws. Any taxpayer who wilfully or fraudulently fails to comply with a
provision relating to a village tax shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this code and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the full
amount of the tax due plus the applicable amount of interest. (Ord. 2000-12-84, 12-18-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
Chapter 9
FRAUDULENT SALES
3-9-1: GENERAL:
This chapter has been enacted pursuant to the authority and direction provided by the Illinois Fraudulent Sales Act, 815 Illinois Compiled Statutes
350/0.01 et seq. (the "Fraudulent Sales Act"). The provisions of this chapter are intended to be consistent with, and to establish compliance with, the
Fraudulent Sales Act. (Ord. 2006-08-435, 8-7-2006)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings hereafter ascribed to them:
DAMAGED GOODS SALE: Any sale of goods that is to be advertised and conducted as an insurance, salvage, removal, going out of business,
insolvent's, assignee's, or creditor's sale of goods or that is a sale of goods that have been damaged by fire, smoke, water, or otherwise.
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: Any sale, whether described by such name or by another name (such as, but not limited to, "closing out sale",
"liquidation sale", "lost our lease sale", "forced to vacate sale"), held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on
hand, the business will cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted.
GOODS: All goods, wares, merchandise, and other personal property, excepting choses in action and money.
REMOVAL SALE: Any sale held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be
discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted, and thereafter will be moved to and occupy another location. (Ord. 2006-08-435, 8-7-2006)
3-9-3: LICENSES:
A. License Required: Prior to advertising any sale defined in section 3-9-2 of this chapter, a license shall be obtained from the Office of the Village Clerk.
B. Exemptions: The license requirement set forth in subsection A of this section shall not apply to sales exempted from the licensing requirement by
section 3 of the Fraudulent Sales Act.
C. Application For License: Each application for a license shall be completed on a form provided by the Village. The application shall include all of the
information required by section 4 of the Fraudulent Sales Act. (Ord. 2006-08-435, 8-7-2006)
D. License, Renewal Fees: A nonrefundable fee shall be submitted with the license application and with any application for renewal of a license in the
amount pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2006-08-435, 8-7-2006; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 111/524
E. Validity Of License: The license issued by the Village Clerk shall be valid for a period of sixty (60) days after the start of the sale. The license can be
renewed for no more than an additional thirty (30) days, as provided in section 8 of the Fraudulent Sales Act.
F. Additional Terms, Conditions, And Limitations: Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to all terms, conditions, and limitations
imposed on such licenses by the Fraudulent Sales Act. (Ord. 2006-08-435, 8-7-2006)
3-9-4: POSTING OF LICENSE:
A copy of the application, including the inventory of goods, and the license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the salesroom or place where the
inventoried goods are to be sold, so that the public may be informed of the facts relating to the goods before purchasing them; provided, however, that
such copy need not show the purchase price of the goods. A duplicative copy of the license shall be posted on the front door of the premises where the
sale is conducted in such a manner that it be clearly visible from the street or adjacent parking. (Ord. 2006-08-435, 8-7-2006)
3-9-5: ADVERTISEMENTS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS:
Any advertisement or announcement published in connection with the sale shall conspicuously show on its face the number of the license and the date of
its expiration. (Ord. 2006-08-435, 8-7-2006)
3-9-6: VIOLATIONS; FINES:
A. General Offense: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord.
2006-08-435, 8-7-2006; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
B. Fraudulent Sales Act: In addition to imposition of a fine for a violation, this chapter shall be enforced in accordance with sections 10.5 and 11 of the
Fraudulent Sales Act. All violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be reported to the Attorney General of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 2006-08-435,
8-7-2006)
Chapter 10
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
3-10-1: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No construction contractor may undertake construction work in the Village without first being registered as required by this section. Registration must be
completed before the construction contractor commences work. Registration is valid only for the calendar year within which it is completed. Every
registration must be renewed each year before December 31 for the following calendar year. (Ord. 2009-01-608, 1-19-2009)
3-10-2: REGISTRATION FORM:
Each registration must be on a form therefor provided by the Village. The required form must be fully and properly completed, with copies of required
certificates or State licenses, and submitted to the Office of the Director of Building and Zoning. The form must be signed by the construction contractor or
an officer of the construction contractor. (Ord. 2009-01-608, 1-19-2009)
3-10-3: ANNUAL FEE:
The annual registration fee is pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. The fee must be paid to the Village at the time of registration.
The fee is nonrefundable and may not be discounted or prorated for any reason. No fee is required for a properly licensed plumbing contractor. (Ord.
2009-01-608, 1-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
3-10-4: SURETY BOND:
Each construction contractor must provide the Village with a surety bond at the time of registration in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The
bond must be made by a surety approved by the Village and in a form acceptable to the Village. The Village will provide a standard form for the required
bond. The bond must indemnify the Village against any claim, loss, costs, damage, judgment, or liability of any kind whatsoever that the Village may suffer,
or that may accrue against the Village or be charged to or be recovered from the Village or any of its officials by reason of any act or thing done or
neglected to be done under or by virtue of the authority given to the construction contractor. No bond is required for a properly licensed plumbing
contractor. (Ord. 2009-01-608, 1-19-2009)
3-10-5: CHANGES IN INFORMATION:
If at any time there is a change to the information included on a construction contractor's registration form, then that construction contractor must submit a
revised registration form to the Director of Building and Zoning reflecting current and correct information. (Ord. 2009-01-608, 1-19-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 112/524
3-10-6: COMPLIANCE:
All construction contractors must secure the appropriate and necessary building permits required by this Code before undertaking any construction. All
construction contractors must comply with all provisions of this Code relating to or regulating their activities as construction contractors. (Ord. 2009-01-608,
1-19-2009)
3-10-7: INSPECTIONS:
The Director of Building and Zoning may inspect or cause to be inspected, at all reasonable times and without notice, the site of a construction contractor's
activities and may investigate whether persons engaged as construction contractors are properly registered in accordance with this Code. (Ord. 2009-01-
608, 1-19-2009)
3-10-8: PENALTY:
A construction contractor that violates any of the provisions of this chapter is subject to a penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this Code. Each day on
which such violation continues is deemed to be a separate offense. The penalties applicable to construction contractors are pursuant to title 13, chapter 1,
"Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2009-01-608, 1-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
3-10-9: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
CONSTRUCTION: All on-site work for which a building permit is required pursuant to title 8 of this Code, including work done in constructing new buildings
or structures, or additions to buildings or structures, whether interior or exterior, from earthwork to completion, including without limitation excavation,
erection, construction, assembly, alteration, rehabilitation, modernization, improvement, or addition.
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR: Any person, company, partnership, or other entity that:
A. Arranges or submits a bid, or offers to undertake, or purports to have the capacity to undertake, through himself or through others, construction to
any building or structure or to any appurtenance thereto attached to real estate and located on the same lot as the building or structure, including but
not limited to driveways, swimming pools, porches, decks, garages, fences, fallout shelters, and other accessory objects or uses; or
B. Undertakes construction to any building or structure or to any appurtenance thereto attached to real estate and located on the same lot as the
building or structure, including, but not limited to, driveways, swimming pools, porches, decks, garages, fences, fallout shelters, and other accessory
objects or uses.
C. The term construction contractor does not include the following:
1. Any employee working for a construction contractor registered or required to be registered under this chapter and acting within the scope of his or
her employment.
2. Any person who merely furnishes materials or supplies for use at a construction site without fabricating them into, or consuming them in the
performance of, construction.
3. Any architect or engineer acting within the scope of his or her license.
4. Any person working on residential property that is owned by that person.
5. Any property owner, or an employee or agent of that property owner, that does minor, nonstructural repairs, not requiring a building permit
pursuant to title 8 of this Code, on that property owner's property.
6. A governmental entity for work on premises owned by a governmental entity and performed by employees of a governmental entity.
7. The Village.
VILLAGE: The Village and all of its officials, officers, employees, and agents. (Ord. 2009-01-608, 1-19-2009)
Chapter 11
FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
3-11-1: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 113/524
No fire suppression systems contractor may undertake work in the Village without first being registered as required by this section. Any person, company,
partnership, or other entity that is engaged in the business of inspecting, installing, designing, altering, or repairing any automatic fire sprinkler system
must provide with the registration proof of State license as a fire sprinkler contractor as required by 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 317/1 et seq., and all
relevant regulations. Any person, company, partnership, or other entity that is engaged in the business of inspecting, installing, designing, altering, or
repairing any other fire suppression system must provide the Village of Lake Zurich with the registration certification of training by the manufacturer of the
system, appropriate NICET certification, or other proof of qualification to inspect, design, alter, or repair a specific fire suppression system. Registration
must be completed before the contractor commences work. Registration is valid only for the calendar year within which it is completed. Every registration
must be renewed each year before December 31 for the following calendar year. (Ord. 2012-06-836, 6-18-2012)
3-11-2: REGISTRATION FORM:
Each registration must be on a form therefor provided by the Village. The required form must be fully and properly completed, with copies of required
certificates or State licenses, and submitted to the Office of the Fire Prevention Bureau. The form must be signed by the fire suppression systems
contractor or an officer of the fire suppression systems contractor. (Ord. 2012-06-836, 6-18-2012)
3-11-3: ANNUAL FEE:
The annual registration fee is pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. The fee must be paid to the Village at the time of registration.
The fee is nonrefundable and may not be discounted or prorated for any reason. The annual registration fee is applicable to all projects that take place
within that calendar year by that contractor. Notwithstanding the above, registrants are required to apply for and obtain permits for individual projects, and
are required to pay the permit application fee for each project, as applicable. (Ord. 2012-06-836, 6-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
3-11-4: CHANGES IN INFORMATION:
If at any time there is a change to the information included on a fire suppression systems contractor's registration form, then that fire suppression systems
contractor must submit a revised registration form to the Fire Prevention Bureau reflecting current and correct information. (Ord. 2012-06-836, 6-18-2012)
3-11-5: COMPLIANCE:
All fire suppression systems contractors must secure the appropriate and necessary building permits required by this Code before undertaking any
construction, including the payment of relevant permit fees. All fire suppression systems contractors must comply with all provisions of this Code relating to
or regulating their activities as fire suppression systems contractors. (Ord. 2012-06-836, 6-18-2012)
3-11-6: INSPECTIONS:
The Fire Prevention Bureau may inspect or cause to be inspected, at all reasonable times and without notice, the site of a fire suppression systems
contractor's activities and may investigate whether persons engaged as fire suppression systems contractors are properly registered in accordance with
this Code. (Ord. 2012-06-836, 6-18-2012)
3-11-7: PENALTY:
The penalties applicable to fire suppression systems contractors are pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. Each day on which such
violation continues is deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 2012-06-836, 6-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
3-11-8: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS CONTRACTOR: Any person, company, partnership, or other entity that is engaged in the business of inspecting,
installing, designing, altering, or repairing any fire suppression system, clean agent suppression system, dry chemical suppression system, fire sprinkler
system, or hood suppression systems in any building or structure, including, without limitation, fire sprinkler contractors or other fire suppression systems
contractors that do work on any of the systems stated in this definition.
VILLAGE: The Village and all of its officials, officers, employees, and agents. (Ord. 2012-06-836, 6-18-2012)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE A. FIRE-RESCUE DEPARTMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 114/524
4-1A-1: FIRE-RESCUE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
The Lake Zurich Fire-Rescue Department is hereby established. (1989 Code)
4-1A-2: DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES:
A. Duties: There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The Director of Emergency Services (the "Director") shall oversee the
activities of the fire and paramedic services and provide administrative direction to the Village's emergency services. Duties shall include, but not be
limited to:
1. The coordination of the Village's fire protection system in the protection of life and property from losses due to fire.
2. Coordination of ambulance activity and emergency medical treatment programs.
3. Development of an area-wide program in conjunction with the Lake Zurich Area Fire Protection District.
4. The Director shall make and return to the Village a semi-annual report verified by affidavit of all fees and other compensation received by him.
5. Perform and coordinate such further and additional activities and programs as may be required under the provisions of any policy directives issued
by the Board of Trustees.
B. Appointment And Oath; Salary:
1. The Director of Emergency Services shall be appointed by the President of the Village by and with the advice and consent of the Village Trustees.
Vacancies in the office of Director of Emergency Services shall be filled in the same manner as original appointment. The Director of Emergency
Services shall continue in office until his successor has been chosen and qualified. In the event of failure to appoint a Director of Emergency
Services, or if the person appointed fails to qualify, the person filling the office shall continue in office until a successor has been chosen and has
qualified.
The Director of Emergency Services shall hold office indefinitely at the pleasure of the President and Board of Trustees, and shall, prior to entering
into the duties of his office, execute a bond with security in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) which bond shall be payable to the
Municipality in the penal sum of said three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office of
Director of Emergency Services and the payment of all money received by the Director, according to law and the ordinances of the Village. Said
bond shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
2. The salary of the Director is hereby established in the amount of thirty nine thousand dollars ($39,000.00) per annum, payable in the same manner
and at such intervals as is customary for employees of the Village. Said salary may be increased, but not decreased, at any time during the term of
the Director. The Director shall receive, in addition to the aforedescribed salary, such additional benefits of his office for attendance at meetings,
memberships, dues, insurance, vehicular mileage, and the like, as the Board of Trustees may from time to time determine.
C. Removal: The Village President may remove the Director on any formal charge, whenever the President is of the opinion that the interests of the Village
demand removal but he shall report the reasons for the removal to the Board of Trustees at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) nor more than
ten (10) days after the removal. In the event the President fails or refuses to report to the Board of Trustees the reasons for the removal, or if the Board
of Trustees, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected, disapproves of the removal, the Director thereupon shall be
restored to the office of Director of Emergency Services. Any vote taken shall be by "yeas" and "nays" and shall be entered in the minutes of the
meeting at which such vote is taken. Upon restoration, the Director shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. The Director shall not be
removed a second time for the same offense. (Ord. 88-06-273, 6-20-1988)
4-1A-3: FIRE CHIEF:
The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees and shall, before entering into the duties of his
office, take and subscribe to the oath prescribed by law for other Village officers and execute a bond with security to be approved by the Board of
Trustees, payable to the Village of Lake Zurich, in such penal sum as the Board of Trustees shall determine. The Fire Chief shall undertake such duties
and responsibilities for the operation of the Fire/Rescue Department as the Administrator shall, from time to time, determine. (1989 Code)
4-1A-4: FIREMEN/PARAMEDICS:
All other sworn personnel serving on the Fire/Rescue Department shall be appointed, promoted, disciplined and discharged in accordance with the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1. (1989 Code)
4-1A-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Administrator, with the advice of the Director of Emergency Services and Fire Chief, shall formulate and place into effect all rules and regulations,
chain of command and designation of internal officers for the governance of the Fire/Rescue Department as may be required and shall forward such
proposed rules and regulations, chain of command and designation of internal officers, to the Board of Trustees for approval before such rules and
regulations, or additions or amendments thereto, become effective. (1989 Code)
4-1A-6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of all members of the Fire/Rescue Department to enforce all the fire prevention, rescue and ambulance rules, regulations and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 115/524
ordinances of the Village, except where specific exemptions are made by the Administrator, and to perform such other duties as may be determined by the
Administrator to meet the fire prevention, rescue and ambulance needs of the Village and any territory served by the Village. (1989 Code)
4-1A-7: TERRITORY:
The Fire/Rescue Department shall provide services to all territory lying within the corporate limits of the Village as such corporate limits shall be
established from time to time by the Board of Trustees and shall also provide services to any territory lying outside the corporate limits as the Board of
Trustees shall determine from time to time. (1989 Code)
4-1A-8: OBEDIENCE TO DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES AND FIRE CHIEF:
Every person present at a fire or rescue or ambulance location shall be subject to and obedient to the orders of the Director of Emergency Services and
Fire Chief in extinguishing any fire or removal and protection of property, and shall not hinder or obstruct the Director of Emergency Services, Fire Chief or
their designees in the performance of their duties. (1989 Code)
4-1A-9: SALARIES:
Staff, officers and members of the Fire/Rescue Department shall be compensated at a rate as determined by the Board of Trustees. (1989 Code)
4-1A-10: REIMBURSEMENTS:
A. Hazardous Materials:
1. Definitions: The following terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COSTS INCURRED BY THE VILLAGE: All costs and expenses of the Village incurred in connection with the cleanup or abatement of the discharge
of hazardous material or the extinguishment of a fire involving hazardous material and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: actual
labor costs of Village personnel involved in the cleanup or abatement of the discharge or the extinguishment of a fire involving hazardous material
(including, without limitation, workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, and administrative overhead), cost of equipment operation, damage,
and loss as published and updated by the Village Finance Director, cost of materials obtained directly by the Village, cost of any contract labor or
materials, and cost of any medical treatment or expense incurred by the Village, its employees and agents, and arising out of said emergency
services.
DISCHARGE: To leak, seep, spill, emit, or release, or leakage, seepage, spill, emission, or other release whether intentional or unintentional.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristic, is determined
by the Village Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health, or safety of persons or
property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum
products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biological) agents, flammables, and corrosives, and any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under
any Federal or State law, statute, or regulation, including, without limitation, any hazardous waste as defined in subtitle C of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, or any hazardous substance as defined in the
Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act, as amended, or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and any
substance which by law, regulation, or ordinance, requires special handling in its collection, storage, treatment, or disposal. (Ord. 98-12-944, 12-21-
1998)
2. Liability: Any person or entity who intentionally, negligently, or otherwise causes a discharge of hazardous material and any person or entity who
owns or controls the hazardous material's container at the time of discharge shall be jointly and severally liable to the Village for: a) payment of the
fee set forth in subsection A3 of this section (the "hazardous material fee") and b) payment of all costs incurred by the Village as a result of the
cleanup or abatement of any hazardous material discharge or the extinguishment of a fire involving hazardous material by the Village, subject to a
minimum charge pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code and provided, however, that the costs incurred by the Village shall not
include costs of fire suppression services that are normally or customarily provided by the Village, unless the fire involves hazardous material, or
other services normally or customarily provided by other Village departments. Fault shall not be an issue in the attachment of the liability for the
hazardous material fee or the costs incurred by the Village.
3. Hazardous Material Fee: Any person or entity who intentionally, negligently, or otherwise causes a discharge of hazardous material and any person
or entity who owns or controls the hazardous material's container at the time of discharge shall be jointly and severally liable to the Village for the
hazardous material fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 98-12-944, 12-21-1998; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-
2018)
4. Billing And Payment: The Village shall send an invoice for the initial hazardous material fee and the costs incurred by the Village to the persons or
entities determined by the Village to be responsible for such discharge pursuant to subsection A2 of this section. (Ord. 98-12-944, 12-21-1998)
B. Charges For Ambulance Transportation And Paramedical Services: Fees for Lake Zurich ambulance transportation and paramedical services shall be
charged to, and paid by, the person receiving such services pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2017-12-231, 12-4-
2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
C. Emergency Response Services Fees:
1. Definition: The term "emergency response services" shall mean services provided under extraordinary circumstances by the Lake Zurich
Fire/Rescue Department or the Lake Zurich Police Department to persons in need of specialized rescue from circumstances such as, but not limited
to, a hostage situation, a confined space, in or under water, underground, or high above the ground. The determination of the existence of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 116/524
extraordinary circumstances shall be reserved solely to the exercise of the discretion of the Village Manager. (Ord. 97-05-853, 5-19-1997; amd. Ord.
2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
2. Payment For Services: If the Lake Zurich Fire/Rescue Department, Lake Zurich Police Department, Lake Zurich Public Works Department, or any
other Village department provides extraordinary emergency response services requiring specialized equipment and personnel skills for which
specialized training is required, then the recipient or recipients of such services, or their administrators, personal representatives, executors,
successors, heir, or assigns, and the holder of legal title of the real property on which such services are provided, shall reimburse the Village for the
cost of all personnel and equipment utilized to provide such services in the amounts provided in subsections C3 and C4 of this section.
3. Payments For Personnel: The charge for personnel services hereunder shall be all costs incurred by the Village for all off duty employees of the
Village and for all outside support services personnel that assist with the emergency response, without markup or separate fee. There shall be no
charge for on duty personnel responding in the course of their regular duties.
4. Payments For Materials And Equipment: The charge for materials and equipment hereunder shall be all costs incurred by the Village for all materials
and equipment that are used as part of the emergency response, including:
a. Rental costs for Village vehicles and equipment in amounts published by the Illinois Department of Transportation for such rental costs; and
b. Rental costs for equipment secured by the Village from outside sources in the amounts paid by the Village; and
c. Purchase costs for all materials and equipment purchased by the Village for the emergency response; and
d. Replacement costs for all materials and equipment, not otherwise paid for, that cannot be reused or otherwise must be discarded; and
e. Repair costs; and
f. All similar costs incurred by the Village.
Equipment costs shall apply and shall be paid for all materials and equipment that are used in responding to the emergency, regardless of whether
such materials or equipment actually are utilized in the rescue, including, by way of example, but not limitation, rental costs for trucks, backhoes, or
other equipment that respond, but are not actually used. (Ord. 97-05-853, 5-19-1997)
4-1A-11: MUTUAL AID BOX ALARM SYSTEM:
The Village President and the Village Clerk be and are hereby authorized to execute an agreement for participation in the mutual aid box alarm system, a
copy of said agreement being attached to the ordinance codified herein and being made a part hereof. (Ord. 89-08-328, 8-7-1989)
4-1A-12: FIRE PROTECTION TRAINING ACT:
The Village hereby elects to participate in the programs provided for in the Illinois Fire Protection Training Act.
Before an individual may be classified for regular full time employment as a firefighter/paramedic, he/she must have been certified by the Illinois State Fire
Marshal as a firefighter II, as having successfully completed an approved training course as provided in said Act.
The firefighter II certification must be completed by the firefighter/paramedic trainee within his/her probationary period of twenty four (24) months. Failure
of any firefighter/paramedic trainee to complete such basic training and certification within the required period will render that individual and local
governmental agency ineligible for reimbursement funding for basic training for that individual in the fiscal year in which his/her probationary period ends.
The individual may later become certified without reimbursement.
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is hereby instructed and directed to make the necessary amendments to the personnel rules, the manual of
rules of the Lake Zurich Fire/Rescue Department, and rules of said Board of Fire and Police Commissioners in order to require that any person appointed
to the Lake Zurich Fire/Rescue Department of the Village shall not become a nonprobationary member of the Fire/Rescue Department unless and until
he/she shall complete, pursuant to said Illinois Fire Protection and Training Act, the approved training course within twenty four (24) months of the date of
his/her employment. (Ord. 90-03-375, 3-5-1990)
4-1A-13: COMPENSATION AND MEDICAL BENEFITS FOR FIRE DEPARTMENT:
A. Compensation For An Injury In The Line Of Duty: The Village will provide salary compensation to any full time sworn member of the Fire Department or
the Fire Chief who was injured in the line of duty in accordance with the provisions of the Public Employee Disability Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
345/0.01 et seq. (Ord. 96-08-816, 8-5-1996)
B. Assumption Of Liability For Medical Expenses: In case of an accident resulting in an injury to or death of any full time sworn member of the Fire
Department, any part time paid on call firefighter or Fire Chief while in the employ of the Village while in the performance of his duties, the Village
Manager may secure and provide proper medical care and hospital treatment for any such full time sworn member of the Fire Department, any part
time paid on call firefighter or Fire Chief and to that end may incur expense in connection therewith to be paid from funds budgeted or appropriated
therefor by the Village Board or from proceeds of insurance funds.
C. Investigation Of Facts: It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to make a complete investigation of all facts surrounding any accident resulting in an
injury to or death of any full time sworn member of the Fire Department, any part time paid on call firefighter or Fire Chief in the employ of the Village
while in the performance of his duties, to obtain the statements of all material witnesses and to present a report thereof. Such report shall also show the
date and hour of any such accident, the place of occurrence of same, the names and addresses of witnesses, the apparent nature and extent of the
injury and whether the injury or death was caused under circumstances creating a legal liability for damages on the part of some person other than the
Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 117/524
D. Payment Of Expenses: All bills showing the items of expense incurred for any medical care and hospital treatment referred to in subsection B of this
section, shall be presented to the Village Manager who shall determine the reasonableness of the charges made for the services so rendered and
recommend payment to cover the items of expense.
E. Reimbursement By Third Person: If the Village Manager is of the opinion that any accident referred to in this section created a legal liability for damages
on the part of some person other than the Village, it shall be the duty of the Village Manager to demand from such person reimbursement to the Village
for the amount expended by the medical care and hospital treatment of any such full time sworn member of the Fire Department, any part time paid on
call firefighter or Fire Chief. In default of payment of such amount so expended, the Village Manager may cause proceedings to be filed to recover for
the Village the amount so expended. (Ord. 96-08-816, 8-5-1996; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
ARTICLE B. BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION
4-1B-1: BUREAU CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There be and is hereby created a bureau of fire prevention in the village. The bureau of fire prevention shall consist of the director of emergency services,
who shall be the chief of the bureau of fire prevention, the village fire chief, the village manager and the director of building and zoning. (1989 Code; amd.
Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-1995; Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
4-1B-2: DUTIES:
The duties and responsibilities of the bureau of fire prevention shall be to:
A. Enforce the fire and safety regulations of the village;
B. Establish a central office for carrying forth the activities of the bureau of fire prevention and to keep the records thereof;
C. Make a monthly report of its progress and activity to the board of trustees;
D. Recommend to the board of trustees codification of all existing fire and safety regulations and proposed amendments thereto;
E. Establish an appeal process to all fire and safety regulations except where an immediate danger to the public or an ever present hazard is deemed to
exist;
F. Issue all orders, permits and determinations necessary to observe the spirit and intent of the fire and safety regulations to the end that the public safety
and welfare is secured;
G. Recommend to the board of trustees the appointment of inspectors for the purpose of carrying out the inspections and enforcement provisions of the
fire and safety regulations. (1989 Code)
4-1B-3: EFFECT OF PROVISIONS:
The passage of this section shall not be construed as preventing the enforcement of, or repealing the provision of, any ordinance, regulation, standard or
code presently in force in the village. (1989 Code)
Chapter 2
PUBLIC NUISANCES
4-2-1: PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED:
A "public nuisance" is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to:
A. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public.
B. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property.
C. Greatly offend the public morals or decency.
D. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of
water or other public way. (1989 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 118/524
4-2-1-1: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but shall not be construed to
exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of section 4-2-1 of this chapter:
A. Adulterated, Unwholesome Food Or Drink: All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
B. Animal Carcasses: Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within twenty four (24) hours after
death.
C. Garbage, Trash And Junk Accumulations1: Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing
material, abandoned vehicles or machinery, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease carrying insects, rats or other vermin may
breed, or which create a fire hazard.
D. Stagnant Water: All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply.
E. Garbage Cans: Garbage cans which are not fly tight.
F. Dangerous Emissions: The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the village limits in such
quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property; or any act in violation of
the Illinois environmental protection act2.
G. Water Pollution: The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other
substances; or any act in violation of the environmental protection act.
H. Offensive Conditions: Any use of property, substances or things within the village emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or
disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or
inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the village.
I. Abandoned Wells And Cisterns: All abandoned wells or cisterns not securely covered or secured from public use.
J. Animal Houses: Any barn, stable or shed used for keeping animals.
K. Watercourse And Drainage Ditch Obstructions: Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch or ravine.
L. Garbage And Rubbish Deposits3: The deposit of garbage, rubbish or any offensive substance on any street, sidewalk or public place, or on any private
property, except as may be permitted by ordinance.
M. Weeds4: Any noxious weeds on private property, as defined by 505 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (1989 Code)
4-2-1-2: PUBLIC NUISANCES OFFENDING MORALS AND DECENCY:
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency,
but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of this section 4-
2-1: (1989 Code)
A. Disorderly Houses, Houses Of Ill Fame: All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the
purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse. (Ord. 2014-4-963, 4-7-2014)
B. Unauthorized Liquor Sales: All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled,
manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by this code5.
C. Violations Of Village And State Laws: Any place or premises within the village where ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace,
morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 2014-4-963, 4-7-2014)
4-2-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration
shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the provisions of this section 4-2-1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 119/524
A. Unlawful Building Construction: All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the village relating to
materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures.
B. Signs And Signals Imitating Traffic Signs And Signals: All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport to be or may be mistaken as
official traffic control devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing.
C. View Obstructions At Intersections: All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or
highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
D. Trees Overhanging Public Ways: All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than eight feet (8') above the surface thereof or less than
ten feet (10') above the surface of a public street.
E. Fireworks: All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the state of Illinois and ordinances of the village.
F. Dangerous Buildings: All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human
use.
G. Utility Wires Over Public Ways: All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than fifteen feet (15') above the surface of the
street or ground.
H. Noises And Vibrations: All loud and discordant noises or vibrations of any kind.
I. Excavations And Street Obstructions6: All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as
permitted by the ordinances of the Village or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable
length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished.
J. Open, Unguarded Cellars, Wells, Excavations, Etc.: All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any
public street, alley or sidewalk.
K. Abandoned Refrigerators And Freezers: All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and other covers have not been removed or
which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside by pushing only with the strength of a small child.
L. Property Use Creating Assemblies Which Obstruct Public Ways: Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or
sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or
sidewalks.
M. Unauthorized Signs Or Advertisements7: Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall, fence, sidewalk, street or other private or public
property without permission of the owner thereof.
N. Dangerous, Overhanging Signs And Awnings8: Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition, or which overhangs any roadway, or
which overhangs any sidewalk less than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk surface.
O. Fire Hazards: Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire hazard or will impair the extinguishing of any fire.
P. State Law Nuisances: Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes9. (1989 Code)
4-2-1-4: GRAFFITI:
A. Definition Of Graffiti: Any symbol, announcement, insignia, name identification, inscription, picture, or similar marking, including without limitation any
letter, word, numeral, emblem, or combination thereof, that is painted, written, drawn, scratched, or in any other way placed on any wall, fence, sign,
building, or other structure, or any sidewalk, pavement, post, stone, tree, or other real or personal property, private or public, except as specifically
permitted by Village Code, ordinance, or regulation.
B. Graffiti Prohibited: It is hereby unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to place graffiti on any property and for any owner or person having control
of any property to allow, permit, or otherwise tolerate the graffiti to be placed or to remain on that property.
C. Duty To Remove Graffiti: Every owner of property or person having control of property shall at his or her own expense, promptly remove, cover, or
otherwise eradicate any graffiti which is placed on that property. (Ord. 93-11-626, 11-15-1993)
D. Penalty: Any person who fails to remove graffiti as required in subsection C of this section within fourteen (14) days after written notification from the
Village to remove such graffiti shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed to have been committed for each day on which a violation occurs or continues after such initial notice has been given. (Ord. 93-11-626, 11-15-
1993; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 120/524
E. Village Remedies: In addition to assessing the penalty provided in subsection D of this section, and if the owner of property or the person having control
of property fails to take action required by said subsection D of this section within thirty (30) days after written notification from the Village to remove
such graffiti, then the Village may take all such steps as are necessary to remove such graffiti. Such steps may include, without limitation, all action
necessary to remove, cover, or otherwise eradicate the graffiti, and may also include action for an injunction requiring such owner or person to remove
the graffiti within a time period determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.
All costs incurred by the Village in taking any action pursuant to this subsection E shall be borne by the owner of the property or the person having
control of the property. If such owner or person fails to reimburse the Village for costs necessary to abate the nuisance within thirty (30) days after the
Village mails an invoice for such costs, then such costs shall become a lien on the property and the Village may perfect such lien with the Lake County
Recorder of Deeds, and take all such action as may be necessary to foreclose and collect on such lien.
F. Remedies Against Perpetrator: The Village's exercise of the remedies provided in this section shall not prevent the owner of the property from
recovering, through civil suit or otherwise, the cost of removal of graffiti or other reparation for damage from the person or persons responsible for
placing the graffiti on such owner's property. (Ord. 93-11-626, 11-15-1993)
4-2-1-5: PROHIBITION OF OPEN BURNING:
A. Open Burning Prohibited: Except only as provided in subsections C and D of this section, it shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to
cause, suffer, or allow open burning of any kind within the Village, including, without limitation, the burning of "landscape waste" as that term is defined
in subsection B of this section.
B. Definition Of Landscape Waste: The term "landscape waste" means, for purposes of this section, any and all accumulations of grass clippings,
shrubbery and vine cuttings, leaves, trees, tree limbs, stumps, brush, and other materials accumulated from or as the result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines, trees, and other natural landscaping.
C. Exceptions To Prohibition Of Open Burning: The following instances of open burning shall be permitted, but only under the terms, limitations, and
standards set forth in this subsection:
1. Recreational Fires: A recreational fire, if and only if conducted pursuant to a valid permit for open burning issued by the Lake Zurich Fire Prevention
Bureau.
2. Fireplaces, Cooking Devices, And Pits: A fire in an outdoor fireplace, open flame cooking device, or fire pit in accordance with the following
standards:
a. Outdoor fireplaces and chimneys shall be a manufactured container or structure that holds fire at the base of a chimney or hearth, is constructed
of stone, brick, steel or other noncombustible materials, and is provided with a screen or a spark arrestor above the fire.
b. An open flame cooking device shall be a manufactured cooking device used for the preparation of food.
c. Each outdoor fire pit shall be dug into the ground in a manner that will prevent the burn materials from falling out of the pit. The above grade
portion of the pit shall be constructed of stone, masonry, metal, or other similar noncombustible materials. The bottom of the pit shall be below
grade and shall be comprised of gravel, stone, or dirt. The total open area of the pit shall be no larger than thirty inches (30") in diameter or four (4)
square feet. The pit shall be surrounded by a noncombustible barrier that is at least six inches (6") above the coals or ash within the pit. A ring of
sand, dirt, or other noncombustible material approximately thirty six inches (36") wide shall be provided around the pit to provide separation for
combustibles. No plant material shall be allowed within that thirty six inch (36") ring.
d. Burn materials shall be comprised only of seasoned firewood, charcoal, natural gas, or LPG gas. No burn materials shall extend outside of the fire
pit, fireplace, or open flame cooking device. No landscape waste materials of any kind shall be burned.
e. Every fire shall be located a safe distance from structures and overhangs such as houses, sheds, fences, trees, power lines, trellises, and
balconies, decks, and rails. That distance shall be not less than fifteen (15) vertical feet and fifteen (15) horizontal feet for outdoor fireplaces and
fire pits and three feet (3') for open flame cooking devices.
f. A fireplace or open flame cooking device placed on a combustible deck shall be placed on noncombustible material not less than one inch (1")
thick and having an eighteen inch (18") perimeter around the fireplace or device. Further, that fireplace shall be located not less than fifteen (15)
vertical feet and fifteen (15) horizontal feet away from all structures. Open flame cooking devices shall be located not less than three (3) vertical
feet and three (3) horizontal feet away from all structures.
g. A means of fire extinguishment must be present and easily accessible during any open burning.
h. Every open burning shall be attended continuously by an adult not less than eighteen (18) years of age.
i. All open burning shall be prohibited when wind speed exceeds twenty (20) miles per hour.
j. All open burning, including the use of any fireplace, open flame cooking device, or fire pit, shall be prohibited at all times between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. every day.
D. Exception For Governmental Agencies: This section shall not apply to the Village or to any other governmental agency properly conducting a controlled
fire or burn; provided, however, that the Fire Chief may impose any condition or limitation on any such controlled fire or burn within the Village's
corporate limits that the Fire Chief determines is necessary and appropriate to ensure the public health and safety. (Ord. 2006-11-460, 11-20-2006)
E. Penalty: Any person, firm, corporation, or entity that violates any provision of this section shall be subject to an escalating fine schedule pursuant to title
13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2006-11-460, 11-20-2006; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 121/524
4-2-1-6: FIREARMS:
A. Discharge Of Firearm Within Village Prohibited:
1. Except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, it shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to discharge, or to cause the discharge
of, any gun, pistol, rifle, or other firearm within the Village.
2. The prohibition established in subsection A1 of this section shall not apply to any officer of the law in the performance of his or her duties or to any
official governmental activity, or to the discharge of a rifle as part of a traditional ceremonial event such as a funeral conducted by a recognized civic
or fraternal organization.
B. Discharge Of Firearm Creating Nuisance Prohibited: Except for any officer of the law in the performance of his or her duties, it shall be unlawful and a
public nuisance for any person to discharge, or for any person to cause the discharge of, or for any property owner to allow on that owner's property
the discharge of, any gun, pistol, rifle, or other firearm in any location in any manner that:
1. Substantially annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, health, repose, or safety of any person within the corporate limits of the Village; or
2. In any way renders any person within the corporate limits of the Village insecure in his or her life or in his or her use of property; or
3. Creates, places, or causes in the air any object, material, or substance that is dangerous, offensive, nauseous, irritating, or noxious to humans or
other animal life within the Village.
C. Prohibition Of Certain Businesses And Establishments Involving Discharge Of Firearm: It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance to conduct, within the
Village or within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the Village's corporate limits, any offensive or unwholesome business, establishment, or activity involving the
discharge of a gun, pistol, rifle, or other firearm. For the purposes of this subsection, an "offensive or unwholesome business, establishment, or activity"
shall include, but not be limited to, any activity: 1) that violates any State or local statute, code, ordinance, or regulation, or 2) that substantially annoys,
injures, or endangers the comfort, health, repose, or safety of any person within the corporate limits of the Village, or 3) that renders any person within
the corporate limits of the Village insecure in his or her life or in his or her use of property, or 4) that creates, places, or causes in the air any object,
material, or substance that is dangerous, offensive, nauseous, irritating, or noxious to humans or other animal life within the Village.
D. Penalties; Abatement: The penalty provisions set forth in title 1, chapter 3 of this Code, and the abatement provisions of section 4-2-3 of this chapter
shall apply to any violation of any provision of this section. (Ord. 2003-12-264, 12-1-2003)
4-2-1-7: BUSINESS DISTRICT DELIVERIES AND SIMILAR NOISEMAKING ACTIVITIES:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms have the meaning ascribed to them herein:
COMMERCIAL AREA: A property zoned in any business district under the Lake Zurich Zoning Code and developed with a commercial or business
use.
RESIDENTIAL AREA: A property zoned in any residential district under the Lake Zurich Zoning Code.
SERVICE AREA: The area within a property in a commercial area used for shipping or receiving deliveries, including any roadway, driveway, or alley
used as access to the shipping or receiving area.
B. Prohibited Acts:
1. General Prohibition: All deliveries, garbage pick up, loading and unloading, parking lot sweeping, and related and similar activities in a commercial
area that cause noise disturbing to people in any adjacent residential area are prohibited at all times between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. every day.
2. Limitation On Vehicles In Service Areas: Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no person, firm, manager, or corporation may cause or
permit, or may allow to continue, any commercial motor vehicle, delivery truck, or garbage truck to enter into or to remain in a service area adjacent
to a residential area at any time between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. every day.
3. Limitation On Noisemaking Activities: Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no person, firm, manager, or corporation may cause or
permit, or may allow to continue, any noise associated with: a) the unloading of any vehicle, truck, or trailer, b) the operation of any forklift, cart,
overhead door, or c) any similar noisemaking activity in a service area adjacent to a residential area at any time between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. every day.
C. Additional Restrictions By Owners: Nothing in this section prohibits a property owner or a business owner from imposing restrictions on deliveries,
vehicles, or noisemaking activities in addition to the restrictions set forth in this section.
D. Exceptions:
1. Snow Removal: This section does not apply to snow removal operations.
2. 680 South Rand Road: Instead of the hours of prohibition set forth in subsection B of this section, the hours of prohibition for the property at 680
South Rand Road developed with a Costco store are between nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. every day.
E. Notification To Drivers:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 122/524
1. Notice By Owners: All property owners and business owners within a commercial area are required to provide advanced notice to vendors,
suppliers, and drivers of delivery trucks and other vehicles affected by this section about the restrictions set forth in this section.
2. Warning Signs: Property owners and business owners must cause warning signs to be installed in clearly visible locations, stating:
NO TRUCK TRAFFIC ALLOWED
BETWEEN 9:00 PM AND 7:00 AM
ANY DAY
Lake Zurich Municipal Code
Section 4-2-1-7
Each warning sign must be not less than eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") in size. Each sign must have a white background with
reflective red lettering. The warning letters must be not less than two and one-half inches (21/2") in height. The reference to the Lake Zurich
Municipal Code must be in lettering not less than one-half inch (1/2") in height.
Warning signs must be posted at each entrance to a regulated service area in such a manner as to adequately warn drivers about the restrictions
before those drivers enter into the service area. The location of a warning sign must be chosen by the property owner or business owner with the
assistance of a member of the Lake Zurich Police Department's traffic safety unit. (Ord. 2007-10-532, 10-15-2007)
F. Penalties:
1. General Penalty: Any person, firm, manager, or corporation violating any provision of this section will be subject to fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1,
"Fee Schedule", of this Code. Each occurrence of a violation of this section will constitute a separate offense subject to a separate fine.
2. Payments To Avoid Prosecution: Any person, firm, manager, or corporation that receives an ordinance violation ticket for a violation of a provision of
subsection B of this section may avoid prosecution by paying a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2007-10-532,
10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
3. Enforcement:
a. An ordinance violation ticket will be issued to the person found to be in violation of a provision of subsection B of this section, and notice of the
violation will be sent to the firm, manager, or corporation that employs the person in violation. A copy of the ticket will be mailed to the address of
the firm or corporation given by the person in violation. The Police Department also will send a notice of the violation to the firm or corporation
responsible for the presence of the truck, and driver if applicable, involved in the violation.
b. For the first three (3) violations of any provision of this section in any calendar year, an ordinance violation ticket will be issued to the person, firm,
manager, or corporation found to be in violation. For each violation after the first three (3) violations in a calendar year, a "nontraffic notice to
appear" in court may be issued both to the person, firm, manager, or corporation found to be in violation and, if different, also to the responsible
firm or corporation that is making the shipment, receiving the delivery, or creating or allowing the creation of the noise. (Ord. 2010-02-697, 2-1-
2010)
4. Informal Review: The person, firm, manager, or corporation to which an ordinance violation ticket has been issued under this section may request an
informal review of the ticket. The informal review will be conducted in accordance with a written procedure established by the Lake Zurich Police
Department. The following standards will apply to a request for review:
a. A written request, on a form provided by the department, must be filed by the person, firm, manager, or corporation requesting the review. The
request must include the sequential serial number of the ordinance violation ticket. The request also must state the reason for the request and
include any factors in mitigation.
b. During the review process, the fine will not increase.
c. The request will be forwarded to the department employee who issued the ordinance violation ticket. The issuing employee will be afforded the
opportunity to make comments concerning the issuance of the ticket. The request then will be forwarded to the Commander of Patrol Operations.
d. The Commander of Patrol Operations will make a recommendation regarding final disposition based on the information provided by the person
requesting review and the issuing employee.
e. The completed written request for review will be forwarded to the Office of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police, or his designee, will have the
authority to void or preserve the ordinance violation ticket.
f. The department will notice the person requesting review in writing of the Chief's disposition within ten (10) days after the disposition is made. The
notice will include information about the right to formal review if the person requesting review is not satisfied with the disposition.
g. If the person requests a formal review of the ordinance violation ticket, then the ticket will be voided and a "nontraffic notice to appear" will be
issued.
h. The "nontraffic notice to appear" will be issued by the employee who issued the ordinance violation ticket. The notice will include a court date and
time at the appropriate Lake County court location. (Ord. 2007-10-532, 10-15-2007)
5. Formal Review: On formal review, a hearing on an ordinance violation ticket may be brought before the Village's administrative hearing system or
before the Illinois Circuit Court for the Nineteenth Judicial Circuit (Lake County). (Ord. 2010-02-697, 2-1-2010)
4-2-2: PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the Village or within the police jurisdiction of the
Village. (1989 Code)
4-2-3: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES AND COSTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 123/524
A. Inspections: Whenever complaint is made to the Village President that a public nuisance exists, or has existed, within the Village, he shall promptly
notify a police officer or some other Village official whom the President shall designate who shall forthwith inspect or cause to be inspected the
premises and shall make a written report of his findings to the President. Whenever practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be
made of the premises and shall file the same in the Office of the Village Clerk.
B. Notice To Abate: If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is great and immediate danger
to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Village President may direct a police officer or a Deputy Sheriff to serve a notice on the
owner or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance and to post a copy of the notice on
the premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such
nuisance within twenty four (24) hours and shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the Village will cause the same to be abated and will
charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the same, as the case may be.
C. Abatement By Village: If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided, or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found,
the Director of Public Works, or some other Village official designated by the President, shall abate such nuisance.
D. Abatement By Court Action: If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such
nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report of
his findings with the President, who shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the name of the Village.
E. Abatement Costs: In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a
public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real
estate as other special taxes. (1989 Code)
Chapter 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section:
BULK ITEMS: Large machine parts, large quantities of building materials from construction, remodeling, and repair projects, tree stumps, household
furniture, used appliances, and the like.
DISPOSABLE WASTE CONTAINER: Any bag, box or other container of sufficient strength and durability to withstand handling until its contents are put
into the hopper of the contractor's vehicle for removal.
FAMILY: One or more persons, each related to the other by blood, marriage or adoption, living together in a dwelling and maintaining a common
household. A family may include any domestic servant and not more than one gratuitous guest. A family may also consist of not more than three (3)
unrelated persons living together in a single dwelling and maintaining a common household.
GARBAGE: Any rejected or waste household food, offal, swill or carrion and every accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the
preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables and any other matter of any nature, which are subject to
decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding materials
for flies or other germ carrying insects.
PERSON: Any natural person, partnership, trust, corporation or association. Whenever used with respect to penalty, the term "person", as applied to
partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to trusts or corporations, shall mean the trustees or officers
thereof.
PREMISES: Any house, residence, building, flat, apartment, room, dwelling place, place of abode or premises.
REFUSE: All garbage, ashes, discarded household furniture, furnishings, fixtures, appliances of all kinds, manure, dead animals or parts thereof, trees and
tree branches, trunks and roots, brush, shrubs, grass clippings, plant stalks, leaves, building material, sod, dirt, concrete and waste not separated at the
source and disposed of through a resource recovery system.
REFUSE DISPOSAL CONTRACTOR: The contractor with whom the village has contracted for the removal of refuse from all residences in the village.
RESOURCE RECOVERY SYSTEM: A waste management system which provides for collection, separation, recycling and recovery of waste, including
disposal of nonrecoverable waste residues.
REUSABLE REFUSE CONTAINER: A can of galvanized iron or noncorrodible metal or plastic, rodentproof and flyproof, durable and leakproof, of the type
commonly sold as a garbage can, of a suitable gauge and construction to ensure durability, with suitable handles on both the can and the lid and not
greater in size than thirty four (34) gallon and sixty (60) pound capacity.
Refuse containers for commercial facilities and apartment houses containing four (4) or more family units shall be rodentproof and leakproof and shall
have fitted covers.
WASTE: Any or all of the following: tin cans, bottles, cartons, boxes, newspapers, books and other material having potential for inclusion in a resource
recovery system. (Ord. 1090-82; amd. Ord. 2004-06-297, 6-21-2004)
4-3-2: ADMINISTRATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 124/524
All matters relating to, or affecting the accumulation, collection, removal or disposal of waste and refuse, unless specifically otherwise assigned by the
village manager under his administrative discretion shall be subject to and under his supervision. (Ord. 1090-82; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
4-3-3: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
A. No person shall permit any refuse to accumulate on his premises except in covered waste containers.
B. The owner of a multiple dwelling containing two (2) or more family units or the owner of a commercial or industrial establishment containing one or more
businesses shall:
1. Provide approved type refuse collection facilities for all occupants whether the occupants be the owner or tenants.
2. Not permit any refuse to accumulate which is not contained in an approved refuse collection facility and shall not allow litter in alleyways, parking lots
or other outdoor areas of the property.
C. Written agreements between owner and occupants shall not relieve the owner of final responsibility for the proper refuse disposal or collection facilities.
(Ord. 1090-82)
4-3-4: REFUSE STORAGE REGULATIONS:
A. Refuse Container And Use Required: Every person in possession of any premises in the village where persons reside shall provide for each family unit
residing therein sufficient refuse containers for the type of service used for a weekly accumulation of normal refuse. Every person in possession of any
premises shall cause to be deposited in such refuse containers all refuse produced in or on, or brought into or onto such premises, as soon as
practicable after same is produced in or on, or brought therein, except as otherwise herein provided. (Ord. 1090-82)
B. Container Specifications; Maintenance And Repair:
1. All refuse containers shall be as previously defined, and no other type of container shall be acceptable. Unsanitary, leaking or defective receptacles
shall be cleaned, repaired or replaced by the owner or occupant at his expense, as directed by the village manager or his designee or their
respective representatives. All containers shall be disinfected with an effective antiseptic solution as often as is necessary to maintain them in a
sanitary condition. Evidence of neglect of these requirements or unsafe containers shall be determined by the village manager or his designee or
their respective representatives. (Ord. 1090-82; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
2. Dumpsters for garbage or refuse shall be the size permitted by the garbage collector. (Ord. 1090-82)
3. All refuse containers shall be subject to inspection and approval or condemnation by the village manager or his designee. (Ord. 1090-82; amd. Ord.
2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
C. Preparation Of Container Contents:
1. It shall be the duty of every person in possession of any premises to cause all garbage brought on or produced on the premises to be thoroughly
drained of all surplus liquid, securely wrapped in paper or packed in a covered box or carton of such dimensions as will permit its free passage into
and out of the refuse container and finally deposited, after such wrapping, in such refuse container as soon as practicable after the same is produced
or brought therein or thereon. Refuse containers to which garbage is frozen through failure to observe these regulations and all containers which are
other than as specified in this chapter will not be serviced by the crews of the village refuse disposal contractor.
2. Refuse of every character shall be securely wrapped or bound in such manner as may be necessary to prevent the scattering of same by the wind
and shall be deposited in a refuse container or otherwise deposited as prescribed herein.
D. Location Of Refuse Containers:
1. It shall be the duty of every person in possession of any premises in the village for which a reusable refuse container or containers is provided to
place said containers so that they are not in plain view from the street or to place said containers in such a place that would be offensive or be a
nuisance to immediate adjoining neighbors in between days of collections. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any reusable container within
the parkways of the village except on the day of collection.
2. Dumpsters shall be placed at the rear of the commercial and manufacturing establishments in an enclosure as provided for in the building code.
(Ord. 1090-82)
E. Placement Of Refuse To Be Collected: All residential service, whether at the curb or behind the front line of the residence, shall be governed by the
following requirements:
1. Items to be placed at the curb include: a) brush or branches securely tied in four foot (4') bundles; b) leaves, grass, garden clippings, and other items
placed in disposable containers weighing not more than sixty (60) pounds each; and c) items of exceptional size such as household furniture but no
larger than can be handled by two (2) men.
2. Items may be placed at the curb by the resident prior to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the day scheduled for pick up and in no case before seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. on the preceding evening.
3. Items eligible to be placed at the curb shall be placed adjacent to the curb so that they can be loaded into a truck in the street.
4. Bulk items may be placed at the curb without a container so long as they are not obstructing any public property or right of way. Customers disposing
of bulk items may be subject to an additional charge, as provided in the village's contract entered into pursuant to section 4-3A-4 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 125/524
(Ord. 2004-06-297, 6-21-2004)
4-3-5: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL REGULATIONS:
A. Residential Service:
1. Collection By Village; Contract Service: It is anticipated that the village will, from time to time, enter into a general contract for the collection of
garbage from private residences within the village, and it is required that each residence shall obtain and pay for such collection service. The
occupant or owner of such residence shall pay the fee established by the contract for the collection directly to the contractor. The contract may
provide for a higher collection fee for rear yard pick up.
2. Residential Service Required: At residences of less than five (5) family units, all refuse shall be called for and disposed of by the refuse disposal firm
duly licensed by the village and shall not be collected or disposed of in any other manner.
Every person in possession of any premises in the village, except commercial and industrial establishments and all apartments or other buildings
occupied by more than four (4) family units, shall, except as otherwise herein provided, be required to have accumulations of refuse collected and
disposed of regularly. All normal household refuse as provided herein shall be collected and disposed of regularly by the refuse disposal contractor
employed by the village for the sums specified in section 4-3-7 of this chapter. All excess refuse shall be collected and disposed of by the refuse
disposal contractor employed by the village for the sum specified in section 4-3-7 of this chapter.
The occupancy of any premises for residential purposes shall be prima facie evidence that refuse is being produced and accumulated on such
premises, and it shall be the duty of the designated representative of the village to inspect the premises and cause to be removed therefrom any and
all refuse found for which collection and removal the required fee, as established by this chapter, shall have been or shall be paid by the person in
whose name the village carries the water or sewer account, or both, of the subject premises.
3. Bills For Service; Delinquencies; Refunds: All charges for refuse disposal service shall be billed by the village refuse disposal contractor to and paid
by the person in whose name the village water or sewer account then appears, or the person at the head of the family unit, for which such refuse
disposal service is rendered, and the village refuse disposal contractor shall assume any and all delinquent accounts. Prices billed by the said
contractor may include an amount to be fixed by the village, over and above the bid price, which may be necessary to cover sanitary inspections and
supervision by the village. Such charges for services shall be billed and collected by the village refuse disposal contractor and such contractor shall
keep an accurate record of all the family units he serves, including the address and the amounts collected from each family unit. Such charges may
be billed in advance, payable on or before the due date. Upon presentation of satisfactory evidence that refuse service paid for in advance will not be
required or has not been required, the said contractor shall refund or adjust on a monthly pro rata basis an amount equal to such refuse service paid
for but not received or not to be received; provided no refunds will be allowed for discontinuances of refuse service for less than thirty (30) days.
4. Materials To Be Collected: The regular household collection shall consist of refuse with the exception of building materials, sod, dirt and concrete
over fifty (50) pounds, which refuse, regardless of amount, shall be removed by the refuse disposal contractor for the charges provided in section 4-
3-7 of this chapter.
Building material, sod, dirt, concrete and other refuse will be removed by any licensed refuse disposal contractor for charges agreed to by the
contractor and the customer. If the refuse is of such character or quantity that the crews of the refuse disposal contractor making the scheduled pick
up are not required to collect the same, then the person in possession of such premises shall immediately make a request for special services from a
licensed disposal contractor.
B. Service To Apartments, Industries And Businesses: Apartments containing five (5) or more family units and commercial and industrial establishments
shall have their refuse removed by a refuse disposal contractor who is licensed to operate in the village.
C. Refuse From Building Contractors' Operations: Refuse accumulated from the operation of lot cleaning or clearing and building contractors' refuse
caused by building, rebuilding or otherwise altering a building or structure shall be removed by the person or building contractor performing such work;
except, that the contractor may employ a public scavenger licensed under the provisions of this chapter. Such scavenger shall not remove refuse
generated by the occupants of any building whether or not under repair or construction, and such scavenger need not be the village's refuse disposal
contractor.
D. Dumping, Burying And Burning Prohibitions And Restrictions:
1. No refuse or waste shall be burned, dumped or buried within the corporate limits of the village.
2. Only dead leaves may be burned. Other refuse may not be burned at any time within the village. (Ord. 1090-82)
4-3-6: COLLECTION SCHEDULES:
A. Residences: For the purpose of fulfilling the requirements of this chapter, the village manager is hereby authorized and directed to cause all "refuse" as
hereinbefore defined to be collected regularly and systematically at least once each seven (7) days at all residences in the village; except, that less
frequent collections may be authorized where no health hazard exists and rates may be altered with the concurrence of the refuse disposal contractor
to alleviate hardship. (Ord. 1090-82; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
B. Apartments, Commercial And Industrial Establishments:
1. Multiple residences, commercial and manufacturing establishments shall arrange for garbage collection of dumpsters by a garbage collector licensed
by the village for garbage and refuse collection twice a week.
2. Special regulations as to apartments and multi-family buildings that are billed as a commercial account are as follows: Over twelve (12) units shall
provide twice weekly pick up and will comply with any and all ordinances that would apply to the collection and storage of refuse. (Ord. 1090-82)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 126/524
4-3-7: COLLECTION FEES:
Fees to be charged by the Village refuse disposal contractor shall not exceed the fees as established by the contract except for annual adjustments as
provided for in the existing contract with the refuse company. (Ord. 1090-82)
4-3-8: RESOURCE RECOVERY:
Waste materials separated from refuse at the source and destined to be reused or recycled and which are not discarded with refuse are considered to be
the property of the owner and may be disposed of through a resource recovery system rather than a refuse disposal system. Resource recovery
operations must be conducted in such a way as to avoid fire and sanitation hazards. Storage and handling of waste materials must conform to the
applicable provisions of the Life Safety Code of the National Fire Protection Association, the health and sanitation requirements of this chapter and
building and zoning1 ordinances of the Village.
Waste materials from which refuse is not separated at the source must be disposed of only through the facilities of the Village's refuse disposal contractor.
(Ord. 1090-82)
4-3-9: REGULATION OF COLLECTORS:
A. Number Of Licensed Collectors: There shall be one contractor servicing single-family residences and multiple-family residences of four (4) or less units.
B. Hours And Days Of Prohibited Operation: No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall operate within the Village between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. or seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or on Saturdays, Sundays, and residential pick ups shall be prohibited on the following holidays:
New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. If scavenger operations do not take place
because of one of the aforementioned holidays, persons licensed under this chapter are required to pick up refuse on the day immediately after the
holidays, except when said day immediately following the holiday is a Saturday or Sunday, in which case refuse pick up shall be on the next day. (Ord.
1090-82)
4-3-10: TRANSPORTING REFUSE; VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
A. No person shall transport refuse or cause refuse to be transported over the streets or other public ways in the Village unless such refuse being
transported is entirely and securely covered. (Ord. 1090-82)
B. Refuse shall not be transported over or along the streets of Lake Zurich or other public property thereof except in a leakproof, compaction type body
referred to as a "packer type" refuse body, approved by the Village Manager. Such equipment shall not be permitted to remain parked anywhere in the
Village limits when not in use, but may be stored or kept when not in use in a tightly constructed and closed building or shed within the Village; provided
such building or structure shall conform with the requirements of the Building and Zoning2 Codes of the Village. Any refuse that may have been spilled
on private premises, parkways, streets, alleys or other public places shall be immediately cleaned up in a neat and workmanlike manner. Refuse
disposal contractors shall replace, at their own expense, any containers which may be damaged by the carelessness of their employees. (Ord. 1090-
82; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
4-3-11: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1090-82; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
ARTICLE A. GARBAGE AND WASTE COLLECTION; RECYCLING PROGRAM
4-3A-1: LANDSCAPE WASTE COLLECTION PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a landscape waste collection program for the village. The program shall consist of mandatory separation of landscape waste
from the residential waste stream, the collection of landscape waste in biodegradable paper bags or separate waste containers, and the placement of
landscape waste at the curbside on the regular garbage collection date. All landscape waste placed by customers for collection shall be contained in either
metal or plastic cans marked with an "X" designating it as yard waste and not be greater in size than thirty four (34) gallon capacity or in biodegradable
paper "kraft" type bags not exceeding thirty three (33) gallons in capacity or sixty (60) pounds in weight, or shall be tightly tied with string, cord, or twine
made of natural fibers in bundles not exceeding four feet (4') in length or sixty (60) pounds in weight. Leaves raked to the curb shall not be considered
landscape waste for purposes of this section. (Ord. 2004-06-297, 6-21-2004)
4-3A-2: RECYCLING PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
There shall be established a voluntary recycling program for the recycling of newspaper; steel, tin, and bimetal cans; #1 and #2 plastics (no caps);
aluminum soda and beer cans; corrugated cardboard and chipboard; aluminum foil and foil products; magazines, catalogues, and telephone books; junk
mail and newspaper inserts; and brown paper grocery bags, as more fully set forth in the contract established pursuant to section 4-3A-4 of this article and
incorporated herein by reference. Recyclables shall be placed in sixty four (64) gallon recycling toters, provided to each single-family residence. (Ord.
2004-06-297, 6-21-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 127/524
4-3A-3: THEFT OF RECYCLABLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, obtain, possess or pick up any recyclable item placed for collection in front of a residence as part of the village
of Lake Zurich's recycling program, unless said person has a contract with the village for said recycling program1. (Ord. 90-07-397, 7-2-1990)
4-3A-4: CONTRACT FOR GARBAGE AND WASTE COLLECTION; RECYCLING:
The village, from time to time, may enter into a contract for the implementation of a program of garbage collection, landscape waste collection, and a
curbside recycling program. The village president is authorized to negotiate such contract on behalf of the village, subject to approval by the board of
trustees. (Ord. 2004-06-297, 6-21-2004)
ARTICLE B. COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE HAULING AND RECYCLING PROGRAM
4-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
CONTRACT FOR SERVICE: Means a written or verbal contract between a hauler and non-residential location, and includes the hauler providing a
collection container and service for collection of Municipal waste and/or recyclable materials.
COUNTY: Means Lake County, Illinois.
HAULER: Means any person who engages in the business of collecting or hauling garbage, Municipal waste, recyclable material, landscape waste, brush
or other refuse on a continuous and regular basis, and makes multiple scheduled collections per month within a county. A hauler may be either licensed by
a municipality and is hereinafter referred to as a "licensed hauler" or registered by a municipality in accordance with subsection 4-3B-3B of this article and
is hereinafter referred to as a "registered hauler".
MUNICIPALITY: Means the Village of Lake Zurich.
NON-RESIDENTIAL LOCATION: Means a commercial, industrial or institutional property that has a hauler providing collection or hauling services for
Municipal waste or recyclable material (not including "special waste" as that term is defined in the Illinois Environmental Protection Act), and said hauler
provides that individual property with its own container(s) for collecting Municipal waste and/or recyclable material.
PARTICIPATION RATE: Means the percentage of non-residential locations that have a hauler contracting for separate collection of recyclable materials,
and is computed by setting as the denominator the total number of non-residential locations served by the haulers in the Municipality with collection
services for Municipal waste as reported by the haulers, and setting as the numerator the total number of non-residential locations contracting with the
haulers in the Municipality with collection services for recyclable material. Such separate collection of recyclable materials shall be on a periodic basis and
if less frequent than once every four (4) weeks shall be reported on the Municipal form provided pursuant to subsection 4-3B-3C2 of this article. For
purposes of computing the participation rate, if non-residential locations opt to share a container for collecting recyclable material the sharing of a
container must be documented as being acceptable to those non-residential locations and as having adequate capacity to meet the recycling needs of the
non-residential locations sharing the container. Such sharing of recyclable material containers shall be reported as recyclable material customers on the
Municipal form provided pursuant to subsection 4-3B-3C2 of this article. If a non-residential location does not contract with a hauler for collection services
for recyclable material, but does recycle recyclable material at its location, such recycling activity shall not count toward the participation rate.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Means material that is separated from Municipal waste for the purpose of recycling, including, but not limited to, ferrous metal
cans, aluminum containers, plastics including HDPE and PET containers and plastics #3 through #7, newsprint, corrugated paper, junk mail, magazines,
office paper and boxboard.
RECYCLING: Means a method, technique or process designed to remove any contaminant from waste so as to render that waste reusable, or any
process by which materials that would otherwise be disposed or discarded are collected, separated, or processed and returned to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw materials or products. (Ord. 2018-09-268, 9-4-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-3B-2: OFFER OF COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
A. Each hauler operating in the Municipality shall offer, either as part of basic service, or alternatively as an additional service, the collection of recyclable
materials from any non-residential location within the Municipality. The offer shall meet the following requirements:
1. For those non-residential locations that have collection services for recyclable materials, the hauler shall provide information on how and what
materials to recycle at least once every other year from the effective date of this article. One sample copy of this information shall be provided to the
Municipality, at least once every other year, by each hauler within thirty (30) days of it being provided to the non-residential locations.
2. For those non-residential locations that do not have collection services for recyclable materials, the hauler shall provide a written offer to provide
recycling services at least once every two (2) years from the effective date of this article. The written offer shall also include a request that the nonresidential
location respond to the hauler's request in writing. One sample copy of this written offer shall be provided to the Municipality, at least once
every two (2) years, by each hauler within thirty (30) days of it being provided to the non-residential locations.
B. Recyclable materials collected by a hauler within the Municipality shall not be deposited into a landfill or incinerator unless all reasonable efforts have
been made by the hauler to recycle the material. If source separated recyclable materials are landfilled or incinerated the hauler shall notify the
Municipality on the Municipal form provided pursuant to subsection 4-3B-3C2 of this article.
C. Ownership of recyclable materials set out for collection shall remain with the non-residential location that set out the material for collection until the
material is removed by the hauler. (Ord. 2018-09-268, 9-4-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 128/524
4-3B-3: PROCEDURES TO DETERMINE IF A COMMERCIAL FRANCHISE CAN BE CONSIDERED BY THE MUNICIPALITY:
A. The Municipality shall provide written notice to all licensed haulers providing hauling services in the Municipality of its intent to issue a request for
proposal for a commercial franchise, and such written notice shall include a copy of this article.
B. If the Municipality does not license haulers it shall make its best effort to determine the haulers that provide collection services within its borders,
develop a list of registered haulers, and provide them with written notice as required by this section and to publish a public notice in accordance with its
regular notice requirements. Such written notice shall include a copy of this article.
C. Upon adoption of this article each licensed or registered hauler, for a period of thirty six (36) continuous months, shall report the number of nonresidential
locations served by the hauler in the Municipality for collection of Municipal waste, and the number that contract for recyclable materials
collection service. The specific data required to be reported for the thirty six (36) month period shall be provided and reported as follows:
1. The thirty six (36) month continuous study shall commence on the first day of the month following the effective date of this article being enacted by
the Municipality.
2. Every six (6) months from the commencement date each licensed or registered hauler shall report to the Municipality, on a form to be provided by
the Municipality, the number of non-residential locations served by the licensed or registered hauler for collection of Municipal waste, and the number
of non-residential locations contracting for recyclable materials collection service. Each six (6) month report shall be submitted to the Municipality
within thirty (30) days following the end of each six (6) month period.
3. The Municipality shall post on its website, within fifteen (15) days of receiving the reports required under subsection C2 of this section from all the
licensed or registered haulers, the participation rate as defined in section 4-3B-1 of this article for each six (6) month reporting period. When
determining the participation rate the Municipality shall use the information provided by all haulers operating within the Municipality in accordance
with subsection C2 of this section. The information shall be reported by licensed or registered hauler, without identifying the hauler; and, in aggregate
without naming individual haulers and the non-residential locations the haulers provide collection services to.
4. If the participation rate calculated by the Municipality, in accordance with this article, for the final six (6) month period in the thirty six (36) month
study establishes that the participation rate is less than fifty percent (50%), the Municipality may proceed to issue a request for proposal for a
commercial franchise.
D. Beginning at the conclusion of the thirty six (36) month reporting period, and upon written request of the Municipality, each licensed or registered hauler
shall report to the Municipality for every six (6) month period thereafter for as long as the Municipality chooses to receive such data. The data required
under this section shall be provided and reported as follows:
1. The number of non-residential locations the hauler provides collection services to for Municipal waste.
2. The number of non-residential locations the hauler provides collection services to for recyclable material.
3. An estimate of the amount, in tons, of Municipal waste collected from the non-residential locations serviced by the hauler.
4. An estimate of the amount, in tons, of recyclable material collected from the non-residential locations serviced by the hauler.
5. The Municipality shall post on its website, within fifteen (15) days of receiving the reports required under subsection C of this section from all the
haulers, the participation rate as defined in section 4-3B-1 of this article for each six (6) month reporting period. When determining the participation
rate the Municipality shall use the information provided by all haulers operating within the Municipality. The information shall be reported by hauler,
without identifying the hauler; and, in aggregate without naming individual haulers and the non-residential locations the haulers provide collection
services to.
6. If the participation rate reported to the Municipality is determined to be less than fifty percent (50%) of the non-residential locations for two (2)
consecutive six (6) month reporting periods, the Municipality may proceed to issue a request for proposal for a commercial franchise. (Ord. 2018-09-
268, 9-4-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-3B-4: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
A. A licensed or registered hauler reporting pursuant to Public Act 98-1079 and this article is required to maintain a current list of the non-residential
locations in the Municipality served by the hauler for collection of Municipal waste, and contracting with the hauler for collection services for recyclable
material. This list shall be made available, within ten (10) business days of written notice from the Municipality, for review by Municipal personnel or its
designated person from the Solid Waste Agency of Lake County, Illinois (SWALCO) at the premises of the hauler after each six (6) month reporting
period. Municipal personnel or its designated person from SWALCO shall review this list solely for the purpose of verifying compliance with the
requirements of Public Act 98-1079 and this article. This list must include the street address location of the service, and the Municipality or its
designated person from SWALCO may then visit these locations to determine if recycling services are in fact being provided in accordance with this
article. (Ord. 2018-09-268, 9-4-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-3B-5: PENALTIES:
A. Any licensed hauler who violates the requirements of this article shall be subject to a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code
for each day a violation has been found to be committed. A second such violation by the same licensed hauler of this article shall result in a fine
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each day a violation has been found to have been committed. Any licensed hauler that
violates the requirements of this article a third time may have its license revoked by the Municipality.
B. Any registered hauler who violates the requirements of this article shall be subject to a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code
for each day a violation has been found to be committed. A second such violation by the same registered hauler of this article shall result in a fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 129/524
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each day a violation has been found to have been committed. (Ord. 2018-09-268, 9-4-
2018, eff. 10-1-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Chapter 4
WEEDS1
4-4-1: DEFINITION:
"Weeds" as used in this Chapter shall include the following: burdock, ragweed (giant), ragweed (common), thistle, cockleburr, jimpson, blue vervain,
common milkweed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambsquarter, wild lettuce, curled dock, smart weeds (all varieties), poison
hemlock and wild hemp, and all other weeds of a like kind, and all other plant materials in an untended or uncultivated state. (Ord. 93-12-636, 12-20-93)
4-4-2: WEED CUTTING REQUIRED:
Every owner of real estate within the Village shall cut weeds on his property at all such times as may be necessary so that such weeds shall not exceed
eight inches (8") in height. If the owner neglects or refuses to so cut the weeds, the Director of Public Works shall cause the weeds to be cut on behalf of
the Village. (1989 Code)
4-4-3: WEED CUTTING LIEN:
A. Notice of Lien: If the Director of Public Works causes the weeds to be cut, a notice of lien for the cost and expenses thereof incurred by the Village shall
be recorded as provided in the 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code2, as amended from time to time. The Village or the
person performing the service by authority of the Village in its or his own name may file notice of lien in the office of Recorder of Deeds of Lake County.
The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, 2) the amount of
money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and 3) the date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the
Village, and shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the cost and expense is incurred. Notice of such lien shall be mailed to the owner of the real
estate; provided, that failure to file the notice or to mail the notice, or failure of the owner to receive thenotice, shall not affect the right to foreclose the
lien as provided in subsection C below.
B. Payment of Weed Cutting Cost; Release of Lien: Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by
the Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record in the same manner as filing notice of the lien.
C. Foreclosure of Lien: Real estate subject to a lien for unpaid cutting costs and expenses may be sold for nonpayment of the same (subject to the
statutory rights of bona fide purchasers or prior lienors), and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay such costs and expenses, after
deducting court costs and legal fees, as in the case of the foreclosure of statutory liens. (1989 Code)
Footnote 1: See also subsection 4-2-1M of this Title.
Footnote 2: S.H.A. 65 ILCS.
Chapter 5
DUTCH ELM DISEASED TREES
4-5-1: INSPECTIONS AUTHORIZED:
The officers, agents and employees of the village may enter upon private property whereon there is located any elm tree having the appearance of or
suspected of being diseased with the Dutch elm disease for the purpose of inspecting the suspected tree and removing therefrom samples or portions
thereof to be tested to establish whether the tree is in fact diseased. (1989 Code)
4-5-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
If it is determined by the village that the tree from which samples have been taken is in fact diseased or infected with the Dutch elm disease, the tree shall
be deemed a nuisance. (1989 Code)
4-5-3: REMOVAL AND DESTRUCTION OF DISEASED TREES:
The owner, occupant or agent of the parcel of land on which the diseased elm tree exists shall remove and destroy the elm tree within ten (10) days after
notification to such owner, occupant, or agent by the village that the elm tree situated on said parcel of land is in fact diseased and infected. (1989 Code)
4-5-4: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE; COSTS:
In case the owner, occupant or agent of the parcel of land on which a diseased elm tree is located cannot be found, or if found and notified as aforesaid,
neglects or refuses to abate the nuisance, the village may abate the same by the removal and destruction of the diseased elm tree, and the owner,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 130/524
occupant and agent or any of them, shall be charged with those expenses which may be incurred by the village in the removal of the diseased elm tree,
which expense shall be collected by the village by suit or otherwise. In addition, the owner, occupant or agent shall be subject to the fine or penalty
provided in this chapter. (1989 Code)
4-5-5: ABATEMENT COSTS A LIEN:
The cost of removal and destruction of a diseased elm tree is a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances except tax
liens; provided, that notice has been given as hereinafter described; and further provided, that within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is
incurred, the village or person performing the service by authority of the village, in his own name, files notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of
Lake County. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: a) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, b) the amount
of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and c) the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
village. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property, after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the village, or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. The
cost of such tree removal shall not be a lien upon the real estate affected unless a notice shall be personally served or sent by registered mail to the
person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year on the property, such notice to be delivered or sent not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the removal of the tree or trees located thereon. The notice shall contain the substance of this chapter and identify the property, by
common description, and the tree or trees affected. (1989 Code)
4-5-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall neglect or refuse to remove and destroy a diseased elm tree growing on any
parcel of land of which such person is owner, agent, occupant or person in possession, when ordered so to do, or who shall interfere with the removal and
destruction of such diseased elm tree, shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of this code1. (1989 Code)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT; PEACE OFFICERS
5-1-1: POLICE DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a Police Department of the Village which shall consist of a Chief of Police and such other members as the Board of Trustees may
from time to time prescribe. (1989 Code)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Appointment; Serve As Village Marshal: The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the President by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees. He
shall also be the Village Marshal. (1989 Code)
B. Powers And Duties: The Chief of Police shall have the following powers and duties:
1. The Chief shall be in charge of the Police Department, and all members thereof shall be subject to the Chief's orders.
2. The Chief may make rules for the functioning of the Police Department, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.
3. The Chief may appoint to the position of Deputy Chief of Police one or more officers within the Police Department as may be specifically authorized
from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
4. The Chief shall keep such records and make such reports of the activities of the Police Department as may be required by statute or requested by
the Board of Trustees.
5. The Chief shall be the keeper of the Village Jail and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. (Ord. 99-12-1013, 12-20-1999)
5-1-3: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
Members of the Police Department shall enforce the ordinances of the Village and laws of the State effective in the Village. They shall preserve order,
prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators of the law or ordinances of the Village. (1989 Code)
5-1-4: POLICE PENSION FUND1:
A. Established: A Police Pension Fund is hereby established for the benefit of police, their widows, children and certain other dependents as provided and
required by law. The fund shall be administered by the Board of Trustees.
B. Financing:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 131/524
1. There shall be deposited in the Police Pension Fund the sums required by law which shall include seven percent (7%) per month deducted from the
salary of each member of the police force.
2. The Village Board of Trustees shall levy a tax, the proceeds of which shall also be deposited in the Police Pension Fund, which, when added to the
deductions from the salaries of the policemen and receipts from other sources, will equal a sum sufficient to meet the annual requirements of the
Police Pension Fund and of the reserves required therefor, all as provided by the Statutes of the State2.
C. Collection And Custody Of Proceeds: It is the duty of the Village Treasurer to collect the monies appropriated for this fund. He shall retain the custody of
said monies until it is drawn from him by order of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund. After said monies are invested by the Board of
Trustees, all securities or intangible choses in action purchased by them shall be deposited with the Village Treasurer and left in the Treasurer's
custody subject to the further control and order of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund. (1989 Code)
D. Reports Required: On the second Tuesday in January annually, the Treasurer and all other officials of the Municipality who have custody of any pension
funds as herein provided shall make a sworn statement to the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund and also to the Village President and the
Board of Trustees relating to all monies received and paid out on account of the Pension Fund ending that year. The Police Pension Fund shall operate
on a fiscal year basis beginning January 1 and ending December 31. The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall report to the Village
Board of Trustees annually upon the condition of the Police Pension Fund. Said report shall be made prior to the meeting of the Board of Trustees held
for the levying of taxes for the year for which such report is made. Said report shall be in the manner and form as required by law. (Ord. 2015-5-071, 5-
4-2015)
5-1-5: POLICE RESERVE OFFICERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-02-246, 2-5-2018)
5-1-6: PRIVATE SECURITY GUARDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-02-246, 2-5-2018)
5-1-7: COMPENSATION AND MEDICAL BENEFITS FOR POLICE DEPARTMENT:
A. Compensation For Injury In The Line Of Duty: The Village will provide salary compensation to any full time sworn member of the Police Department or
the Chief of Police who was injured in the line of duty in accordance with the provisions of the Public Employee Disability Act, 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 345/0.01 et seq. (Ord. 96-08-816, 8-5-1996)
B. Assumption Of Liability For Medical Expenses: In case of an accident resulting in an injury to or death of any full time sworn member of the Police
Department or the Chief of Police while in the employ of the Village while in the performance of his duties, the Village Manager may secure and provide
proper medical care and hospital treatment for any such full time sworn member of the Police Department or the Chief of Police, and to that end may
incur expense in connection therewith to be paid from funds budgeted or appropriated therefor by the Village Board or from proceeds of insurance
funds.
C. Investigation Of Facts: It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to make a complete investigation of all facts surrounding any accident resulting in an
injury to or death of any full time sworn member of the Police Department or the Chief of Police in the employ of the Village while in the performance of
his duties, to obtain the statements of all material witnesses and to present a report thereof. Such report shall also show the date and hour of any such
accident, the place of occurrence of same, the names and addresses of witnesses, the apparent nature and extent of the injury and whether the injury
or death was caused under circumstances creating a legal liability for damages on the part of some person other than the Village.
D. Payment Of Expenses: All bills showing the items of expense incurred for any medical care and hospital treatment referred to in subsection B of this
section shall be presented to the Village Manager who shall make a determination as to the reasonableness of the charges made for the services so
rendered and recommend payment to cover the items of expense.
E. Reimbursement By Third Person: If the Village Manager is of the opinion that any accident referred to in this section created a legal liability for damages
on the part of some person other than the Village, it shall be the duty of the Village Manager to demand from such person reimbursement to the Village
for the amount expended by the Village for the medical care and hospital treatment of any such full time sworn member of the Police Department or the
Chief of Police. In default of payment of such amount so expended, the Village Manager may cause proceedings to be filed to recover for the Village
the amount so expended. (Ord. 96-08-816, 8-5-1996; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
Chapter 2
ANIMALS AND ANIMAL CONTROL
5-2-1: CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall keep or raise any of the following animals or fowl within the Village: pigs, cattle, horses, goats, sheep or any other farm animals, or any
chickens, geese, ducks or other domestic fowl. (1989 Code)
5-2-2: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 132/524
No person shall permit any dangerous or vicious animal within his care or custody to be kept at large or to be in any location where any person is
endangered thereby. (1989 Code)
5-2-3: RABIES CONTROL:
A. County Regulations Adopted: The Lake County Board of Health ordinance, article X, rabies control, effective December 1, 1976, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. A copy of such ordinance shall be kept on file in the Office of the Village
Clerk.
B. Joint Agreement With County: The Village shall enter into a joint agreement with the County of Lake as provided in agreement III on file in the Office of
the Village Clerk, and the Village President and Village Clerk are authorized to execute such agreement III on behalf of the Village. (1989 Code)
C. Penalties: The same penalties as provided in the Lake County Board of Health ordinance aforesaid shall apply to any violation of this section, said
penalties being herein restated as follows: Any person violating or aiding in or abetting the violation of any provision of this section, or counterfeiting
any certificate or tag, or making any misrepresentation in regard to any matter prescribed by this section, or resisting, obstructing or impeding the
Health Department or an authorized officer in enforcing this section shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. Each
day a person fails to comply constitutes a separate offense. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
5-2-4: SMALL ANIMAL DEALERS:
No person shall engage in the business of buying, selling or dealing in birds, dogs or other small animals used as household pets or used for domestic
purposes without first having obtained a license. (1989 Code)
5-2-5: KENNELS AND CATTERIES:
A. Licenses Required; Exemptions: No person shall engage in the business of operating a dog kennel or a cattery without first having obtained a license
therefor.
In case the business of buying, selling or dealing in birds, dogs and other small animals used as household pets or for domestic purposes is conducted
or carried on in connection with the business of a dog kennel or a cattery in the same premises, and by the same person, then only one license need
be obtained, and that license shall be that which requires the payment of the highest license fee under either of the two (2) license provisions of this
Code.
Any person licensed to operate a kennel shall be exempt from the payment of the dog registry fee for each and every dog which is kept in any licensed
kennel. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 2009-06-621, 6-15-2009)
5-2-6: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ANIMAL: Any live vertebrate creature except man.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER/WARDEN: Any employee of the village designated by the chief of police to exercise police powers in the enforcement of
this chapter. This includes: sworn police officers, community service officers, and marine officers.
AUTHORIZED PERSON: Any member of the police department, animal control officer/warden or any person under their supervision.
BITE: Seizure of a person with the jaws or teeth of any cat, dog or other animal capable of transmitting rabies so that the person so seized has been
wounded or pierced and further includes contact of the saliva of such cat, dog or other animal with any break or abrasion of the skin.
CAT: All members of the feline family.
CATTERY: Any establishment or premises wherein or whereon cats are kept for the purpose of breeding, boarding, sale or exchange or sporting.
CONTROL: Any owned animal that is secured by one or more of the following:
A. A leash or lead no longer than six feet (6') in length.
B. An electrical or mechanical device designed to keep an animal confined to the owner's property.
C. A fence, cage, crate or enclosure.
D. A vehicle.
DISEASED ANIMAL: Any animal affected with a disease contagious or infectious to both humans and animals.
DOG: All members of the canine family.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 133/524
ENCLOSURE: Any fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
to confine a dog or other animal, designed with secure sides, top and bottom adequate to prevent escape.
IMPOUNDMENT: The removal and taking into custody of animals pursuant to this chapter.
KENNEL: Any establishment or premises where more than four (4) dogs or four (4) cats or any combination thereof, over four (4) months of age are
boarded or kept for any purpose whatsoever, or on which more than two (2) such animals are boarded for compensation or kept for sale, with the
exception of regularly established veterinary hospitals, pet shops, pounds or shelters.
LEASH: Any restraint, cord, thong or chain not more than six feet (6') in length, designed for the purpose of keeping the animal under control. The leash
must securely fasten to the collar or harness of the animal and must be of sufficient strength to restrain the animal.
POUND: Any facility licensed by the Illinois department of agriculture and approved by the chief of police for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and
used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals.
SHELTER: Any establishment where dogs, cats or other animals are received, housed and distributed with or without charge.
STRAY ANIMAL: Any animal running at large in the public way or on private property other than that of the owner or keeper of such animal.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: A. Any individual animal that, when unprovoked, inflicts bites and attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private
property.
B. Any individual animal with a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise do any act that might
endanger the safety of human beings, domestic animals or any property of another, including, but not limited to, a disposition to mischief or
fierceness which might lead to attack to the foregoing.
C. Any individual animal which attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation, whether in play, anger or outbreak of untrained nature.
D. No animal shall be deemed vicious if it bites, attacks or menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner, or harms or menaces anyone who has
tormented or abused it, or is a professionally trained animal for law enforcement or guard duties.
VILLAGE: Village of Lake Zurich, Lake County, Illinois. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 2009-06-621, 6-15-2009)
5-2-7: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
It shall be unlawful to:
A. Inhumanely beat, underfeed, overload or abandon any animal.
B. Fail to provide any animal with proper shelter, protection from weather or veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering.
C. Keep animals in violation of the "Illinois humane care for animals act1" or the "Illinois animal welfare act2".
D. Intentionally strike Canadian geese or other wildlife with a motor vehicle. Geese and other wildlife shall have the right of way when crossing streets
within the village. Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes an animal, shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be
possible, or shall immediately report such injury to the animal owner, if known; or to the appropriate law enforcement agency; or to the local humane
society.
E. Torment, shoot at with slingshots, BB or pellet type guns or other firearms, pelt with rocks or otherwise disturb any animals.
F. Poison or cause to be poisoned any domesticated animal. The only exception will be by written permit from the Illinois department of agriculture for the
purpose of controlling diseases transmissible to humans or other animals and only when all other methods and means have been exhausted. Any
drugs used for euthanasia shall be by or under the direction of a licensed veterinarian.
G. Leave any animal unattended in a motor vehicle or enclosed trailer when the outside temperature exceeds eighty six degrees Fahrenheit (86°F) (30°C)
or contain any animal in such manner that said animal does not have proper air circulation while confined in a motor vehicle, trailer, kennel, doghouse,
or any type of container or structure in which an animal may be confined.
H. Own any animal which is known to be infected with any disease transmissible to other animals or man, including severe parasitism, unless such animal
shall be confined in such a manner as not to expose other animals or man. (Ord. 2009-06-621, 6-15-2009)
5-2-8: CONTROL OF ANIMALS:
A. Unlawful: It shall be unlawful:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 134/524
1. Consent Required: For the owner or any person who has in his custody or control, any dog, cat, or other animal to enter upon the premises of
another within the village without the consent of the owners.
2. Public Body Of Water: To permit any animal, whether licensed or not, to enter any public body of water, pond, fountain or stream.
3. Food Establishment: To permit any animal to enter any place where food is stored, prepared, served or sold to the public, or any public building or
hall; provided however, that this section shall not apply to any visually impaired or hearing impaired person using a trained guide dog, to veterinary
offices or hospitals, or to animal shows or exhibitions.
4. At Large/Trespass: To permit any animal to run uncontrolled or trespass on private or public property.
5. Damage: To permit any animal to damage or destroy any property.
6. Vehicles: To permit any dog to chase, run after or jump at vehicles using the public thoroughfares.
7. Threatening Animal: To permit any dog to habitually snap, growl, snarl, jump upon or otherwise threaten persons lawfully using any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where people congregate or walk.
8. Disturbance Of The Peace: To permit any dog or other animal to howl, yelp, whine, or bark or make noise in such a manner as to disturb any person
or neighborhood at any time of the day or night.
9. Unsanitary Conditions: To allow any places where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unsanitary or become offensive to those
residing in the vicinity.
10. Number Of Dogs Or Cats: To keep on a residentially zoned premises more than three (3) dogs and/or three (3) cats over four (4) months of age,
with the exception of regularly established and zoned veterinary hospitals, pet shops, pounds or shelters. (Reference: Lake County board of health,
ordinance X, animal/rabies control, section 2910.1 and 2910.2.)
11. Excrement Removal:
a. Device For Removal, Depository: For any person to cause or permit a dog to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by
such person unless such person has in his immediate possession a device for the removal of excrement and a depository for the transmission of
excrement to a receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such person.
b. Removal Required: For any person in control of, causing or permitting any dog to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by
such person to fail to remove excrement left by such dog to a proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person.
12. Bites: To fail to report an animal bite.
13. Animals Other Than Domestic Pets: To keep, harbor or maintain any animal which may endanger the safety of persons or property. This includes
animals other than commonly recognized domestic pets which may harm or injure humans or other animals by injection of toxins, by constriction or
suffocation, or by vicious biting, scratching or mauling. It is no defense to a violation of this subsection that the keeper of such animal prohibited
herein has attempted to domesticate such animal. Exceptions to this subsection are animals displayed or harbored in a zoo, carnival or circus.
14. Public Street Or Highway: To permit any dog, cat or other animal upon a public street or highway, or upon any premises other than that of the
person owning such dog, cat or other animal unless such dog, cat or other animal is on a leash securely fastened to a collar or harness. The overall
length of the leash including the handle shall not exceed six feet (6') and be held by its owner or other person able to control such dog, cat or other
animal and, while lawfully on the premises of the owner, shall not be allowed to come in contact with any person who is not a member of the
immediate household.
B. Exemptions: Guide dogs for visually impaired or hearing impaired persons, support dogs for persons with physical disabilities and sentry, guard, or
police owned dogs are exempt from this section, provided an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To
qualify for exemption under this subsection, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies. It shall be the duty of the owner of such
exempted dog to notify the police department of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the police department
advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. (Ord. 2009-06-621, 6-15-2009)
5-2-9: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION:
A. Nuisance Animals; Impoundment Authorized: Any dog or other animal doing any of the acts prohibited in section 5-2-8 of this chapter is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and such animal may be seized and impounded as provided herein.
B. Notice To Owner; Impoundment Period; Disposition Of Animals: After such animal is impounded, the Police Department, animal warden or authorized
representative shall ascertain whether the animal is licensed and, if so, shall, within a reasonable time, notify the person to whom the license was
issued that said animal has been impounded and may be redeemed. Impounded animals will be transferred to the Lake County Department of Public
Health the next business day. The owner of such a transferred animal will be responsible for all fees charged by the Lake County Department of Public
Health.
C. Redemption Of Impounded Animal: Any dog or other animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this section may be redeemed upon payment of
the required redemption fee, fines, license and vaccination fees as provided herein. The animal shall be returned to the owner, provided he shall:
1. Show satisfactory proof of ownership.
2. Agree to pay any fines or penalties imposed for violation of this chapter.
3. Agree to pay the cost of keeping the animal while impounded by the Village at its pound. (Ord. 2009-06-621, 6-15-2009)
a. The fee for each day an animal is housed/transported by the Lake Zurich Police Department shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee
Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2009-06-621, 6-15-2009; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 135/524
4. Secure an animal license or rabies vaccination, if applicable and due.
D. Liability For Fines And Costs: If ownership of the animal is established and the owner refuses to redeem the same, he shall remain obligated to pay all
fines and impoundment expenses. (Ord. 2009-06-621, 6-15-2009)
5-2-10: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of section 5-2-7 or 5-2-8 of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of
this Code for each offense.
B. Payments To Avoid Prosecution: For violations of section 5-2-7 or 5-2-8 of this chapter, any person that receives a citation for a violation of the
aforementioned sections of this chapter may avoid prosecution by paying a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord.
2009-06-621, 6-15-2009; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Chapter 3
GENERAL OFFENSES
5-3-1: DANGEROUS WEAPONS PROHIBITED ON OR WITHIN PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection A:
DANGEROUS WEAPONS: 1. A rifle, pistol, or any other type of gun, firearm, or device from which a projectile may be fired by means of an
explosive,
2. Any simulated firearm operated by gas or compressed air,
3. Metal knuckles or similar devices,
4. Any knife that has a spring blade, or that opens or is ejected by an outward or downward thrust or movement, or that has a blade in excess of
three inches (3") in length (excluding kitchen cutlery), and
5. Any instrument that can be used as a club or similar type of weapon and that poses a reasonable risk of injury.
VILLAGE OWNED PROPERTY OR FACILITY: Any real property or structure owned by the village, including, without limitation, any building owned,
leased, or operated by the village regardless of the occupancy of that building; any park; any park or accessory building; and any storage facility.
B. Possession Of Dangerous Weapons Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to wear, carry, transport, store, or in any other way possess a dangerous
weapon while on or within any village owned property or facility.
C. Exceptions: The prohibition stated in subsection B of this section does not apply to: 1) any law enforcement official, public safety officer, or security
personnel engaged in his or her official duties, or 2) any properly authorized person engaged in military activities pursuant to authorization by the
federal government or the state of Illinois while engaged in his or her official duties, or 3) possession of a legal and properly permitted firearm in a
single-family residence owned by the village and leased as a single-family residence.
D. Signs: The police department will cause signs to be posted in appropriate locations on village owned property and within village owned facilities as
notice of the prohibition against dangerous weapons provided in this section. (Ord. 2008-12-592, 12-1-2008)
Chapter 4
SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS
5-4-1: PURPOSES:
The purposes of this Chapter are to provide regulations that logically, efficiently and properly regulate the installation and use of security alarm systems,
and to reduce the number of unnecessary responses by the Lake Zurich Police Department to such alarm systems, and to provide for the imposition of
fees to be charged to that portion of the village residential and business population that maintains such alarm systems. The inherent difficulties and
malfunctions associated with mechanically or electronically activated alarm systems result in unnecessary or false alarm activation and consequently
require unnecessary responses by the Police Department. Such unnecessary responses severely impact and endanger the safety and welfare of the
residents of the Village. In addition to the significant cost involved in responding to such alarm system activations and the concurrent loss of manpower
and ineffective utilization of equipment, such alarm systems require emergency responses which may contribute to a high accident rate.
A system of graduated fees for Police Department responses to alarm systems serves the dual purpose of encouraging the cessation of non-bona fide
alarms and of charging the cost of the use of such alarm systems to that portion of the population wishing to use them. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-94)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 136/524
The following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ALARM OCCURRENCE: The activation of an alarm system, for any reason whatsoever, which notifies the Lake Zurich Police Department to respond to
the premises at which the alarm system is maintained.
ALARM SERVICE PROVIDER: That person or organization supplying alarm services to the Village as determined from time to time by the Board of
Trustees.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any single device or assemblage of mechanical or electrical equipment or devices arranged to signal the presence of or the occurrence
of an unauthorized intrusion or any other activity requiring the urgent and immediate attention of the Lake Zurich Police Department. The term "alarm
system" shall include elevator trouble systems or similar communications systems, automatic holdup alarm systems, burglar alarm systems, holdup alarm
systems, direct dial systems, on-premises alarm systems, and on-site ringers. The following alarm systems, however, are specifically excluded from the
provisions of this Chapter: alarm systems owned or operated by the Village, fire alarm systems, medical emergency alarm systems, motor vehicle alarm
systems, alarm systems arranged to signal police departments other than the Lake Zurich Police Department, and alarm systems that monitor
temperature, humidity or any other condition not directly related to either the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted
robbery or burglary at a premises.
ALARM USER: The person, family, household, firm, entity, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or state, or subdivision thereof
other than the Village, in possession or control of any building, structure, facility or property in the Village where an alarm system is currently being
maintained or is hereinafter maintained.
DELAY MECHANISM: An electrical or mechanical feature of an alarm system that: a) provides a time delay between activation of the alarm system and
the annunciation of an audible alarm or the transmitting of a message or signal to the Lake Zurich Police Department; and b) allows for deactivation of the
alarm system prior to the annunciation of an audible alarm or the transmitting of a message or signal to the Lake Zurich Police Department or to an alarm
service or central station alarm.
DIRECT CONNECTION ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system that, when activated, notifies the Lake Zurich Police Department to respond to the premises
at which the alarm system is maintained by means of a direct connection to an alarm monitoring panel maintained by the Village.
DIRECT DIALER: An alarm system that utilizes a telephone device or attachment to automatically select a telephone trunk line at the Lake Zurich Police
Department or at an alarm service or central station alarm and then reproduces a prerecorded message to report an alarm occurrence.
ON-SITE RINGER: A feature of an alarm system that, when activated, causes an audible and/or visual device to activate in, on, or near the premises
within which the alarm system is maintained.
SERVICE CHARGE: The amount of money determined by the Board of Trustees to be reasonable compensation for the services provided by the Village
in responding to alarm occurrences. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-94)
5-4-3: ALARM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall install or maintain in the Village any alarm system that does not meet the following standards:
A. Delay Mechanism Required: All alarm systems must be equipped with a delay mechanism that allows at least a thirty (30) second delay before
activation of the alarm with respect to ingress and egress of doorways.
B. Reset Mechanism Required: All alarm systems must be equipped with a mechanism that deactivates the alarm and resets the system within ten (10)
minutes after the initial activation of the system.
C. Direct Dialer to Lake Zurich Police Department Prohibited: No alarm system shall include a direct dialer or other device that automatically selects a
telephone trunk line at the Lake Zurich Police Department.
D. On-Site Ringers Limited: No alarm system shall include an on-site ringer unless 1) any audible sound emitting from such on-site ringer is not similar to
emergency vehicles of the Village or any other audible Village alert system; and 2) the on-site ringer is not designed to be audible outside of the
structure in which the alarm system is located; and 3) the alarm system is equipped with an automatic cut-off mechanism that deactivates the on-site
ringer within ten (10) minutes after the initial alarm.
E. Back-Up Power Required: Every alarm system shall be equipped with a battery pack back-up power supply or other alternative source of back-up
power capable of sustaining the operation of the alarm system for a minimum of six (6) hours.
F. Maintenance: Every alarm system shall be properly maintained at all times by the alarm user.
G. Nonresident Direct Connection Alarm Systems Prohibited: No direct connection alarm system shall be maintained or operated in any structure outside
of the Village's corporate limits. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-94)
5-4-4: APPROVAL OF DIRECT CONNECTION ALARM SYSTEMS:
No person shall allow or cause a direct connection alarm system to be installed or maintained except after the approval of such system by the Lake Zurich
Chief of Police. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-94)
5-4-5: ALARM USER INFORMATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 137/524
Every alarm user, promptly after a request therefor by the Village, shall provide accurate and up-to-date information on forms provided by the Village,
including without limitation: the name, address, and telephone number of the alarm user; the address and telephone number of the property where the
alarm system is located; and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of at least two (2) persons who are regularly available and who have direct
means of access to the property and building at which the alarm system is located. Such information, if requested, shall be provided prior to any
authorization by the Chief of Police pursuant to section 5-4-4 of this chapter and shall be revised from time-to-time by the alarm user as necessary to keep
such information fully up to date. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-4-6: ACCESS AND INDEMNIFICATION:
By installing and maintaining an alarm system, every alarm user authorizes the Lake Zurich Police Department to enter on and into every property and
structure serviced by an alarm system in the event of an activation of an alarm. Every alarm user shall indemnify and hold harmless the Village for all
claims, demands, judgments, liability, costs, damages and expenses, including attorneys' fees, that may arise from or out of or in any way relate to any
alarm connection, alarm occurrence, or any response thereto. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-4-7: REQUIRED ALARM USER RESPONSE:
Each alarm user shall respond to and reset, or cause someone with access to the property to respond to and reset, that alarm user's alarm system,
immediately at the request of Lake Zurich Police Department. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-4-8: CONNECTION AND MAINTENANCE FEE:
In addition to every other fee provided by law, every alarm user shall pay an annual fee established from time to time by the Board of Trustees. Such fee
shall be set at a rate necessary to reimburse the Village for all of its costs for an alarm service provider and other administrative, maintenance and
operations costs as determined by the Board of Trustees. Such fee shall be collected by the Village or by the Village's alarm services provider, as
determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-4-9: SERVICE CHARGES:
A. Basic Occurrence Charges: More than three (3) alarm occurrences in a calendar year from an alarm system shall result in the imposition of service
charges pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code that shall be paid by the alarm user.
B. Nonresident Charge: Any owner of property outside of the Village corporate limits to whose property the Lake Zurich Police Department responds as a
result of the activation of a security alarm shall pay to the Village a fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for such response,
unless the Lake Zurich Police Department responds as a result of a request of another law enforcement agency. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994; amd.
Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
C. Notification Of Charges: The Police Department shall notify the alarm user in writing of each alarm occurrence. After the third alarm occurrence in a
calendar year, the Police Department shall notify the alarm user of the fact that additional alarm occurrences will result in the imposition of service
charges in accordance with this section. After additional alarm occurrences, the Village shall invoice the alarm user for the service charges which have
been imposed.
D. Payment Of Service Charges: All service charges shall be paid by the alarm user within thirty (30) days after receipt of the invoice tendered pursuant to
subsection C of this section. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-4-10: WAIVER OF SERVICE CHARGE/NULLIFICATION OF ALARM OCCURRENCE:
A. Authority: The Chief of Police shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to waive any service charge and to nullify the existence of any alarm
occurrence; provided, however, that every such waiver or nullification shall be made only after a finding, based on evidence and testimony presented
by the alarm user, that one or more of the following circumstances exist:
1. Actual Emergency: Evidence of an actual intrusion, of an obvious intrusion attempt, or of a fire or medical emergency.
2. Power Outage: Evidence of power utility outage conditions lasting eight (8) hours or longer and affecting a general neighborhood area.
3. Act Of Nature Or God: Evidence of a tornado, earthquake or other violent and extreme condition of nature or act of God, excluding thunder, snow,
ice and electrical storms.
4. Malicious Act: Evidence of a malicious act of someone not the alarm user or his or her agent, employee, servant or other person within the direction,
control or responsibility of the alarm user.
5. Thirty Day Grace Period: Alarm occurrences during the thirty (30) day period immediately after installation of an alarm system.
B. Request; Decision: Requests in writing for a waiver or nullification may be made by any alarm user to the Chief of Police. Within fourteen (14) days after
receipt of such a written request, the Chief of Police shall review the alarm user's request in accordance with this section and shall issue a decision.
(Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 138/524
C. Appeal: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of such decision, the alarm user may appeal the Chief of Police's decision to the Village Manager, whose
determination in accordance with this section shall be final. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
5-4-11: REVOCATION OF DIRECT CONNECTION AUTHORIZATION:
A. Authority To Revoke: The Chief of Police shall have the authority, in the reasonable exercise of his or her discretion, to revoke authorization for a direct
connection alarm system for either of the following grounds:
1. Failure To Pay Service Charge: The failure to pay any service charge imposed pursuant to and in the manner described in section 5-4-9 of this
chapter (and which payment has not been waived pursuant to section 5-4-10 of this chapter).
2. Multiple Alarm Occurrences: Ten (10) or more alarm occurrences for one alarm system in one calendar year (none of which having been nullified
pursuant to section 5-4-10 of this chapter), regardless of whether the service charge for any of said alarm occurrences has been paid.
B. Notice And Hearing Prior To Revocation:
1. Notice Of Revocation: The Chief of Police, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the revocation of a direct connection alarm system authorization, shall
notify the alarm user in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by direct police service, of the grounds for revocation and of the Village's
intent to revoke.
2. Request For Hearing: Within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, the alarm user may submit a written request to the Chief of Police for a
hearing before the Chief of Police, setting forth the reasons the authorization should not be revoked. The submission of such request shall suspend
the revocation of the authorization.
3. Revocation If No Request: If the alarm user fails to so submit a request for hearing within the stated time period, then the Chief of Police shall issue
a written statement of revocation, which written statement shall include an explanation of the consequences of revocation. Said written statement
shall be sent to the alarm user by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by direct police service. Revocation shall be effective immediately after
receipt by the alarm user of said written statement.
4. Notice Of Hearing: If a request for a hearing is submitted within the stated time period, then written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be served on the alarm user by the Chief of Police by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
5. Hearing; Decision: At said hearing, the alarm user, or his or her authorized representative, shall have the right to confront and examine witnesses
and to present evidence on his or her own behalf. After the hearing, the Chief of Police either may support revocation or may cancel the notice of
revocation. If the Chief of Police supports revocation, then he or she shall notify the alarm user in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
by direct police service explaining the consequences of revocation. Revocation shall be effective immediately after receipt by the alarm user of said
written notice. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-4-12: ALARM SERVICE PROVIDER:
The Chief of Police, after approval by the Board of Trustees, may contract with an alarm service provider to provide all such alarm services as the Chief of
Police and the Board of Trustees may determine are necessary from time to time. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-4-13: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each
offense. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any penalty provided pursuant to this section shall be in
addition to any other service charge, fee, assessment, or penalty provided in this chapter. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Chapter 5
FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
DIRECT DIALER: A fire alarm system that utilizes a telephone device or attachment to automatically select a telephone trunk line at the Lake Zurich
Fire/Rescue Department or at an alarm service or central station alarm and then reproduces a prerecorded message to report an alarm.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of a fire alarm system by one or more of the following causes when no fire or other emergency circumstance exists:
A. Mechanical failure of any element of the fire alarm system;
B. Malfunction of any element of the fire alarm system;
C. Improper installation, maintenance, repair or operation of the fire alarm system; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 139/524
D. Any other cause, except as provided herein.
This definition shall not include activation of a fire alarm system by natural causes such as tornadoes, severe wind storms, earthquakes and the like,
and also shall not include the malicious act of any person not the fire alarm user or any agent, employee, servant or other person within the direction,
control or responsibility of the fire alarm user.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: Any assemblage of mechanical or electrical equipment or devices (or any single device) arranged to signal the existence, or
supposed existence, of a fire or other emergency requiring the response of the Lake Zurich Fire/Rescue Department.
FIRE ALARM USER: The person, family, household, firm, entity, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or state, or subdivision
thereof other than the Village, in possession or control of any building, structure, facility or property in the Village where a fire alarm system is currently
being maintained or is hereinafter maintained.
FIRE ALARM USER PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village for the privilege and ability to operate a fire alarm system within the Village. No person, entity,
or fire alarm user shall be issued a fire alarm user permit unless a) an application thereof is completed and submitted in a form satisfactory to the Fire
Chief, b) the applicable fire alarm user permit fee is paid, and c) the fire alarm system complies with the fire alarm system requirements set forth in this
Chapter. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-94)
5-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall install, maintain or operate a fire alarm system within the Village without first obtaining a valid and
effective fire alarm user permit. The installation, maintenance, and operation of a fire alarm system at any time without a fire alarm user permit shall
constitute an offense punishable as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-5-3: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Every application for a fire alarm user permit shall be filed with the Fire Chief on a form approved by the Village. Every such application shall include,
among other things, plans and specifications for the fire alarm system sufficient for the Fire Chief to review all elements of such system. Every such
application also shall include, among other things, the written certification of the fire alarm user that the fire alarm user will properly maintain, or will cause
to be properly maintained, the fire alarm system at all times. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-5-4: POSTING REQUIREMENT:
Each fire alarm user shall post and maintain, or cause to be posted and maintained, a notice in a form acceptable to the Fire Chief including the name,
address, and telephone number of a person responsible for the maintenance and repair of the fire alarm system. Such notice shall be posted at or
adjacent to the location where the fire alarm system can be deactivated. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-5-5: DIRECT DIALERS PROHIBITED:
No fire alarm system shall include a direct dialer or other device that automatically selects a telephone trunk line at the Lake Zurich Fire/Rescue
Department; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit direct dialers otherwise authorized by the Village Manager. (Ord.
94-04-659, 4-18-1994; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
5-5-6: ACCESS AND INDEMNIFICATION:
By installing and maintaining a fire alarm system, every fire alarm user authorizes the Lake Zurich Fire/Rescue Department to enter on and into every
property and structure serviced by a fire alarm system in the event of an activation of an alarm. Every fire alarm user shall indemnify and hold harmless the
Village for all claims, demands, judgments, liability, costs, damages, and expenses, including attorney fees, that may arise from or out of or in any way
relate to any alarm connection, any alarm activation, or any response thereto. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-5-7: FALSE ALARMS PROHIBITED:
No person shall transmit or cause to be transmitted any false alarm when such person knows at the time of such transmission that there is no fire or other
emergency or when such person has no reasonable grounds at the time of such transmission to believe that there is a fire or other emergency. (Ord. 94-
04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-5-8: FALSE ALARM RESPONSE CHARGES:
A. False Alarm Service Charges: More than three (3) false alarms in a calendar year from a fire alarm system shall result in the imposition of the service
charges pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code that shall be paid by the fire alarm user. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994; amd. Ord.
2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
B. Notification Of Charges: After the Lake Zurich Fire/Rescue Department has recorded three (3) false alarms within a calendar year from any fire alarm
system, it shall notify the fire alarm user in writing, by first class mail or by direct service, of such fact and of the fact that additional false alarms will
result in the imposition of response charges in accordance with this section. After additional false alarms, the Village shall invoice the fire alarm user for
the response charges which have been imposed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 140/524
C. Payment Of Response Charges: All response charges shall be paid by the fire alarm user within thirty (30) days after receipt of the invoice tendered
pursuant to subsection B of this section. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994)
5-5-9: WAIVER OF RESPONSE CHARGE:
A. Authority: The Fire Chief shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to waive any response charge; provided, however, that every such waiver shall
be made only after a finding, based on evidence and testimony presented by the fire alarm user, that one or more of the following circumstances exist:
1. Actual Emergency: Evidence of an actual fire or other emergency.
2. Power Outage: Evidence of power utility outage conditions lasting eight (8) hours or longer and affecting a general neighborhood area.
3. Act Of Nature Or God: Evidence of a tornado, earthquake or other violent and extreme condition of nature or act of God.
4. Malicious Act: Evidence of a malicious act of someone not the fire alarm user or his or her agent, employee, servant, or other person within the
direction, control or responsibility of the fire alarm user.
5. Thirty Day Grace Period: A false alarm occurred during the thirty (30) day period immediately after installation of an alarm system.
B. Request; Decision: Requests in writing for a waiver may be made by any fire alarm user to the Fire Chief. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of such
a written request, the Fire Chief shall review the fire alarm user's request in accordance with this section and shall issue a decision. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-
18-1994)
C. Appeal: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of such decision, the fire alarm user may appeal the Fire Chief's decision to the Village Manager, whose
determination in accordance with this section shall be final. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
5-5-10: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each
offense. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any penalty provided pursuant to this section shall be in
addition to any other service charge, fee, assessment, or penalty provided in this chapter. (Ord. 94-04-659, 4-18-1994; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Title 6
TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE A. ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
6-1A-1: ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE:
The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, shall be, and it is hereby incorporated
into this Code and adopted by reference, three (3) copies of said Vehicle Code having been on file in the Office of the Village Clerk and available for public
examination, inspection, and use for not fewer than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this title, as provided in section 1-3-2 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3-2. (Ord. 2017-6-202, 6-19-2017)
6-1A-2: CITATIONS:
In lieu of, or addition to, reference to any section of this title or any other Village Code, ordinance, or regulation, any officer of the Village issuing a citation
may issue it pursuant to any section of the Illinois Vehicle Code. All such citations shall be issued in the name of the Village and shall refer to the
numbered sections in the Illinois Vehicle Code and shall also state that the citation is a violation of a Village Code, ordinance, or regulation. (Ord. 2017-6-
202, 6-19-2017)
6-1A-3: PENALTIES:
The penalty provisions of this title, when provided, and not those of the Illinois Vehicle Code, shall apply to all citations issued hereunder. (Ord. 2017-6-
202, 6-19-2017)
6-1A-4: REGULATION OF PARKING AND TRAFFIC ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Parking: Section 11-209 of the Illinois Vehicle Code1, authorizes municipalities to enter into agreements with school boards, hospitals, churches, and
owners of any shopping center or apartment complex which controls a parking area located within the limits of the municipality to regulate the parking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 141/524
of automobiles and the traffic at such parking areas.
The following property owners, associations, or boards have filed such written requests with the Village of Lake Zurich:
Name Addresses Enforced
Concord Village Condo Association Parking areas
Deerpath Commons 935 - 987 S. Rand Rd.
Deerpath Commons Outlots 917 - 927 and 997 - 1015 S. Rand Rd.
Deerpath Court Retail Center 696 - 888 S. Rand Rd.
Deerpath Plaza 884 S. Rand Rd.
Deerpath Plaza 890 S. Rand Rd.
Foglia YMCA 1025 Old McHenry Rd.
Lakeview Plaza 41 - 193 S. Rand Rd.
Office Park Phase 1 715 - 755 Ela Rd.
Office Park Phase 2 765 - 795 Ela Rd.
St. Peters Church 47 Church Street
School District 95 School properties in Lake Zurich
Schweda Properties 58 - 66 N. Old Rand Rd.
The Landings 25 N. Buesching Road
US Realty 87 - 225 S. Rand Rd.
Village Square Outlot 525 - 531 S. Rand Rd.
Village Square Shopping Center 459 - 513 S. Rand Rd. and 719 - 801 W. Rt. 22
B. Traffic: Section 11-209.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code2, authorizes municipalities to enforce provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code on all private streets or
roads open to or used by the tenants, owners, employees or the public for the purposes of vehicular traffic by permission of such person or board of
directors and not as a matter of public right, in response to a written request made by any person or board of directors owning, operating, or
representing a residential subdivision, development, apartment house or apartment project containing a minimum of ten (10) apartments or single
family residences located within the limits of the Municipality.
The following associations, boards, or authorized persons have filed such written requests with the Village of Lake Zurich:
Meadow Wood of Lake Zurich. (Ord. 2017-6-202, 6-19-2017)
ARTICLE B. DEFINITIONS; PENALTY
6-1B-1: TERMS DEFINED:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE: Any motorized off highway device fifty inches (50") or less in width, having a manufacturer's dry weight of nine hundred (900)
pounds or less, traveling on three (3) or more low pressure tires, designed with a seat or saddle for operator use, and handlebars or steering wheel for
steering control.
ALLEY: A public way within a block generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: A motor vehicle that is more than twenty five (25) years of age or a bona fide replica thereof and which is driven on the highways
only going to and returning from an antique auto show or an exhibition, or for servicing or demonstration, or a firefighting vehicle more than twenty (20)
years old which is not used as firefighting equipment but is used only for the purpose of exhibition or demonstration.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having one or more wheels, except for scooters and similar devices.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any six hundred feet (600') along the highway there are buildings
in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings that occupy at
least three hundred feet (300') of frontage on one side or three hundred feet (300') collectively on both sides of the highway.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for
hire or not for hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ride sharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational
vehicle not being used commercially.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of
the highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the
sidewalk, with the extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the highway;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 142/524
B. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface placed
in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the department of transportation as authorized in section 11-301 of the Illinois vehicle
code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-301.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, vehicles of the fire department, ambulances, vehicles carrying a federal, state, county, or municipal officer or
employee in response to an emergency call, the emergency vehicles of public service corporations on an emergency call, and vehicles of the Illinois
emergency management agency and the department of nuclear safety.
EXPLOSIVE: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and that
contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.
FARM TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines and other
implements of husbandry, and every implement of husbandry that is self-propelled, excluding all-terrain vehicles and off highway motorcycles as defined in
the Illinois vehicle code.
FIRE LANE: Any street, alley, driveway, or other area designated and posted as a fire lane on private or public property.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Any liquid that has a flash point of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) or less, as determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent closed
cup test device.
GOLF CART: A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance
equipment while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
HOLIDAY: The term holiday shall include the following days only: January 1, the last Monday of May, July 4, the first Monday in September, December 25,
and the day designated and set aside by the president of the United States as a day of thanksgiving.
IMPROVED HIGHWAY: A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam, and crushed stone or gravel.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of roadways
of two (2) highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways joining at
any other angles may come in conflict.
Where a highway includes two (2) roadways forty feet (40') or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
LANED HIGHWAY: A street, the roadway of which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
METAL TIRE: Every tire the surface of which in contact with the roadway is wholly or partly of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle that is self-propelled, and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLE: A motor driven cycle whose speed attainable in one mile is thirty (30) miles per hour or less, that is equipped with a motor
that produces two (2) brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is used, the displacement shall not exceed fifty (50) cubic centimeter
displacement and the power drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears.
PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of
passengers and/or materials.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY: A natural person who, as determined by a licensed physician: a) cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a
brace, cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive device; b) is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that his or
her forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second, when measured by spirometry, is less than one liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than
sixty (60) mm/hg on room air at rest; c) uses portable oxygen; d) has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional limitations are classified
in severity as class III or class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association; e) is severely limited in his or her ability to walk due to an
arthritic, neurological, or orthopedic condition; or f) cannot walk two hundred feet (200') without stopping to rest because of one of the above conditions.
PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots of property abutting thereon.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the village, county, any park district, school district, township, the state of Illinois, or the United States government.
RESCUE VEHICLE: Any publicly or privately owned vehicle that is specifically designed, configured, and equipped for the performance of access and
extrication of persons from hazardous or life endangering situations, as well as for the emergency transportation of persons who are sick, injured,
wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 143/524
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: Any territory not comprising a business district, contiguous to and including a highway, when the property on the highway is in the
main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or more.
RIGHT OF WAY: The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under
such circumstances of direction, speed, and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for the drawing of other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
ROADWAY: That portion of the street designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and that is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL VEHICLE: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious
organization solely for the transportation of its pupils in connection with school activities.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motor power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SHOULDER: That portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for accommodating stopped vehicles or for emergency use.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street between the curb line or roadway and the adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain steered by skis or runners, and supported in part by skis,
belts, or cleats.
SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material that does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right of way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right of way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield
sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this title. Only those streets, or parts of streets, that have been or may be designated as through streets
by the village board of trustees shall be considered as such for the purpose of this title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances whether singly or together while using any highway for the purpose of
travel.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motor power designed for carrying passengers or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that
no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part
of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
URBAN DISTRICT: Any area developed primarily for residential and/or business purposes.
VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and snowmobiles as defined in the snowmobile registration and safety act.
VEHICLE CODE: The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2008-06-570, 6-16-
2008)
6-1B-2: CLASSIFICATION OF VEHICLES:
Every vehicle that is self-propelled and every vehicle that is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails,
except for vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs. For this title, motor vehicles are divided into two (2) divisions:
First division: Those motor vehicles that are designed for the carrying of not more than ten (10) persons.
Second division: Those motor vehicles that are designed for carrying more than ten (10) persons, those motor vehicles designed or used for living
quarters, those motor vehicles that are designed for pulling or carrying freight, cargo, or implements of husbandry, and those motor vehicles of the first
division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second division. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-1B-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-1B-4: MUNICIPAL BOND FEE:
Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be released upon proper bail being furnished as required by law. (Ord. 2016-7-141, 7-
5-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 144/524
6-1B-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this title shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each
offense. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6-1B-6: VALIDITY:
The validity of any section or part of a section of this title herewith adopted shall not invalidate any other section or part of a section or any provisions
thereof. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-1B-7: REPEAL:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-1B-8: DATE WHEN EFFECTIVE:
This title shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as required by law. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
Chapter 2
SIGNALS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
ARTICLE A. SIGNALS AND DEVICES
6-2A-1: DRIVER'S SIGNALS:
No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop, or attempt to turn without first giving a suitable signal in such a manner as to apprise others
who might be affected by his action.
A. No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety, and then only
after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement, or after giving an appropriate signal in
the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by such movement.
B. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during not less than the last two hundred feet (200') traveled by the vehicle before turning.
C. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or signal device, but when a vehicle is so
constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of the vehicle then the signals must be given by a lamp
or device.
D. All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and the signals shall indicate
as follows:
1. Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
2. Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
3. Stop or decrease of speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-2A-2: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. Every person shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the law, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer, or other officer as provided in section 6-3-1 of this title, and subject to the exception granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in section 6-3-3 of this title.
B. It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across private property to avoid an official traffic control device.
C. No provision of this title for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official device is not in the proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a
particular section does not state that the official traffic control devices are required, the section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-2A-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 145/524
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with lighted green arrows, only the
following colors shall be used and such terms and lights and lighted green arrows shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
A. Circular Green (Alone) Or GO:
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at that place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular
traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed otherwise by a pedestrian
signal as provided under chapter 7 of this title.
B. Steady Yellow Or Caution:
1. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be
exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic may not enter the intersection.
2. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as provided in chapter 7 of this title, are thereby
advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and no pedestrian shall start to cross.
C. Steady Red Or Stop Indication:
1. Vehicles facing a steady red signal alone must stop at any clearly marked stop line; or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of an intersection; or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection; and vehicles at a steady red or stop indication shall remain
standing until an indication to proceed is shown, except as provided in subsection C2 of this section.
2. Unless a sign is in place prohibiting a turn on a steady red signal, vehicular traffic facing such a signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make
the turn indicated by the sign after stopping as required in subsection C1 of this section. The vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to
pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
D. Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
E. Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past the signal only with caution. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-2A-4: LANE CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever lane control signals are used in conjunction with official signs, they shall have the following meanings:
A. Downward Pointing Green Arrow: A driver facing this indication is permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal is located. Otherwise, the
driver shall obey all other traffic controls present and follow normal safe driving practices.
B. Red X Symbol: A driver facing this indication shall not drive in the lane over which the signal is located, and this indication shall modify accordingly the
meaning of all other traffic controls present. Otherwise, the driver shall obey all other traffic controls and follow normal safe driving practices.
C. Yellow X (Steady): A driver facing this indication should prepare to vacate the lane over which the signal is located in a safe manner, to avoid, if
possible, occupying that lane when a steady red X is displayed. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-2A-5: DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS, OR ADVERTISING SIGNS:
A. No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway, any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device that purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or that attempts to direct the movement of traffic, nor shall any person
place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any other signs that hide from view or interfere with the movement of traffic or the
effectiveness of any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. Only the federal, state, county, or village governments may authorize signs in
any location properly subject to their respective jurisdictions.
B. No person may place or maintain nor may any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial
advertising.
C. Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is empowered to remove the
same or cause it to be removed without notice. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-2A-6: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNALS:
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad
sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 146/524
6-2A-7: OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN:
A. Whenever a person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing, the person must exercise due care and caution as the existence of a
railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall stop within fifty feet
(50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he or she can do so safely. The foregoing
requirements shall apply when:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train.
2. A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train.
3. A railroad train approaching a highway crossing emits a warning signal and the railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to the crossing, is
an immediate hazard.
4. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
5. A railroad train is approaching so closely that an immediate hazard is created.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is closed or is
being opened or closed.
C. Where the Village, with the approval of the Illinois Department of Transportation, has designated particularly dangerous highway crossings of railroads
and erected stop signs thereat, the driver of any vehicle shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of such
railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.
D. At any railroad grade crossing provided with railroad crossbuck signs, without automatic, electric, or mechanical signal devices, crossing gates, or a
human flagman giving a signal of the approach or passage of a train, the driver of a vehicle shall, in obedience to the railroad crossbuck sign, yield the
right-of-way and slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and shall stop, if required for safety, at a clearly marked stop line, or if no
stop line, within fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. If a driver is involved in a collision at a railroad crossing or interferes with the movement of a train after driving past the railroad crossbuck sign,
the collision or interference is prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
E. A violation of this section shall result in a mandatory fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005;
amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
ARTICLE B. THROUGH AND STOP STREETS
6-2B-1: THROUGH STREETS:
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to constitute through streets:
All state highways within the corporate limits of the village of Lake Zurich
Bristol Trail Road
Buesching Road
Cuba Road
Deerpath Road
Ela Road
Ensell Road
Fairway Road
Golfview Road
Illinois Route 22, also known as Main Street
Illinois Route 63, also known as Church Street
Lions Drive
Miller Road
North and South Old Rand Road
Oakwood Road
Old Mill Grove Road
Pheasant Ridge Road
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 147/524
Ravinia Terrace
Telser Road
U.S. Route 12, also known as Rand Road
Every driver of a vehicle approaching a through street intersection shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; or, if there is no stop line, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of an intersection; or, if there is no crosswalk, then at the point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has a view of
the approaching traffic on the intersecting highway before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control
signal. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-2B-2: STOP STREETS:
A. The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto, and shall
proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so obligated to stop that are within the intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard, unless traffic at the intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the directions of the police officer shall be
complied with.
B. If stop bars are marked on the pavement at a designated pedestrian crosswalk at a stop street, the driver shall stop behind the stop bars before
proceeding through the intersection. Any pedestrian within the crosswalk shall have the right of way. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-2B-3: POSTING OF SIGNS:
All stop signs must be approved by the president and board of trustees. The president and board of trustees may approve stop signs by ordinance,
resolution, or motion. The chief of police, his designee, or any other person designated by the president or board of trustees, may post stop signs on an
emergency basis at any intersection. Notice of the posted stop sign must be provided to the village manager within twenty four (24) hours of its posting. If
the stop sign is not approved by the president and board of trustees within thirty (30) days of its posting, the chief of police shall cause the sign to be
removed. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
ARTICLE C. CLASS II DESIGNATED TRUCK ROUTES
6-2C-1: LOAD LIMITATION:
Vehicles utilizing any street within the village identified as a class II designated truck route pursuant to section 6-2C-2 of this article may be of a weight,
length, and width no greater than allowable under the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2008-10-586, 10-10-2008)
6-2C-2: CLASS II TRUCK ROUTES:
The following streets and parts of streets, and no others, are hereby designated as class II designated truck routes:
Capital Drive
Commerce Drive
Cortland Drive (between West Route 22 and 550 Cortland Drive)
Donata Court
Ensell Road
Enterprise Parkway
Flex Court
Heather Lane
June Terrace (between U.S. Route 12 and 680 South Rand Road)
Main Street (between Church Street/Midlothian Road and East Route 22 Bypass)
North Buesching Road
Oakwood Road
Pheasant Ridge Road (between U.S. Route 12 and 832 South Rand Road)
Rose Road
South Buesching Road
South Old Rand Road (between U.S. Route 12 and Buesching Road)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 148/524
Telser Road (Ord. 2013-04-888, 4-1-2013)
6-2C-3: POSTING OF SIGNS:
The village will cause signs to be posted as reasonably necessary to indicate that a street is designated as a class II designated truck route. (Ord. 2008-
10-586, 10-10-2008)
Chapter 3
UNIFORMED OFFICERS, EMERGENCY VEHICLES, AND SERVICE VEHICLES
6-3-1: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:
Members of the police department, and special police assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of
this title, or, in emergencies, as public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order, signal, or direction of a police officer, special police officer assigned to traffic duty, chief of police, fire department, or paramedic official. Except in
case of an emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-3-2: SCENE OF FIRE OR MEDICAL EMERGENCY:
The fire department official or paramedic officer in command, or any firefighter or paramedic designated by him, may exercise the powers and authority of
a police officer in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or medical emergency, or where the fire department or paramedics have responded to an
emergency, for so long as the fire department or paramedic equipment is on the scene, in the absence of or in assisting the police. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-
7-2005)
6-3-3: OPERATION OF AMBULANCES OR RESCUE VEHICLES:
A. No person shall operate an ambulance or rescue vehicle in a manner not conforming to the motor vehicle laws and regulations of this state or
ordinances of this village as such laws and regulations apply to motor vehicles in general, unless in compliance with the following conditions:
1. The person operating the ambulance shall be either responding to a bona fide emergency call or specifically directed by a licensed physician to
disregard traffic laws in operating the ambulance during and for the purpose of the specific trip or journey that is involved;
2. The ambulance or rescue vehicle shall be equipped with a siren producing an audible signal of an intensity of one hundred (100) decibels at a
distance of fifty feet (50') from the siren, and with a lamp or lamps emitting an oscillating, rotating or flashing red beam directed in part toward the
front of the vehicle, and these lamps shall have sufficient intensity to be visible at five hundred feet (500') in normal sunlight, and, in addition to other
lighting requirements, may also operate with a lamp or lamps emitting an oscillating, rotating, or flashing green light;
3. The aforesaid siren and lamp or lamps shall be in operation at all times when it is reasonably necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the
approach thereof during the trip or journey;
4. Whenever the ambulance or rescue vehicle is operated at a speed in excess of forty (40) miles per hour, the ambulance or rescue vehicle shall be
operated in complete conformance with every other motor vehicle law and regulation of this state and this village, relating to the operation of motor
vehicles, as such provision applies to motor vehicles in general, except laws and regulations pertaining to compliance with official traffic control
devices or to vehicular operation upon the right half of the roadway; and
5. The ambulance shall display registration plates identifying the vehicle as an ambulance.
B. The provisions of this title regulating the movement or parking of vehicles shall not apply to the driver of any authorized ambulance, rescue, or other
emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call, but the driver of any emergency vehicle, when approaching a red or stop sign or signal,
shall slow down as necessary for safety but may proceed cautiously past the sign or signal. At other times, drivers of authorized emergency vehicles
shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal.
C. The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an ambulance or rescue vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor do the provisions protect the driver from the consequences resulting from the reckless disregard for the safety of others.
D. No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privileges except when the vehicle is operated in response to an emergency
call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-3-4: OPERATION OF VEHICLE ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver is giving audible signal by siren or bell, thedriver of every other vehicle
shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the highway,
clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in that position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by
a police officer.
This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the highway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 149/524
Upon approaching a stationary authorized emergency vehicle, when the authorized emergency vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately flashing
red, red and white, blue, or red and blue lights or amber or yellow warning lights, a person who drives an approaching vehicle shall: a) proceed with due
caution, yield the right of way by making a lane change into a lane not adjacent to that of the authorized emergency vehicle, if possible with due regard to
safety and traffic conditions, if on a highway having at least four (4) lanes with not less than two (2) lanes proceeding in the same direction as the
approaching vehicle; or b) proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes
would be impossible or unsafe. As used in this section, "authorized emergency vehicle" includes any vehicle authorized by law to be equipped with
oscillating, rotating, or flashing lights under the vehicle code or this title, while the owner or operator of the vehicle is engaged in his or her official duties.
(Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-3-5: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED:
A. The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five
hundred feet (500') or stop the vehicle within five hundred feet (500') of any fire apparatus stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
B. It shall be further unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive over any unprotected hose of the fire department without the consent of the fire chief or
the assistant in command. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-3-6: LIGHTS ON VEHICLES OWNED BY FIREFIGHTERS AND PARAMEDICS:
Any motor vehicle owned or fully operated by any firefighter, paramedic, or any authorized department member as designated in writing by the chief of the
fire department, may be equipped with one or two (2) oscillating, rotating, or flashing lamps that shall emit a blue light only. Such lights shall only be in
operation when responding to a bona fide emergency call. In addition to the blue oscillating, rotating, or flashing lights, a vehicle operated by a voluntary
firefighter may be equipped with flashing white headlights and blue grill lights, which may beused only in responding to an emergency call. The written
permission to operate the motor vehicle with flashing lights must be kept in the motor vehicle and displayed to any police officer upon demand. (Ord. 2005-
02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-3-7: APPLICATION TO SERVICE VEHICLES:
The provisions of this title regulating the movement and parking of vehicles shall not apply to persons, equipment, or other vehicles while actually engaged
in installing, repairing, or otherwise improving streets or street pavements. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
Chapter 4
VEHICLE OPERATION
ARTICLE A. TRAVEL
6-4A-1: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle that is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety. (Ord. 2005-02-
333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-2: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING, PRIVATE ROAD, OR DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway within an urban area shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving
into the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or, in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point
nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon, and the driver shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. (Ord. 2005-02-
333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-3: BACKING:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless the movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. (Ord.
2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-4: DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Drivers or vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right. Upon roadways having width for not more than one lane of traffic
in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
B. Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movements;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 150/524
2. When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right of
way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an immediate
hazard;
3. Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
4. Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic;
5. Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public highway and two (2) vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right of way on the pavement to the other vehicle.
C. Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be
driven in the right hand lane available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.
D. Upon any roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of
the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the
roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or except as permitted under subsection B2 of this section. However, this
subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway. (Ord.
2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-5: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the vehicles
and the traffic upon and the conditions of the street. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-6: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
A. Unless another speed is specifically designated, it shall be unlawful to drive at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour on any street in an urban
district within the village not under the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois or the county. On a street or highway within the village under the jurisdiction of
the state, or under the jurisdiction of the county, it shall be unlawful to drive at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such street. In an alley, it shall be
unlawful to drive at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
B. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public
thoroughfare where children pass going to and from school during school days when children are present and when appropriate signs are posted upon
the streets. For the purposes of this subsection the school day shall begin at seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and conclude at four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
C. If the village board of trustees sets by ordinance other limits as provided by the vehicle code, after an engineering or traffic survey, then such limits shall
govern the rate of speed on the streets indicated in the ordinance. The director of public works shall post appropriate signs showing such speeds.
D. The speed of all vehicles of the second division having two (2) or more solid tires shall not exceed ten (10) miles per hour.
E. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed
when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic by reason of weather or highway condition; and
speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle or on entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
F. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for the safe operation of the vehicle or to comply with applicable laws. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-7: DRAG RACING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, as an operator of a motor vehicle, to drag race.
"Drag racing" means the act of two (2) or more individuals competing or racing on any street or highway in this village in a situation in which one of the
motor vehicles is beside or to the rear of a motor vehicle operated by a competing driver and the one driver attempts to prevent the competing driver from
passing or overtaking him, either by acceleration or maneuver, or one or more individuals competing in a race against time on any street or highway in this
village. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-8: NEGLIGENT DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon a public way negligently, heedlessly, and without due caution in a manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-9: RECKLESS DRIVING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 151/524
Any person who drives any vehicle with a wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-
7-2005)
6-4A-10: VISION OBSTRUCTED:
A. No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat a number of persons exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view
of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
B. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle that is so loaded or in a condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the roadway
essential to the safe operation of the vehicle. This subsection shall apply to any vehicle with a damaged windshield. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-11: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
A. No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon.
B. No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk or drive onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection, crosswalk, or railroad grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-12: ACCIDENTS:
The driver of a vehicle that has collided with, or has been in an accident with any vehicle, person, or property shall remain at the scene, render assistance,
and report the accident in accordance with the provisions of the vehicle code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-13: RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on the outside of any vehicle except on a platform or step designed for this purpose, and provided further that
special brackets, bars, or handgrips are mounted on the vehicle to hold onto while riding on the platform or step. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-14: TRANSPORTATION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:
No person shall transport, carry, possess, or have any alcoholic liquor within the passenger area of a motor vehicle in the village of Lake Zurich, except in
the original package with the seal unbroken. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-15: FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION:
A. Funeral processions have the right of way at intersections when vehicles comprising the procession have their headlights lighted, subject to the
following conditions and exceptions:
1. Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right of way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an audible or
visible signal;
2. Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right of way when directed to do so by a traffic officer;
3. The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall comply with stop signs and traffic control signals but when the leading vehicle has
proceeded across an intersection in accordance with the signal or after stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in the procession may
proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or signal. The leading vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed with due caution.
B. The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall not drive his vehicle in the funeral procession except when authorized to do so by a traffic
officer or when the vehicle is an authorized emergency vehicle giving audible or visible signal.
C. Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may not form a procession or convoy and have their headlights lighted for the purpose of
securing the right of way granted by this section to funeral processions.
D. The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and pass the vehicles in the procession if the overtaking and passing can be
accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering with the procession.
E. The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped with a flashing amber light that may be used only when the vehicle is used as a lead
vehicle in the procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral procession may utilize funeral pennants, flags, windshield stickers, or flashing hazard warning
signal flashers to identify the individual vehicles in the procession. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-16: DEPOSITING REFUSE ON PUBLIC STREETS OR HIGHWAYS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 152/524
A. No person shall drive a vehicle on a public street or highway in the village of Lake Zurich in a manner or with the vehicle in such condition that refuse,
debris, excessive dirt or mud, or other matter is strewn or deposited on the public streets or highways, or on the public streets, highways, or property
adjacent thereto, except as provided for in the following subsection for construction areas.
B. It is required that any person, firm, or corporation engaged in construction work and using the village roadways and rights of way shall remove from the
village roadways and rights of way, at least twice each day or more often if so directed by the Lake Zurich police department, all foreign materials
deposited by the person, firm, or corporation on the roadways and rights of way. "Twice each day" shall mean twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and four
thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. Scraping the road surface and depositing the material on the shoulder of the road may be permitted in the intervals prior to the
specified removal times, and the material deposited on the shoulder of the road shall then be removed as specified above or as directed by the Lake
Zurich police department. Such direction by the Lake Zurich police department shall be exercised in its discretion to maintain driving safety in cases of
extremely heavy deposits, extremely light deposits, or construction projects worked on during hours other than the normal eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to
four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. five (5) day workweek. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-17: SPILLING LOADS:
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any street or alley in this village. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-18: POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
A. Right Turn:
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. When a motor vehicle and a mass transit bus are traveling in the same direction on the same multi-laned highway, street, or road, the operator of the
motor vehicle overtaking any bus that is stopped at an intersection on the right side of the roadway to receive or discharge passengers, shall pass to
the left of the bus at a safe distance and shall not turn to the right in front of the bus at that intersection.
B. Left Turn:
1. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be
made in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be
made so as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable,
the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross
a highway from a private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching.
2. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction that is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed when
safe intervals occur, and, having given a signal when and as required, may make the left turn, and the drivers of all vehicles approaching the
intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn.
3. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction that is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed when a safe interval occurs.
4. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn left into any angle or parallel parking place located on the opposite side of the street
from the side being driven upon by the operator of the vehicle.
5. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn left where prohibited by any traffic control device or sign.
6. Where a special lane for making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official traffic control devices, a left turn
shall not be made from any other lane. No vehicle shall be driven in the left turn lane except when preparing for or making a left turn from or into the
roadway or when preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law.
C. Traffic Control Devices: The village may cause official traffic control devices to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and
direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when the devices are so placed no
driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by the devices. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-19: TURNING ON CREST OF HILL:
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where the
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other approaching vehicle from either direction within five hundred feet (500'). (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-20: U-TURNS:
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in
safety and without backing into traffic or otherwise interfering with traffic.
B. Unless specifically authorized by a traffic sign, or otherwise permitted by the agency having jurisdiction over the street, no vehicle shall be turned so as
to proceed in the opposite direction:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 153/524
1. Upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where the vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from either direction within five hundred feet (500'); or
2. Where prohibited by any traffic control device or sign. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-21: VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION:
A. Excepting as otherwise herein provided, the driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right of way to a vehicle that has entered the
intersection from a different highway; and when two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the
driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the driver on the right.
B. Preferential right of way at an intersection may be indicated by stop or yield signs as authorized by the village.
C. 1. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a
stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line. If there is no stop line, the driver shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection. If there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersection roadway before entering the intersection.
2. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle that has entered the intersection from another roadway or that is
approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the driver is moving across or within the
intersection, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed when a safe interval occurs.
D. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if
required for safety, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, crosswalk, or on the near side of the intersection, as described in subsection C1 of this
section. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely
as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection.
E. If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield right of way sign, the
collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right of way. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-22: PASSING:
A. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
B. No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless
the left side is clearly visible and free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be made completely
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the
overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of the roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction.
C. Except when overtaking or passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
D. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle that is making or about to make a left turn.
E. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and, allowing for sufficient clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding from the same direction either upon the left
or upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for four (4) or more lanes of moving traffic when the movement can be
made in safety. No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the roadway in overtaking or passing on the right.
F. No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within sufficient distance as to create a
hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
2. When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing.
3. When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred feet (100') of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.
4. Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the right or a distinctive centerline is marked, which distinctive line also directs traffic as
declared in the sign manual adopted by the state of Illinois.
5. In any designated school zone or while traveling upon any public thoroughfare where children pass going to and from school during school days
when children are present and when appropriate signs are posted upon the streets. For the purposes of this subsection the school day shall begin at
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and conclude at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4A-23: SCHOOL BUSES:
A. Restrictions For Drivers Approaching A School Bus:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 154/524
1. The driver of any vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking, from either direction, any school bus that has stopped on the highway for the purpose of
receiving or discharging pupils, shall stop the vehicle before reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the school bus the visual signals
as specified by the vehicle code and this title, and the driver shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion, the driver of the vehicle is
signaled by the school bus driver to proceed, or the visual signals are no longer in operation.
2. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having four (4) or more lanes that permits at least two (2) lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions need
not stop the vehicle upon meeting a school bus that is stopped in the opposing roadway; and need not stop the vehicle when driving upon a
controlled access highway when passing a school bus traveling in either direction that is stopped in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or
improved part of the controlled access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross.
B. Restrictions For Drivers Of School Buses:
1. The stop signal arm required by the Vehicle Code shall be extended after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or
discharging pupils and shall be closed before starting out again. The stop signal arm shall not be extended at any other time.
2. The alternately flashing red signal lamps of a four (4) lamp or eight (8) lamp flashing signal system required by the Vehicle Code shall be actuated
after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils, and shall be turned off before starting out again.
The red signal lamps shall not be actuated at any other time except as provided in subsection B3 of this section.
3. The alternately flashing amber signal lamps of an eight (8) lamp flashing signal system, or the alternately flashing red signal lamps of a four (4) lamp
flashing signal system, required by the Vehicle Code shall be actuated continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by
the bus before stopping for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils within a business or residential district, and during not less than the last two
hundred feet (200') traveled by the bus outside a business or residential district. The amber signal lamps shall remain actuated until the bus is
stopped. The amber signal lamps shall not be actuated at any other time. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
C. Penalty: In addition to other remedies the Village may seek, any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating this section shall be subject to a
mandatory fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6-4A-24: PROHIBITION OF EXCESSIVE ENGINE IDLING:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect public health and well being and the environment by reducing emissions and conserving fuel.
B. Idling Prohibition: No person using a motor vehicle that operates on diesel fuel shall cause or allow that motor vehicle to idle for more than a total of ten
(10) minutes within any sixty (60) minute period, except under the following circumstances:
1. The motor vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of less than eight thousand (8,000) pounds;
2. The motor vehicle idles while forced to remain motionless because of on-highway traffic, an official traffic control device or signal, or at the direction
of a law enforcement official;
3. The motor vehicle idles when operating defrosters, heaters, air conditioners, or other equipment solely to prevent a safety or health emergency;
4. A police, fire, ambulance, public safety, other emergency or law enforcement motor vehicle, or any motor vehicle used in an emergency capacity,
idles while in an emergency or training mode and not for the convenience of the vehicle operator;
5. The primary propulsion engine idles for maintenance, servicing, repairing, or diagnostic purposes if idling is necessary for such activity;
6. The motor vehicle idles as part of a government inspection to verify that all equipment is in good working order, provided idling is required as part of
the inspection;
7. When idling of the motor vehicle is required to operate auxiliary equipment to accomplish the intended use of the vehicle such as loading, unloading,
mixing, or processing cargo; controlling cargo temperature; construction operations; lumbering operations; oil or gas well servicing; or farming
operations; provided, however, that this exemption does not apply when the vehicle is idling solely for cabin comfort or to operate nonessential
equipment such as air conditioning, heating, microwave ovens, or televisions;
8. An armored motor vehicle idles when a person remains inside the vehicle to guard the contents or while the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded;
9. A bus idles a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes in any sixty (60) minute period to maintain passenger comfort while nondriver passengers are on
board;
10. If the motor vehicle has a sleeping berth, when the operator is occupying the vehicle during a rest or sleep period and idling of the vehicle is
required to operate air conditioning or heating;
11. When the motor vehicle idles due to mechanical difficulties over which the operator has no control;
12. The motor vehicle is a bus owned by a public transit authority and that bus is being operated on a designated bus route or on a street or highway
between designated bus routes for the provision of public transportation;
13. The motor vehicle is an implement of husbandry exempt from registration under State law;
14. The motor vehicle is owned by an electric utility and is operated for electricity generation or hydraulic pressure to power equipment necessary in the
restoration, repair, modification or installation of electric utility service; or
15. The outdoor temperature is less than thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) or greater than eighty degrees Fahrenheit (80°F). When the outdoor
temperature is thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) or higher and eighty degrees Fahrenheit (80°F) or lower, a person who operates a motor vehicle
operating on diesel fuel in an affected area may not cause or allow the motor vehicle to idle for a period greater than thirty (30) minutes in any sixty
(60) minute period while waiting to weigh, load, or unload cargo or freight, unless the vehicle is in a line of vehicles that regularly and periodically
moves forward.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 155/524
C. Exceptions: The following matters are excepted from the regulations of this section:
1. The operation of an auxiliary power unit or generator set as an alternative to idling the main engine of a motor vehicle operating on diesel fuel; and
2. An owner of a motor vehicle rented or leased to another entity or person operating the vehicle is not responsible for a violation of this section by such
other entity or person. (Ord. 2006-12-469, 12-4-2006)
D. Violations; Penalties: Any person convicted of any violation of this section is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1,
"Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2006-12-469, 12-4-2006; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
ARTICLE B. ROADWAY RESTRICTIONS
6-4B-1: DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent
herewith shall apply:
A. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first ascertained
that the movement can be made with safety.
B. Upon a roadway that is divided into three (3) lanes and provides for a two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction when the center lanes are clear of traffic within a safe distance, or
in preparation for making a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle
is proceeding and the allocation is designated by official traffic control devices.
C. Official traffic control devices may be erected directing specific traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in
a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. Drivers must obey
lane designation signing except when it is necessary to use a different lane to make a turning maneuver.
D. Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions
of every such device. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4B-2: RESTRICTED ACCESS:
A. No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at established entrances and exits.
B. No vehicle of the second division may be driven over curbing within the village at any place other than a regularly provided entrance or exit without first
providing a suitable means of distributing the weight of the vehicle laterally along the curbing. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4B-3: VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS OR IN SAFETY ZONES:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway, nor at any time into or up any portion of a
roadway marked as a safety zone. This section does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human power, nor to any motorized wheelchair. (Ord.
2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4B-4: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
A. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle that with its load exceeds ten thousand (10,000) pounds upon any street owned and maintained by the village
of Lake Zurich. The chief of police shall cause the erection of signs as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this section. (Ord. 2005-02-333,
2-7-2005)
B. Garbage trucks, school buses, vehicles owned by a utility company, municipal or other government owned vehicles, delivery trucks, and moving vans
only while loading or unloading are exempted under this section, provided that the vehicles are being used: 1) in the performance of their designated
duties and 2) on the most direct available route to points of loading and unloading. (Ord. 2008-10-586, 10-10-2008)
C. This section shall not apply to any class II truck route or any movement authorized by a village permit. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4B-5: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES:
No all-terrain vehicle shall be operated on any village street, except when making a direct crossing of a street, provided:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 156/524
A. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street, road, or highway, and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing; and
B. The all-terrain vehicle or off highway motorcycle is brought to a complete stop before attempting a crossing; and
C. The operator of the all-terrain vehicle or off highway motorcycle yields the right of way to all pedestrian and vehicular traffic that constitutes a hazard;
and
D. That when crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of the highway with another public street, road, or highway. (Ord.
2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4B-6: GOLF CARTS:
Except as otherwise permitted by law, no golf cart shall be operated on any village street, except to make a direct crossing under the following conditions:
A. The crossing is made at an interchange approved by the village and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing; and
B. The golf cart is brought to a complete stop before attempting a crossing; and
C. The operator of the golf cart yields the right of way to all pedestrian and vehicular traffic that constitutes a hazard; and
D. There is no tunnel or overpass ramp provided for the golf cart to cross through the golf course. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
ARTICLE C. OVERWEIGHT AND OVERSIZE VEHICLES
6-4C-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A permit shall be required for the movement of every vehicle, and for every nondivisible load or combination of vehicles or nondivisible loads, on roadways
and bridges within the jurisdiction of the village which vehicle or load exceeds any one or more of the following limits:
A. Maximum gross weight: More than seventy three thousand two hundred eighty (73,280) pounds; or
B. Maximum gross length: More than sixty feet (60'); or
C. Maximum gross width: More than eight feet six inches (8'6"); or
D. Maximum gross height: More than thirteen feet six inches (13'6"); or
E. Maximum axle weight: Eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds; or
F. Maximum axle tandem weight: Thirty two thousand (32,000) pounds. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
Road closures with or without signage do not exempt overweight and/or over dimension movement from permit requirements when any traffic is allowed
through a construction zone and when the movement is made by an operator not performing construction on the roadways closed. In an emergency
declared by the village manager or the board of trustees, the requirement to obtain permits may be waived. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2012-
10-861, 10-1-2012)
6-4C-2: EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
The following vehicles are exempt, under the following circumstances, from the permit requirements of this article:
A. Fire department vehicles; and
B. Vehicles operating under a declaration of an emergency by federal, state of Illinois, or Lake Zurich officials; and
C. Village owned vehicles; and
D. Equipment used for snow and ice removal and owned or operated by any governmental body. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 157/524
6-4C-3: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS; GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. An applicant for a permit shall submit a properly completed application on a form provided by the village. Each application for a permit shall be made to
the Lake Zurich police department.
B. The following information shall be included with every application:
1. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the applicant's business name, address, and telephone number; and
2. Whether the permit is for a single trip, round trip, or for multiple movements; and
3. Whether the applicant is an authorized carrier under the Illinois motor carrier of property law and, if so, the registration and certificate number issued
by the Illinois commerce commission; and
4. The description of the vehicle and its load making the movement; and
5. The routing, including points of origin and destination; and
6. Whether the vehicle or load is being transported for hire; and
7. The Illinois Department of Transportation permit number; and
8. The vehicle and trailer registration numbers, state, and year; and
9. The Village of Lake Zurich permit number, if any; and
10. Proper insurance as required by section 6-4C-6 of this article.
C. Permits shall be issued only in the name of the actual owner or bona fide lessee of the subject vehicle.
D. No permit is transferable and every permit applies only to the vehicle and the owner or lessee to which it is issued.
E. All applications for permits are subject to the Village's determination of the following matters:
1. Whether the Village roadways and bridges will not be unduly damaged; and
2. Whether the safety of the traveling public will be adequately protected.
F. The Village, after issuance of a permit pursuant to this article, may issue a revision to the permit:
1. To correct an error; or
2. To adjust weights, dimension, or routes as issued on the permit before the movement is made. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
Any revision made at the request of the permittee for the purpose of changing weights, dimensions, routes, or load description shall be made before
any movement is made and shall require payment of an additional fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code per permit. (Ord.
2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
G. Each permit, when issued, shall constitute the agreement of the permittee that all movements shall be undertaken only in compliance with the permit.
The permittee shall report to the Village any inaccuracies or errors in the permit before starting any movement. Undertaking the movement shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and all of its conditions as issued.
Permits shall be in the driver's possession at all times unless otherwise directed by the Police Department and shall be presented upon demand to any
police officer for the purposes of inspection.
H. If required, all arrangements to have the proper utilities notified, or bridge or highway analyses performed, or other traffic or property management
conditions addressed, shall be made by the permittee and shall be completed in advance of any permit movement. All movements under the permit
shall be made in accordance with all applicable Federal, State of Illinois, and local laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
I. A "one-way" or "single trip" movement means one movement from the point of origin to the point of destination. Any stop between the points of origin
and the point of destination is expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are effective only for five (5) consecutive days after the date of issuance unless
otherwise directed in writing by the Police Department.
J. "Round trip movement" means two (2) trips over the same route in opposite directions. Round trip permits are effective only for ten (10) consecutive
days after the date of issuance.
K. "Multiple movements" are movements in such close proximity to each other in distance or time that the Police Department would consider incorporating
two (2) or more permit movements as one movement. Multiple movement permits when granted by the Police Department shall be for a period of time
not to exceed thirty (30) days after the date of issuance. Multiple movements must be identified in the application for a permit.
L. "Limited continuous use movements" are movements to one site over a period of time not longer than three (3) months made by oversized vehicles that
do not exceed the weight limits established in section 6-4C-9 of this article. Limited continuous use permits may be issued for not more than ten (10)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 158/524
trips during the time period allowed. Limited continuous use permits are not available for overweight vehicles. Limited continuous use permits are
available only for over dimension vehicles and for a period of not more than three (3) months after the date of effect. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4C-4: POLICE ESCORTS:
Police escorts are required for certain vehicles and loads as indicated in subsection 6-4C-9B of this article. The total number of officers necessary to
provide for a safe movement shall be determined by the Police Department, based on the size and weight of the permitted movement. Fees for escorts
shall be paid by the permittee in addition to the permit fees set forth herein. Fees for escorts shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this
Code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6-4C-5: LIABILITY; BOND:
Each permittee shall assume full responsibility and liability for all injuries and damages to streets, bridges, and all private or public property while engaged
in a permitted movement. Prior to issuance of any permit by the Village, the permittee shall provide a bond to indemnify the Village against all injuries and
damages to Village roadways, bridges, or property in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in the form of a certified or cashier's
check made in favor of the Village of Lake Zurich, or, in lieu of a cash bond and at the discretion of the Village, in the form of a license and permit bond,
with a surety approved by the Village, in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Bonds are returnable on request within ten (10) days after the
completion of all movements and expiration of the applicable permit, provided there are no outstanding injuries, damages, or debts to the Village. No
further permits shall be issued to the permittee without redeposit of such a bond. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4C-6: INDEMNIFICATION; INSURANCE:
The permittee shall indemnify, hold harmless, and, on the Village's written request, defend the Village from all costs, claims, judgments, or settlements,
including attorney fees, arising from physical injuries, including, without limitation, loss of life, or damage to or loss of property related to acts or omissions
by permittee, its officers, agents or employees, pursuant to the permit. With its application for a permit, each applicant shall provide evidence of a valid
comprehensive general liability insurance policy, with an insurance company approved by the Village, for protection against personal injury and property
damage, in the amount of not less than five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4C-7: PERMIT IS PRIVILEGE ONLY:
Each permit issued under this article constitutes the grant of a privilege only by the Village and does not confer any property right of any kind to the
permittee. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4C-8: DENIAL; REVOCATION; REINSTATEMENT:
A. Any permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked for any reason the Village may deem to be in the best interest of the Village, including, without
limitation:
1. A permittee knowingly providing incorrect information in an application for a permit; or
2. A permittee acting on or pursuant to a permit that has been altered for purposes of deception; or
3. Noncompliance by a permittee with any Federal, State, or local law pertaining to the transport of goods or operation of a vehicle engaged in the
transport of goods; or
4. Moving on Village streets prior to the issuance of, or otherwise without, a valid permit issued pursuant to the procedures and standards of this article.
(Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
B. Suspension or revocation of a current permit shall be for the time determined appropriate by the Police Department. No permit shall be reinstated
except upon the sound judgment of the Police Department, and then only upon compliance with all applicable laws, codes, and ordinances, payment of
all outstanding fees and penalties, and payment of the fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005;
amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
C. Any applicant or permittee denied a permit or who has had a permit suspended or revoked may appeal the denial, suspension, or revocation to the
Village Manager upon written request for such appeal made in writing on a form provided by the Village within three (3) business days after the denial,
suspension, or revocation. The Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within seven (7) business days after the
filing of the appeal and shall issue a decision within three (3) business days after the hearing. The decision of the Village Manager shall be final. (Ord.
2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
6-4C-9: FEES:
The following fees shall apply to permits issued pursuant to this article: (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
A. Weight Fee Schedule: Refer to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
B. Escorts: Vehicles with weights that exceed those prescribed in categories 7B, 8B, 9B, and larger in subsection A of this section, and in categories 3C,
4C, and 5C in subsection D of this section, shall require an escort. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 159/524
C. Special Assessment: Any axle or gross weight greater than the maximum weights set forth in this article is subject to special assessment and
investigation to determine appropriate fees. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
D. Size Fee Schedule: Refer to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6-4C-10: ESCROW:
Any permittee may establish an escrow account for the purpose of depositing money to be automatically withdrawn by the Village on request of the
applicant for payment of permit fees as needed. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain a balance in its escrow account sufficient to cover
all fees for permit requests. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4C-11: PENALTIES:
In addition to other remedies the Village may seek, a permittee, its officers, agents, or employees, found guilty of moving an over dimension or overweight
vehicle or load on Village streets on a permit altered for purposes of deception, or without a valid permit as is required under this article, shall be subject to
a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each day during which a movement was so made. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005;
amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
ARTICLE D. EQUIPMENT
6-4D-1: LIGHTS:
It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not equipped with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of the vehicle code.
(Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4D-2: USE OF LIGHTS AND LAMPS:
A. All motor vehicles other than motorcycles shall exhibit at least two (2) lighted headlamps, with at least one on each side of the front of the vehicle, that
satisfy United States department of transportation requirements, showing white lights, including that emitted by high intensity discharge (HID) lamps, or
lights of a yellow or amber tint, during the period from sunset to sunrise, at times when rain, snow, fog, or other atmospheric conditions require the use
of windshield wipers, and at any other times when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway
are not clearly discernible at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000'). Parking lamps may be used in addition to, but not in lieu of, such headlamps.
Every motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer shall also exhibit at least two (2) lighted lamps, commonly known as taillamps, that shall be mounted on the
left rear and right rear of the vehicle so as to throw a red light visible for at least five hundred feet (500') in the reverse direction, except that a truck
tractor or road tractor manufactured before January 1, 1968, and all motorcycles need be equipped with only one such taillamp.
B. Either a taillamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light a rear registration plate when required to
render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty feet (50') to the rear. Any taillamp or taillamps, together with any separate lamp or lamps for illuminating
a rear registration plate, shall be wired so as to be lighted whenever the headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.
C. A person shall install headlamps only if they satisfy United States department of transportation regulations and show white light, including that emitted
by HID lamps, or light of a yellow or amber tint for use by a motor vehicle. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4D-3: SIGNAL LAMPS AND DEVICES:
A. Every vehicle other than an antique vehicle displaying an antique plate operated in this village shall be equipped with a stop lamp or lamps on the rear
of the vehicle that shall display a red or amber light visible from a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') to the rear in normal sunlight and
that shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot) brake, and that may but need not be incorporated with other rear lamps. During times when
lighted lamps are not required, an antique vehicle may be equipped with a stop lamp or lamps on the rear of such vehicle of the same type originally
installed by the manufacturer as original equipment and in working order; however, at all other times, the antique vehicle must be equipped with stop
lamps meeting the requirements of this section.
B. Every motor vehicle other than an antique vehicle displaying an antique plate shall be equipped with an electric turn signal device that shall indicate the
intention of the driver to turn to the right or to the left in the form of flashing lights located at and showing to the front and rear of the vehicle on the side
of the vehicle toward which the turn is to be made. The lamps showing to the front shall be mounted on the same level and as widely spaced laterally
as practicable and, when signaling, shall emit a white or amber light, or any shade of light between white and amber. The lamps showing to the rear
shall be mounted on the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, and, when signaling, shall emit a red or amber light. An antique
vehicle shall be equipped with a turn signal device of the same type originally installed by the manufacturer as original equipment and in working order.
C. Every trailer and semitrailer shall be equipped with an electric turn signal device that indicates the intention of the driver in the power unit to turn to the
right or to the left, in the form of flashing red or amber lights located at the rear of the vehicle on the side toward which the turn is to be made, mounted
on the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable.
D. Turn signal lamps must be visible from a distance of not less than three hundred feet (300') in normal sunlight.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 160/524
E. Motorcycles and motor driven cycles need not be equipped with electric turn signals. Antique vehicles need not be equipped with turn signals unless the
signals installed by the manufacturer as original equipment. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4D-4: HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES:
A. Every motor vehicle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under
normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200'). The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure
safe operation, give audible warning with the horn but shall not otherwise use the horn when upon a highway. No horn or other warning device shall
emit an unreasonably loud or hard sound or a whistle.
B. No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle a siren, whistle, or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this section or title.
Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle, or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a
distance of not less than five hundred feet (500'), but the siren, whistle, or bell shall not be used except where the vehicle is operated in response to an
emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in either of which events the driver of the vehicle shall sound
the siren, whistle, or bell when necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the vehicle's approach. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4D-5: BUMPERS:
All vehicles operated in the village must have bumpers that conform to the requirements of the vehicle code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4D-6: TIRES:
A. All motor vehicles, and all other vehicles in tow thereof or thereunto attached, operating upon any roadway, shall have tires of rubber or some material
of equal resiliency. Solid tires shall be considered defective and shall not be permitted to be used if the rubber or other material has been worn or
otherwise reduced to a thickness of less than three-fourths (3/4) of an inch, or if such tires have been so worn or otherwise damaged as to cause undue
vibration when the vehicle is in motion or to cause undue concentration of the wheel load on the surface of the road.
B. The requirements of this section do not apply to agricultural machinery, including wagons being used for agricultural purposes in tow thereof, or to road
rollers or road building machinery operated at a speed not in excess of ten (10) miles per hour. All motor vehicles of the second division operating upon
any roadway shall have pneumatic tires, unless exempted herein.
C. No metal tired vehicle, including tractors, motor vehicles of the second division, traction engines, and other similar vehicles, shall be operated over any
improved highway of this village, if such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road wheels any block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, lug, or any
projection of metal or wood that projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the tire. This prohibition does not apply to:
1. Pneumatic tires with metal studs used on vehicles operated by rural letter carriers who are employed or enjoy a contract with the United States
postal service for the purpose of delivering mail, if the vehicle is actually used for postal purposes during operations between November 15 and April
1; or
2. Tracked type motor vehicles when that part of the vehicle coming in contact with the road surface does not contain any projections of any kind likely
to injure the surface of the road.
D. Tractors, traction engines and similar vehicles may be operated that have upon their road wheels V-shaped, diagonal, or other cleats arranged in such
a manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface, provided that the gross weight upon the wheels per inch of width of the cleats in
contact with the road surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the vehicle, does not exceed eight hundred (800) pounds.
E. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of tire chains of reasonable proportion upon any vehicle when required for safety because of
snow, ice, or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to skid. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4D-7: SUFFICIENT BRAKES; ENGINE BRAKING NOISE PROHIBITED:
A. Brakes: It is unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street that is not equipped with good and sufficient brakes, in good working condition, as
required by the vehicle code. It also is unlawful to operate any vehicle that is so loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the mechanism
operating the brakes of the vehicle.
B. Engine Braking Systems Prohibited; Exceptions:
1. Except as expressly authorized in this subsection B, it is unlawful for the driver of any commercial vehicle to operate or actuate any engine braking
system that emits excessive noise, including the use of an engine compression brake (sometimes called a "jake brake" or "Jacobs brake"), on any
street, highway, or road within the village limits.
2. An engine compression braking system may be operated only: a) when the engine braking system has an adequate sound muffling system in proper
working order that effectively prevents excessive noise or b) in an emergency. (Ord. 2008-06-570, 6-16-2008)
6-4D-8: MUFFLERS, PREVENTION OF NOISE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 161/524
A. Every motor vehicle driven or operated upon the highways of this village shall at all times be equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust system in
constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout,
bypass, or similar device.
B. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in a manner that will amplify or increase the noise of the vehicle above that emitted by the
muffler originally installed on the vehicle, and the original muffler shall comply with all requirements of this section. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4D-9: SUSPENSION SYSTEM:
A. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on any highway of this village when the suspension system has been modified from the original
manufactured design by lifting the body from the chassis in excess of three inches (3") or to cause the horizontal line from the front to the rear bumper
to vary over three inches (3") in height when measured from a level surface of the highway to the lower edge of the bumper.
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the installation of manufactured heavy duty equipment, including shock absorbers and overload springs, nor shall
anything contained in this section prevent a person from operating a motor vehicle on any highway in this village with normal wear of the suspension
system if normal wear does not affect the control or safe operation of the vehicle. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles designed or modified
primarily for off highway racing purposes while such vehicles are in tow, nor shall it apply to motorcycles or motor driven cycles. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-
7-2005)
6-4D-10: PROJECTING LOADS:
A. The maximum width, length, and height of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed the limits expressed in the vehicle code.
B. No passenger type vehicle shall operate on the streets with a load extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle, nor extending
more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof.
C. No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than two (2) units, but such limitation shall not apply to vehicles operated in daytime
when transporting pipes, poles, machines, and other objects that cannot readily be dismembered, nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a
public utility when engaged in emergency repair work, but such loads carried at night shall be clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full
dimensions of the load. The limitation in this subsection shall not apply to tow trucks towing vehicles otherwise permissible under this subsection.
D. No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3') in front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4D-11: WEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with a weight, including load, in excess of that permitted by the Vehicle Code for driving on
improved highways, or with weight distributed in a manner not conforming to the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4D-12: UNSAFE VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles that is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property, or that does not contain those parts or is not at all times
equipped with lamps and other equipment in proper working condition and adjustment as required by statute, or that is equipped in any manner in violation
of this article. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-4D-13: VEHICLE REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
The owner of a motor vehicle must properly register the vehicle in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2009-10-666, 10-5-2009)
6-4D-14: MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE, AND MOPED EQUIPMENT:
Every motorcycle, motor driven cycle, and moped must be properly equipped in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2009-
10-666, 10-5-2009)
6-4D-15: OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW AND DEFECTIVE WINDSHIELD:
No motor vehicle may be operated when the operator's view is obstructed due to an excessive number of passengers in the front compartment of the
vehicle or due to a material defect to the vehicle windshield. No motor vehicle may be operated with any sign, poster, window application, reflective
material, nonreflective material or tinted film applied to a window or windshield that restricts the clear vision of the driver and passenger compartment of
the vehicle as provided by the Illinois Vehicle Code. Motor vehicles with a windshield must be equipped with operating windshield wipers. (Ord. 2009-10-
666, 10-5-2009)
6-4D-16: FAILURE TO DIM HEADLIGHTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 162/524
Whenever the driver of any vehicle equipped with an electric driving head lamp or lamps, or auxiliary driving lamp or lamps is within five hundred feet
(500') of another vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, the driver must dim or drop such head lamp or lamps and shall extinguish all auxiliary
driving lamps. Nothing in this section prohibits the use of auxiliary driving lamps, commonly referred to as "fog" lamps, when they are used in conjunction
with headlamps, if those auxiliary driving lamps are aimed not to project into the eyes of drivers of oncoming vehicles. (Ord. 2009-10-666, 10-5-2009)
6-4D-17: HEADPHONES AND HEADSET RECEIVERS:
No driver of a motor vehicle on highways within the Village may wear headphones or headset receivers while driving. This section does not prohibit the
use of a single sided headset receiver in conjunction with a cellular telephone or the use of a headset receiver by a licensed amateur radio operator. (Ord.
2009-10-666, 10-5-2009)
6-4D-18: PENALTIES:
A. Equipment Citations: Any person to whom a citation for an equipment violation has been issued under this article, and who has corrected the equipment
violation, may avoid prosecution for the citation by paying a sum pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
After a twenty (20) day time period, the fine will be as prescribed in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2009-10-666, 10-5-2009; amd. Ord. 2018-12-
279, 12-3-2018)
B. Fines Forwarded For Collection: If a citation is not paid pursuant to subsection A of this section, then the Village may commence proceedings to recover
the payment in accordance with the following procedures: (Ord. 2009-10-666, 10-5-2009)
1. The Village may issue notice to the registered owner of the offending vehicle by first class postage prepaid U.S. mail, which notice must state: a) that
the owner may pay pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code to the Village within ten (10) days after the date of that notice in full
satisfaction of the citation, and b) that, if that payment is not received within the ten (10) day period, then the fine will increase pursuant to title 13,
chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code, and c) that the Village may initiate collection proceedings if payment is not received within the ten (10) day
period. (Ord. 2009-10-666, 10-5-2009; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
2. If payment is not received within the ten (10) day period, then the Village may issue a second notice to the registered owner of the offending vehicle
by first class postage prepaid U.S. mail, which notice must state the following: (Ord. 2009-10-666, 10-5-2009)
a. The fine for the violation is pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code; and
b. The fine may be paid on or before a date certain not less than ten (10) days after the date of the second notice; and (Ord. 2009-10-666, 10-5-
2009; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
c. If payment is not received, then the Village may immediately implement collection proceedings against the owner. (Ord. 2009-10-666, 10-5-2009)
Chapter 5
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE
6-5-1: PROHIBITED:
Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug, or combination thereof.
A. A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle within this village while:
1. The alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath is 0.08 or more based on the definition of blood and breath units in the vehicle code;
2. Under the influence of alcohol;
3. Under the influence of any intoxicating compound or combination of intoxicating compounds to a degree that renders the person incapable of driving
safely;
4. Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving; or
5. Under the combined influence of alcohol and any other drug or drugs to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving.
6. There is any amount of a drug, substance, or compound in the person's breath, blood, or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of
cannabis listed in the cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., a controlled substance listed in the Illinois controlled
substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., or an intoxicating compound listed in the use of intoxicating compounds act, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 690/0.01 et seq.
B. The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has been legally entitled to use alcohol, or other drugs, or any combination of both,
shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section.
C. Every person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor and shall be punished upon conviction by the penalties set by
statute for such misdemeanors. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-5-2: SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 163/524
A. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon the public highways of this village shall be deemed to have given consent,
subject to the provisions of the vehicle code, to a chemical test or tests of blood, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the alcohol, other drug,
or combination thereof content of the person's blood if arrested, as evidenced by the issuance of a uniform traffic ticket, for any offense defined in
section 6-5-1 of this chapter. The test or tests shall be administered at the direction of the arresting officer. The law enforcement agency employing the
officer shall designate which of the aforesaid tests shall be administered by their enforcement personnel.
B. Any person who is dead, unconscious, or who is otherwise in a condition rendering the person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed not to have
withdrawn the consent provided in subsection A of this section and the test or tests may be administered, subject to the provisions of section 6-5-3 of
this chapter.
C. 1. A person required to submit to any test as provided above shall be warned by the law enforcement officer requesting the test that a refusal to submit
to the test will result in suspension of the person's license to operate a motor vehicle. Following this warning, if a person under arrest refuses, upon the
request of a law enforcement officer, to submit to a test designated by the law enforcement agency as provided in subsection A of this section, no test
shall be given.
2. If no test is administered under the provisions of subsection C1 of this section, the law enforcement officer shall file with the clerk of the circuit court
for the county in which the arrest was made a sworn statement regarding the refusal to take the test. The sworn statement shall in all respects
comply with the requirements for sworn statements set forth in the vehicle code.
3. After the officer has filed the sworn statement, the prosecution of the arrested individual shall proceed in the manner prescribed by the vehicle code.
(Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-5-3: CHEMICAL TESTS:
All chemical tests shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of section 11-501.2 of the vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
501.2. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
Chapter 6
VEHICLES OTHER THAN AUTOMOBILES
ARTICLE A. MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLES
6-6A-1: RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES:
A. The operator of a motorcycle shall ride only astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, and the operator shall not permit more
than one other person to ride thereon nor shall the other person ride on the motorcycle unless it is designed to carry two (2) people, in which event the
passenger shall also ride astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle if it is designed for two (2) persons, or astride another seat or saddle firmly
attached to the rear of the operator; however, any seat or saddle designed for a passenger must be equipped with permanent handgrips and, in
addition, the motorcycle must be equipped with footrests adjusted to fit the passenger.
B. A sidecar may be attached to a motorcycle in which additional persons may ride. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6A-2: OPERATING MOTORCYCLE ON ONE WHEEL:
No motorcycle may be operated on one wheel. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6A-3: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT ON MOTORCYCLES:
A. When operated in the village, every motorcycle shall at all times exhibit at least one lighted lamp, showing a white light visible for at least five hundred
feet (500') in the direction the motorcycle is proceeding. However, in lieu of a lighted lamp, a motorcycle may be equipped with and use a means of
modulating the upper beam of the headlamp between high and a lower brightness. No such headlamp shall be modulated, except to otherwise comply
with this article, during times when lighted lamps are required for other motor vehicles.
B. No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars higher than the height of the shoulders of the operator when seated in the normal driving
position astride that portion of the seat orsaddle occupied by the operator.
C. Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed cab, shall be equipped with footrests adjusted to fit the passenger. (Ord.
2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6A-4: RIDING ON MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 164/524
A. The operator of a motorized pedalcycle shall ride only astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto and shall not permit two (2) persons to
ride thereon at the same time, unless the motorized pedalcycle is designed to carry two (2) persons; any motorized pedalcycle designed for two (2)
persons must be equipped with a passenger seat and permanent handgrips and footrests for use by a passenger.
B. The provisions of this title, particularly sections 6-6B-5 and 6-6B-8 of this chapter, shall be applicable to the operation of motorized pedalcycles, except
for those provisions that by their nature can have no application to motorized pedalcycles. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6A-5: LAMPS ON MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLES:
Every motorized pedalcycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of the type approved by the state of Illinois that shall be visible from all
distances from one hundred feet (100') to six hundred feet (600') to the rear when in front of lawful, low powered beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.
A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-
7-2005)
6-6A-6: EYE PROTECTION:
The operator of a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or motorized pedalcycle, and every passenger thereon, shall be protected by glasses, goggles, or a
transparent shield, as defined by the vehicle code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
ARTICLE B. NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES
6-6B-1: REGULATIONS:
A. Every person riding a bicycle or animal, or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon any street, shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to
all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of this
title that by their nature can have no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal.
B. Provided that, except in business districts, bicycles may be ridden on sidewalks.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle to go upon a roadway other than at a crosswalk. (Ord. 2005-02-333,
2-7-2005)
6-6B-2: APPLICATION OF RULES:
A. It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article.
B. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this article.
C. These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-3: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
A. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped except that an adult rider may carry a
child securely attached to his or her person in a backpack or sling. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-4: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. (Ord. 2005-
02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-5: POSITION ON ROADWAY; BICYCLE PATHS:
A. Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway except under the following conditions:
1. When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedalcycle, or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 165/524
2. When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; or
3. When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions, including, without limitation, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles, motorized
pedalcycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right hand curb or edge.
For purposes of this subsection A3, a "substandard width lane" means a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle and a vehicle to
travel safely side by side within the lane.
B. Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a one-way highway with two (2) or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left
hand curb or edge of the roadway as practicable.
C. Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. (Ord.
2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-6: BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS:
A. A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian
and shall give an audible signalbefore overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
B. A person shall not ride a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, where the use of bicycles is prohibited
by official traffic control devices.
C. A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-7: CARRYING ARTICLES ON BICYCLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article that prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of the bicycle. A
person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the handlebars at all times. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-8: LEFT TURNS:
A. A person riding a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle intending to turn left shall follow a course described in section 6-4A-18 of this title or in subsection B of
this section.
B. A person riding a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle intending to turn left shall approach the turn as close as practicable to the right curb or edge of the
roadway. After proceeding across the intersecting roadway to the far corner of the curb or intersection of the roadway edges, the bicyclist or motorized
pedalcycle driver shall stop, as much as practicable, out of the way of traffic. After stopping, the person shall yield to any traffic proceeding in either
direction along the roadway the person had been using. After yielding, the bicycle or motorized pedalcycle driver shall comply with any official traffic
control device or police officer regulating traffic on the highway along which he or she intends to proceed, and the bicyclist or motorized pedalcycle
driver may proceed in the new direction.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the department and local authorities in their respective jurisdictions may cause official traffic control devices to
be placed and thereby require and direct that a specific course be traveled by turning bicycles and motorized pedalcycles, and when such devices are
so placed, no person shall turn a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle other than as directed and required by the devices. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-9: TURN AND STOP SIGNALS:
A. Except as provided in this section, a person riding a bicycle shall comply with section 6-2A-1 of this title.
B. A signal of intention to turn right or left, when required, shall be given during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the bicycle before
turning, and shall be given while the bicycle is stopped waiting to turn. A signal by hand and arm need not be given continuously if the hand is needed
in the control or operation of the bicycle. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-10: LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT:
A. Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the state of Illinois that shall be visible from all distances from
one hundred feet (100') to six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp
emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren.
C. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that will adequately control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 166/524
D. No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to specifications of the state of
Illinois on each pedal, visible from the front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of two hundred feet (200').
E. No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not equipped with side reflectors. The reflectors shall be visible from each side of the bicycle
from a distance of five hundred feet (500'), and shall be essentially colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle, and essentially colorless or
amber to the front of the center of the bicycle. The requirements of this subsection may be met by reflective materials that shall be at least threesixteenths
(3/16) of an inch wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of the tires or
rims of the bicycle, and the reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear tire or rim. The reflectors shall conform to
specifications prescribed by the state of Illinois.
F. No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not equipped with an essentially colorless front facing reflector. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-11: INSPECTION:
A uniformed police officer may at any time, upon reasonable cause to believe that a bicycle is unsafe or not equipped as required by law, or that its
equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair, require the person riding the bicycle to stop and submit the bicycle to an inspection and test with reference
thereto as may be appropriate. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-12: IDENTIFYING NUMBER:
A person engaged in the business of selling bicycles at retail shall not sell any bicycle unless the bicycle has an identifying number permanently stamped
or cast on its frame. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-13: PARKING:
A. A person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk unless prohibited or restricted by an official traffic control device.
B. A bicycle parked on a sidewalk shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
C. A bicycle may be parked on the roadway at any angle to the curb or edge of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed.
D. A bicycle may be parked on the roadway abreast of another bicycle or bicycles near the side of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed.
E. A person shall not park a bicycle on a roadway in a manner as to obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle.
F. In all other respects, bicycles parked anywhere on a highway shall conform with the provisions of this title regulating the parking of vehicles. (Ord. 2005-
02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6B-14: RACING:
A. Bicycle racing on a highway shall be lawful only when a racing event has been approved by the village or the state of Illinois on any highway under their
respective jurisdictions. Approval of bicycle highway racing events shall be granted only under conditions that assure reasonable safety for all race
participants, spectators, and other highway users, and that prevent unreasonable interference with traffic flow that would seriously inconvenience other
highway users.
B. By agreement with the approving authority, participants in an approved bicycle highway racing event may be exempted from compliance with any traffic
laws otherwise applicable thereto, provided that traffic control is adequate to assure the safety of all highway users. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
ARTICLE C. SNOWMOBILES
6-6C-1: STATE STATUTE:
An act passed by the state of Illinois known or cited as the "snowmobile registration and safety act", 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5-1 et seq., is
hereby adopted and made a part of this article, including any or all amendments or changes that may occur from time to time. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-
2005)
6-6C-2: DEFINITIONS:
OPERATE: To control the operation of a snowmobile.
OPERATOR: A person who operates or is in actual control of a snowmobile.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 167/524
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice in a natural terrain steered by wheels, skis, or runners. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-
2005)
6-6C-3: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the following circumstances:
A. In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner.
B. While under the influence of intoxicating beverages or narcotic or dangerous drugs as defined in the vehicle code or this title.
C. At any time without at least one lighted headlamp and one lighted tail lamp on the snowmobile.
D. Within one mile of any nature preserve.
E. On the tracks or right of way of an operating railroad.
F. In any tree nursery or planting in a manner that damages or destroys growing stock, or creates a substantial risk thereto.
G. On private property, without the written consent of the owner or lessee thereof. Any person operating a snowmobile upon lands of another shall stop
and identify himself upon the request of the landowner or his duly authorized representative, and, if requested to do so by the landowner, shall promptly
remove the snowmobile from the premises.
H. On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational areas, and golf courses without express provision or permission to do so by the
proper public authority.
I. In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
J. Within the right of way of any public road or street within the village. When it becomes necessary to cross a public road or street, the operator of a
snowmobile must stop the snowmobile before crossing the road or street and yield the right of way to any motor vehicle or pedestrian on the highway
before proceeding to cross the street.
K. It shall be unlawful to ride on a snowmobile wearing dangling scarves or loose garments that can be enmeshed in the moving mechanism of a
snowmobile.
L. At any time during which the person's snowmobile operation privileges have been suspended pursuant to the snowmobile registration and safety act,
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1-1 et seq. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6C-4: YOUTHFUL OPERATORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person without a valid motor vehicle driver's license to operate a snowmobile, as provided in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
40/5-3. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6C-5: EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
All snowmobiles operated within the village of Lake Zurich shall have the following equipment:
A. Mufflers that are properly attached and that reduce the noise of the operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating the vehicle
and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device on the vehicle.
B. Adequate brakes in good working condition and at least one headlight and one taillight.
C. A safety or so called "dead man" throttle in operatingcondition. A safety or "dead man" throttle is defined as a device that, when pressure is removed
from the accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving track. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-6C-6: UNATTENDED SNOWMOBILES:
It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a snowmobile to be or remain unattended on property while the motor is running or with the keys
for starting the vehicle left in the ignition. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 168/524
6-6C-7: EXCEPTIONS TO REGULATIONS:
A. Notwithstanding the prohibitions of this article, the recreation board shall have the authority to supervise and regulate events or programs in connection
with events conducted by the recreation board in which snowmobiles are used. The recreation board shall have the authority to designate village park
areas that it shall deem available for the use of snowmobiles.
B. Except as herein provided, snowmobiles may be ridden along the shoulder or along the edge of the paved portion of the street for the purpose of
traveling from one's place of residence or abode to gain access to property, other than public streets or rights of way, at a speed not to exceed ten (10)
miles per hour. In any event, snowmobiles may not be ridden at any time on sidewalks, parkways, state highways, tollways, interstate highways, and
limited access highways. Violations of this section will be deemed as riding within the right of way of a public street and will be subject to prosecution
therein.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed as granting authority to violate any provision of the snowmobile registration and safety act, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 40/1-1 et seq. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
Chapter 7
PEDESTRIANS
6-7-1: WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
A. Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder as far as practicable from the edge
of the roadway.
C. When neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an outside
edge of a roadway and if, on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
E. No person shall stand, loiter, or take any other action in any roadway if such act interferes, or is intended to interfere, with the lawful movement of traffic.
No person on any sidewalk shall take any action that interferes with, or is intended to interfere with, the lawful movement of traffic. No person on any
street or village right of way shall engage in any activity that creates a hazard to motorists or a threat to public safety.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-7-2: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
A. Pedestrians are required to comply with traffic control signals as provided in section 6-2A-3 of this title.
B. Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" or the illuminated symbols of a walking person or an upraised
palm are in place, the signals shall indicate as follows:
1. Walk or walking person symbol: Pedestrians facing this signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal,and shall be given the
right of way by the drivers of all vehicles.
2. Don't walk or upraised palm symbol: No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of this signal, but any pedestrian who has partly
completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal or walking person symbol shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" signal or
upraised palm symbol is illuminated steady or flashing. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-7-3: CROSSING ROADWAY:
A. At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any place other than
a crosswalk he or she shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon that roadway.
B. Where traffic control signals as described in section 6-2A-3 of this title, or pedestrian control signals as described in section 6-7-2 of this chapter, are not
in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway or
street within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk.
C. Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or a marked crosswalk between intersections the pedestrian shall have the
right of way over drivers of vehicles; and at such marked places drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and any pedestrian
within or entering a crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of way over any vehicle so stopped.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 169/524
D. The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at the crosswalk for the
purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.
E. Vehicular traffic lawfully turning against a steady red signal shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-7-4: BLIND PEDESTRIANS:
A. Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick that is white in color or white tipped with red, or who is being
guided by a dog, shall have the right of way in crossing any street or highway, whether or not traffic on the street or highway is controlled by traffic
signals, anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding. The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any blind pedestrian carrying a
clearly visible white caneor accompanied by a guide dog.
B. The driver of every vehicle approaching the place where a blind person, so carrying a cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a street or
highway, shall bring his or her vehicle to a full stop and, before proceeding, shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind
person. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a blind person who is not carrying a cane or walking stick or is not guided by a dog.
C. The failure of a blind person to so use or so carry a cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog when walking on streets, highways, or
sidewalks shall not be considered evidence of contributory negligence. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
Chapter 8
PARKING
ARTICLE A. GENERAL RESTRICTIONS
6-8A-1: SIGNS:
The chief of police shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited, indicating the limitations or prohibitions. No person
shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle where an official sign controlling the area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during the
relevant hours. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8A-2: PROHIBITED:
A. No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of the vehicle next to the curb, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than
parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line, except that on
those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by the marks and within the markings
provided.
B. At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic signal:
1. In any intersection;
2. In any crosswalk;
3. Upon any bridge, or viaduct, or in any tunnel or the approach thereto;
4. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within twenty feet (20') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone;
5. Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, flashing light, or stop sign on the approaching side;
6. Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk;
7. At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of a roadway for moving traffic to less than twelve feet (12');
8. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
9. At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway;
10. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing;
11. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such
station within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance;
12. On a sidewalk or parkway;
13. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
C. It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property used for fire prevention or firefighting purposes when the property is posted to that
effect, in accordance with the fire prevention code of the village of Lake Zurich.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 170/524
D. Double parking is prohibited. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8A-3: TOW AWAY ZONES:
The chief of police is hereby authorized to cause a towing service to remove and take possession of any vehicle that is parked in any designated tow away
zone in violation of the parking restrictions established for that zone by this title. In causing the removal of such vehicles, the chief of police shall follow the
procedures established for the removal of abandoned vehicles. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8A-4: LOADING ZONES:
In any place designated by the board of trustees as a loading zone and marked as such, it shall be unlawful:
A. For the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, or to
stand for a period of time exceeding ten (10) minutes; and
B. For the driver to stand any freight carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, or to stand for a
period of time exceeding fifteen (15) minutes. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8A-5: PARKING FOR THE DISABLED:
A. Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates specified in this section, or such devices as the village deems proper as evidence that the vehicle is
operated by or for a disabled person or disabled veteran, may park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any parking place specifically reserved, by
posting of an official sign, for such vehicles. Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the person to whom the special registration
plates, special decal, or device were issued, and to qualified operators acting under his express direction while the disabled person is present. It shall
be prohibited to park any motor vehicle that does not bear the aforementioned registration plates or decals, in any parking place, including any private
or public off street parking facility, reserved, by the posting of an official sign, for motor vehicles bearing such registration plates.
B. Any person owning or operating any public or private off street parking facility may, after notifying the police department, remove or cause to be
removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety, any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by the physically disabled that does
not display disabled registration plates or decals as required under this section.
C. A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a physically disabled person pursuant to state statute is exempt from any statute or ordinance
imposing time limitations on parking in a business district, but otherwise is subject to the laws that prohibit parking in "no stopping" and "no standing"
zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops, loading areas, and where the motor vehicle constitutes
a traffic hazard, in which case the motor vehicle must be moved at the instruction and request of a law enforcement officer to a location designated by
the officer. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8A-6: REPAIRING OR SERVICING VEHICLES:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway, public parking lot, or private parking lot open for use to the public for the purpose of repairing
the vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency, or for the purpose of greasing, changing fluids or oils, or other mechanical work. (Ord. 2005-
02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8A-7: VEHICLES FOR SALE; SELLING FROM VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to:
A. Park any vehicle upon any street, municipal parking lot, or right of way, for the purpose of displaying it for sale; or
B. Park any vehicle adjacent to any through street or right of way for the purpose of displaying it for sale; or
C. To park any vehicle from which merchandise is peddled upon any street. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
ARTICLE B. TIME RESTRICTIONS AND PARKING METERS
6-8B-1: OVERNIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful to park any vehicle on any Village street, right-of-way, or parking lot or area for a period of time longer than fifteen (15) minutes
at any time between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on any day, except as provided in this article.
B. Exceptions: The overnight parking prohibition in this section does not apply to the following circumstances:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 171/524
1. Physicians or clergy on emergency calls.
2. Village owned or Village operated vehicles engaged in Village business and vehicles owned or operated by Village employees engaged in Village
business.
3. Tenants of Village owned nonresidential property for personal vehicles parked in parking areas accessory to the rental property.
4. Tenants of Village owned residential property for personal vehicles parked within the rental property.
C. Temporary Authorizations:
1. At the request of a Village resident made the same day, the Police Department may authorize one or more vehicles to be parked on the street at that
resident's address overnight. Temporary overnight parking under this subsection C1 may be authorized no more than ten (10) nights in any calendar
year per vehicle.
2. At the request of a Village resident made in advance, the Police Department may authorize one or more vehicles to be parked on the street at that
resident's address overnight during construction or reconstruction of the driveway serving that resident's property. That authorization may extend
only while the driveway cannot be used by vehicles and only while it is actively under construction or reconstruction.
3. The Department of Public Works may authorize overnight parking for vehicles affected by street repairs that prevent access to regular parking by
issuing windshield permits for those vehicles. The Department of Public Works will provide copies to the Police Department of each issued
windshield permit. (Ord. 2018-5-255, 5-7-2018)
6-8B-2: OVERNIGHT PARKING PERMITS:
A. Permit Authorized: Subject to the conditions stated in this section, the Village Manager may issue a residential overnight street parking permit
("overnight permit") to a resident authorizing one or more vehicles to park on a Village street or parking lot or area between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. All overnight permits are subject to all of the following conditions: (Ord. 2010-02-698, 2-1-2010; amd. Ord.
2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
1. An overnight permit may be issued only for private passenger vehicles.
2. The applicant for an overnight permit must file a properly completed written application on a form provided by the Village. The application must
include proof of residency with the Village and all other information requested by the Village therein.
3. An overnight permit authorizes parking of one or more vehicles:
a. Only for a single-family residence or Village parking lot or area;
b. Only between the side lot lines of the lot on which that residence is located or in a designated parking spot; and
c. Only on the same side of the street as that residence is located or in a Village parking lot or area adjacent to the residence. (Ord. 2010-02-698, 2-
1-2010)
4. No overnight permit will be issued if, in the judgment of the Village Manager, an off street parking place such as a garage space or driveway space is
available for the subject vehicle. Use of a garage for storage or as a workroom or for any purpose other than the parking of vehicles is not a valid
basis for issuance of an overnight permit. (Ord. 2010-02-698, 2-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
5. No vehicle will be issued an overnight permit unless the owner has obtained, and properly displays, all current required licenses and stickers, and
unless the vehicle is registered to the address for which the permit is requested.
6. An overnight permit sticker must be affixed on the lower driver's side corner of the rear windshield of the authorized vehicle and must be in plain view
at all times.
7. Every vehicle for which an overnight permit is issued must be in good operating condition. No disabled vehicle, whether permitted or not, may be
parked on a Village street, right-of-way, or parking lot or area at any time.
8. No vehicle may be parked in any manner that impedes or obstructs traffic or that obstructs access or views on adjacent property.
9. No overnight permit is valid during a time of snow removal when Village regulations prohibit parking on that street or parking lot or area.
10. No overnight permit is valid during times designated for street cleaning.
11. No overnight permit authorizes any parking, standing, or other operation of any kind of a vehicle in violation of any traffic or highway statute, code,
or regulation.
B. Streets Not Included: No overnight permit may be issued for any of the following streets:
1. North Old Rand Road.
2. South Old Rand Road.
3. Main Street (Route 22).
4. Rand Road (U.S. Route 12).
5. Miller Road.
6. Ela Road.
7. Cuba Road.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 172/524
8. Church Street/Midlothian Road.
9. All nonresidential streets (streets abutting primarily nonresidential uses). (Ord. 2010-02-698, 2-1-2010)
C. Overnight Permit Term, Fee: Each overnight permit is issued for a term ending on December 31 of the year in which it is issued or any earlier date
stated on the permit. The fee for each overnight permit is pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code regardless of its term. That fee
may not be reduced, discounted, or prorated at any time for any reason. (Ord. 2010-02-698, 2-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6-8B-3: DEFINITIONS:
PARKING METER: A mechanical device located upon a public street or sidewalk or parking lot, in a place designated by the Village Board as a "parking
meter zone" hereafter defined, which device shall record, by the use of a clock mechanism, a certain number of minutes determining the period of time for
which parking privileges may be extended to the person depositing a coin therein.
PARKING METER ZONE: An area designated by the Village Board where a vehicle may be temporarily parked and allowed to remain for a period of time
indicated on the meter. Parking meter zones shall be such as may from time to time be established by ordinance. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8B-4: PARKING METER PLACEMENT AND MARKINGS:
A. Parking meters shall be installed in the parking meter zones as established and provided for by ordinance, and shall be placed upon the curb
immediately adjacent to the individual parking places hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in a manner as to show or
display by a signal whether or not the parking space adjacent to the meter is legally in use.
B. Suitable markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb or street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space
and the angle at which vehicles are parked at the curb. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8B-5: USE OF METERED PARKING SPACES:
A. Each vehicle parking within any parking meter zone shall park within the line or markings established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any
such line or marking, or to park the vehicle in a position that it is not entirely within the area designated by the line or markings.
B. Any person desiring to park any vehicle within a parking meter space shall deposit the proper coins for the time desired as required by ordinance.
C. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, or to permit a vehicle to remain parked, in any parking meter zone for a period longer than designated on the
meter, between the hours designated thereon, except on Sundays and holidays, or to park a vehicle in any zone without paying the fee hereinafter
designated; or to permit a vehicle to remain parked longer in any such zone for the period for which the fee was paid, except on Sundays and holidays.
(Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8B-6: TAMPERING WITH PARKING METERS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Village Board to deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy, or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article. Any person acting in a manner prohibited by this subsection may be
prosecuted for criminal damage to property.
B. It shall be unlawful to deposit any slug, device, or metal or other substitute for a coin in any parking meter. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
ARTICLE C. SNOW REMOVAL DURING SNOWSTORMS AND NATURAL DISASTERS
6-8C-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings stated in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in any other sections of this title or ordinances of the village and, if not defined therein, the terms shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in the vehicle code.
NATURAL DISASTER: Any severe weather event, other than the accumulation of snow, that results in a blockage or partial blockage of a village street, as
determined and declared by the village's manager or director of public works.
TWO INCH SNOWFALL: Any snowfall that results in a depth of two inches (2") or more of snow on any village street, as determined by the village's
director of public works based on personal observations or calculations or on weather statistics reported commercially or otherwise provided to the
director. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
6-8C-2: NO PARKING DURING TWO INCH SNOWFALL:
A. Restriction: It is unlawful to park any vehicle on any village street, right of way, or parking lot or area at any time during a snowfall of two inches (2") or
greater in magnitude. This prohibition remains in effect during the snowfall and until the earlier of the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 173/524
1. For twenty four (24) hours after the snow stops falling, or
2. Until village snowplowing operations are completed in that part of the street.
B. Exceptions: The parking restriction in this section does not apply to emergency vehicles or to vehicles that are parked for ten (10) minutes or less in
connection with a delivery. (Ord. 2010-02-698, 2-1-2010)
6-8C-3: NO PARKING DURING NATURAL DISASTER:
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful to park any vehicle on any village street, right of way, or parking lot or area during a natural disaster where debris or
obstructions are located. This prohibition remains in effect until the debris or other obstructions have been removed.
B. Exceptions: The parking prohibition in this section does not apply to emergency vehicles or to vehicles that are parked for ten (10) minutes or less in
connection with a delivery. (Ord. 2010-02-698, 2-1-2010)
6-8C-4: VEHICLE RELOCATION:
The Lake Zurich police department is hereby authorized to direct a towing service to tow and relocate vehicles parked or unattended in violation of this
article to an area established by the Lake Zurich chief of police or his or her designee. The village shall pay to the towing service a fee for the tow and
relocation in an amount established in advance from time to time by the Lake Zurich board of trustees. All such fees shall be reimbursed to the village by
the vehicle owner or other person legally entitled to possession of the towed vehicle as part of the penalty established in section 6-8C-6 of this article.
(Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8C-5: REMOVAL OPERATIONS:
The Village's Manager or Director of Public Works shall notify the Village's E911 dispatch center that snow or debris removal operations have begun. The
Lake Zurich Chief of Police or his or her designee shall coordinate the relocation of vehicles from Village streets for snow and debris removal pursuant to
procedures therefor established by the Lake Zurich Police Department. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
6-8C-6: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this article and whose vehicle is towed pursuant to this article shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee
Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6-8C-7: SEPARATE OFFENSES:
Each incident of illegally parking or leaving unattended a vehicle shall constitute a separate offense. Without limiting the preceding sentence, when a
vehicle is illegally parked or left unattended for a continuous period of time that lasts more than one day, each day, or part of a day, of that period shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8C-8: NOTICE:
The Lake Zurich Public Works Department shall post appropriate signs notifying persons using the streets of the restrictions set forth in this article. (Ord.
2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
ARTICLE D. UNATTENDED, ABANDONED, INOPERABLE, HAZARDOUS, AND
UNLAWFUL VEHICLES
6-8D-1: VEHICLES UNATTENDED:
A. No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of the vehicle is running.
B. No vehicle shall be left without a driver on any hill or incline unless the vehicle is secured against moving. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8D-2: ANIMALS UNATTENDED:
It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in any street without having the animal securely fastened. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-
2005)
6-8D-3: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 174/524
For the purposes of the remainder of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings stated in this section. Any term not defined in this section
shall have the meaning ascribed to it in other sections of this title or ordinances of the Village, and, if not defined therein, the term shall have the meaning
ascribed to it in the Vehicle Code.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any of the following vehicles:
A. A vehicle, other than a hazardous or unlawful vehicle, on any public street or in any public parking lot that is in such a state of disrepair that it is
incapable of being driven under its own power; or
B. A vehicle, other than a hazardous or unlawful vehicle, on any public street, in any public parking lot, or on any private property that has been
unmoved for a period of at least seven (7) days and that appears to have been abandoned based on: 1) its condition, or 2) the length of time during
which it has not been moved, or 3) other circumstances indicating abandonment; or
C. A vehicle, other than a hazardous or unlawful vehicle, on any public street or in any public parking lot that was last operated by a driver who was
arrested for the violation of any state statute or local ordinance, which arrest renders the driver incapable of operating or moving the vehicle lawfully;
or
D. A vehicle in a private parking lot or on private property without the consent of the property owner, proprietor, or agent, when the owner, proprietor, or
agent has requested that the vehicle be towed or otherwise removed; or
E. A vehicle left unattended on any highway in the Village for a period in excess of ten (10) hours in an urban district or in excess of twenty four (24)
hours outside of an urban district.
HAZARDOUS VEHICLE: Any of the following vehicles:
A. A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the vehicle; or
B. A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or welfare of members of the public; or
C. A vehicle that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic on any public or private street or alley or that poses a potential danger to pedestrians or
operators of other vehicles; or
D. A vehicle that is parked or stopped in such a way as to block access to a fire hydrant.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: A vehicle from which, for a period in excess of seven (7) days, the engine, wheels, or other essential parts have been removed,
or on which the engine, wheels, or other essential parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise treated so that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own power. "Inoperable vehicle" shall not include: a) any vehicle that has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own
power as a result of ordinary service or repair operations, b) any vehicle enclosed within a building, or c) any vehicle on the premises of a place of
business engaged in the wrecking or junking of vehicles.
REGISTERED OWNER: The person or entity recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State as the vehicle owner or listed in the registry of motor vehicles of
another state, or, if after diligent search no such person or entity can be located, then the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located, if on
private property.
UNLAWFUL VEHICLE: Any of the following vehicles:
A. A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a search and seizure by the Police Department or any other law enforcement agency with
jurisdiction; or
B. A vehicle parked in violation of any statute or ordinance that authorizes the vehicle to be towed, but only when signs posted at the location in
question indicate that vehicles may be subject to towing; or
C. A vehicle driven by the subject of a custodial arrest that has been parked on any Village street for more than twenty four (24) hours after the
arrestee has been given express notice that the vehicle will be towed if not moved within twenty four (24) hours thereafter.
VEHICLE: Any device, or part thereof, including trailers and other devices designed to be pulled by a propelled device, in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported upon a street, highway, or other public way. (Ord. 2017-3-186, 3-20-2017)
6-8D-4: UNLAWFUL; PUBLIC NUISANCE:
A. Maintenance And Use Illegal: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or maintain an abandoned, inoperable, hazardous, or unlawful vehicle within
the Village or to use or allow use of a vehicle in a manner that renders the vehicle an inoperable, hazardous, or unlawful vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 175/524
B. Declaration Of Public Nuisance: The Village hereby declares that abandoned, inoperable, hazardous, and unlawful vehicles are public nuisances
subject to abatement pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8D-5: VEHICLE TOWING, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSAL:
A. The Police Department, and any other duly authorized agents or forces of the Village, are hereby authorized to tow, impound, and dispose of
abandoned, inoperable, hazardous, and unlawful vehicles pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article. A vehicle that is towed pursuant to this
article shall be impounded only at a facility approved by the Police Chief and shall be impounded only until lawfully released or disposed of pursuant to
the provisions of this article and applicable State Statutes.
B. The Police Department, and any other duly authorized agents or forces of the Village, shall keep records of all vehicles towed in accordance with the
Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8D-6: PRE-TOW PROCEDURES:
A. Record Search: Prior to the impoundment of any vehicle, the Village shall follow all pre-impoundment procedures mandated by the Vehicle Code,
including performing a record search.
B. Notice: Not fewer than seven (7) days before the Village tows an abandoned or inoperable vehicle, the Police Chief shall cause personal delivery to the
registered owner of the vehicle of a written "pre-tow notice", or shall mail the pre-tow notice by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to
the address of the registered owner of the vehicle recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State, or, if the vehicle bears a registration number of a state
other than Illinois, then at the address of the registered owner in that state's registry of motor vehicles. The issuance of a pre-tow notice will not apply to
a vehicle which is subject to a ten (10) or twenty four (24) hour tow. The pre-tow notice shall provide the following information:
1. Requirement To Move And/Or Repair: A statement that, no later than seven (7) days after the pre-tow notice is delivered or mailed, the vehicle in
question must be moved from its improper location to a proper and lawful location and/or repaired to a lawful condition.
2. Fine: A statement that if the vehicle is not moved and/or repaired within the seven (7) day period, then the registered owner or other responsible
party shall be fined pursuant to section 6-8D-7 of this article.
3. Tow: A statement that if the vehicle is not moved and/or repaired within the seven (7) day period, then the vehicle may be towed and impounded
pursuant to this article without further notice.
4. Description Of Vehicle: A description of the make, model, year, and color of the vehicle.
5. Registration And Plate Numbers: The vehicle's registration number, and the number and state of the license plates displayed on the vehicle.
6. Location And Condition: The location and condition of the vehicle that caused the Village to determine that the vehicle is abandoned and/or
inoperable.
7. Owner Name And Address: The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle.
8. Summary Of Procedures: A summary of the procedures set forth in this article relating to the towing and impoundment of abandoned and inoperable
vehicles, and the right of the owner to appeal. (Ord. 2017-3-186, 3-20-2017)
C. Sticker: On or before the day on which the Village personally delivers or mails the pre-tow notice pursuant to subsection B of this section, the Village
shall affix a "pre-tow sticker" in a conspicuous place on the vehicle in question. The pre-tow sticker shall prominently state the earliest date on which
the Village would be authorized to tow the vehicle pursuant to this article and the address and telephone number of the Police Department. The pre-tow
sticker also shall state that the unauthorized removal of the pre-tow sticker from the vehicle is prohibited and punishable by a fine pursuant to title 13,
chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2017-3-186, 3-20-2017; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
D. Appeal: The registered owner of an abandoned or inoperable vehicle may challenge the validity of a pre-tow notice by prosecuting a pre-tow appeal
pursuant to this section. A pre-tow appeal and hearing will not apply to a vehicle which is subject to a ten (10) or twenty four (24) hour tow.
1. Initiation Of Appeal: To initiate a pre-tow appeal, the registered owner of the vehicle in question shall deliver a "notice of pre-tow appeal" to the Police
Chief no later than seven (7) days after the Village delivers or mails the pre-tow notice. The notice of pre-tow appeal shall state whether a pre-tow
hearing is requested and shall state the general nature of the registered owner's defense.
2. Scheduling Hearing; Waiver: The Police Chief shall schedule, in consultation with the registered owner of the vehicle in question, a pre-tow hearing
no later than three (3) days, excluding weekends and holidays, after the Police Chief receives the notice of pre-tow appeal pursuant to subsection D1
of this section, or on such later day as is mutually agreed by the parties. The registered owner shall be deemed to have waived the right to a pre-tow
appeal if the registered owner fails to appear for the pre-tow hearing without prior notice of absence and good cause shown therefor.
3. Status Of Vehicle Pending Hearing: Pending final disposition of a pre-tow appeal, the vehicle in question shall not be towed except pursuant to the
procedures of this article applicable to hazardous and unlawful vehicles.
4. Conduct Of Hearing Burden: The Police Chief may conduct the pre-tow hearing or may appoint a Hearing Officer to conduct the hearing. The
Enforcement Officer responsible for the decision to tow the vehicle in question shall not serve as the Hearing Officer. The registered owner of the
vehicle must appear in person at the hearing. To invalidate the pre-tow notice, the registered owner must submit evidence that conclusively
demonstrates that the vehicle is not an abandoned or inoperable vehicle and is not otherwise subject to being towed pursuant to this article. The
Police Chief or Hearing Officer shall have the authority to require the presence of the Enforcement Officer responsible for the proposed tow and any
other Village personnel, and to request the presence of other witnesses at the hearing.
5. Decision: Based on the hearing record, the Police Chief shall issue a written decision: a) affirming the validity of the pre-tow notice and confirming
that the vehicle in question is an inoperable or abandoned vehicle subject to towing pursuant to this article, or b) revoking the pre-tow notice. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 176/524
Police Chief shall deliver a copy of the Police Chief's decision to the registered owner within forty eight (48) hours after the conclusion of the pre-tow
hearing. The decision of the Police Chief on a pre-tow appeal shall be final.
6. Action If Affirmation: If the Police Chief affirms the validity of a pre-tow notice and confirms that the vehicle in question is inoperable or abandoned,
then the Police Chief shall direct that the vehicle be towed; provided, however, that the vehicle shall not be towed if, within forty eight (48) hours after
the Police Chief's decision, the registered owner or other responsible party causes the vehicle to be moved from the improper location to a proper
and lawful location and/or causes the vehicle to be repaired to a lawful condition. If the vehicle is not moved and/or repaired within the forty eight (48)
hour period, then the registered owner shall be fined pursuant to section 6-8D-7 of this article and the vehicle may be towed immediately and without
further notice. If the vehicle is towed pursuant to this subsection D6, then the registered owner shall be liable for the towing and impoundment fees
established pursuant to section 6-8D-13 of this article.
7. Action If Revocation: If the Police Chief revokes the pre-tow notice, then the Police Chief shall direct that the pre-tow sticker be removed and that the
vehicle not be towed. The registered owner may display a copy of the Police Chief's decision in the vehicle. No vehicle about which such a decision
has been rendered shall be towed by the Village unless the vehicle is otherwise subject to towing pursuant to this article.
8. No Determination Of Violation: A pre-tow appeal and hearing shall not be determinative of, and shall not be used or construed to adjudicate, any
citation or violation of any Village ordinance relative to the vehicle in question.
9. No Appeal: If the registered owner of an abandoned or inoperable vehicle does not initiate a pre-tow appeal pursuant to subsection D1 of this
section, then the vehicle may be towed without further notice, the right to a pre-tow appeal shall be deemed to have been waived, and the registered
owner shall be subject to fine pursuant to section 6-8D-7 of this article.
10. Right To Post-Tow Appeal: If a pre-tow appeal is not initiated pursuant to subsection D1 of this section, the registered owner of the towed vehicle
shall nevertheless have the right to a post-tow appeal pursuant to section 6-8D-11 of this article. (Ord. 2017-3-186, 3-20-2017)
6-8D-7: FAILURE TO MOVE OR REPAIR:
Unless a pre-tow appeal is initiated pursuant to subsection 6-8D-6D of this article, a vehicle subject to a pre-tow notice may be towed by the Village if it is
not moved from its improper location to a proper and lawful location, or is not repaired to a lawful condition, within seven (7) days after the Village delivers
or mails the pre-tow notice pursuant to subsection 6-8D-6B of this article. The registered owner of a vehicle subject to a pre-tow notice shall be fined
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code if the registered owner fails to move the vehicle from its improper location to a proper and
lawful location, or to repair the vehicle to a lawful condition, within seven (7) days after the Village delivers or mails the pre-tow notice pursuant to
subsection 6-8D-6B of this article, or, if a pre-tow appeal is initiated, within forty eight (48) hours after the Police Chief renders a decision affirming the
validity of the pre-tow notice. (Ord. 2017-3-186, 3-20-2017; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6-8D-8: TOWING HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES; NOTICE:
The Police Department, and any other duly authorized agent or outside forces of the Village, are hereby authorized to tow hazardous and unlawful
vehicles without notice. The Village shall deliver to the registered owner of the towed hazardous or unlawful vehicle a "posttow notice" pursuant to section
6-8D-9 of this article. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8D-9: POST-TOW NOTICE:
A. Post-Tow Notice: Not more than forty eight (48) hours after towing any hazardous or unlawful vehicle pursuant to section 6-8D-8 of this article, or more
than seven (7) days after towing any abandoned or inoperable vehicle pursuant to sections 6-8D-6 and 6-8D-7 of this article, the Police Chief shall
cause personal delivery to the registered owner of the vehicle in question of a post-tow notice, or shall mail the post-tow notice by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the registered owner of the vehicle recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State, or, if the vehicle bears
a registration number of a state other than Illinois, then at the address of the registered owner in that state's registry of motor vehicles. A vehicle which
was towed because it was either involved in a traffic crash without a custodial arrest or was disabled on a highway which created a hazard and the
owner was aware of the tow, does not require the issuance of a post-tow notice. The post-tow notice shall provide the following information:
1. Statement Of Towing: A statement that the vehicle has been towed pursuant to this article.
2. Description Of Vehicle: A description of the make, model, year, and color of the vehicle.
3. Registration And Plate Numbers: The vehicle's registration number, and the number and state of the license plates displayed on the vehicle.
4. Location And Condition: The location and condition of the vehicle that provided the Village with authorization to tow the vehicle as an abandoned,
inoperable, hazardous, or unlawful vehicle pursuant to this article.
5. Owner Name And Address: The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle.
6. Summary Of Procedures: A summary of the procedures set forth in this article relating to the towing and impoundment of vehicles, and the right of
the owner to appeal.
7. Release Of Vehicle: A statement that the registered owner must secure release of the vehicle prior to appealing the tow.
B. Towing And Impoundment Facility Notice: Each towing and impoundment service operator utilized by the Village for purposes of towing and impounding
vehicles pursuant to this article shall display, in a prominent location, a sign indicating the opportunity and procedures for appealing the validity of the
towing of any vehicle and related fines and fees. The sign shall be placed in a location readily visible to the public transacting business at the towing or
impoundment facility. (Ord. 2017-3-186, 3-20-2017)
6-8D-10: PROCEDURES FOR RELEASE OF TOWED VEHICLES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 177/524
A. Requirements For Release: The registered owner of a vehicle towed pursuant to this article may secure the release of the vehicle by furnishing
evidence of his or her identity and ownership or possessory right to the vehicle, by signing a receipt for the vehicle, and by paying or causing to be paid
to the Village the following fine and fees:
1. Fine: The fine imposed pursuant to section 6-8D-7 of this article.
2. Towing Fee: The towing fee imposed pursuant to subsection 6-8D-13A of this article.
3. Impoundment Fee: The impoundment fee imposed pursuant to subsection 6-8D-13B of this article.
B. Release If Invalidation Of Tow: Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the registered owner of a towed vehicle may remove
the vehicle without paying any fine or fee otherwise required to be paid pursuant to this article if the Police Chief determines, on appeal or otherwise,
that the tow of the vehicle was not authorized pursuant to this article or was otherwise invalid.
C. Taking Possession: The registered owner shall take possession of the towed vehicle no later than twenty four (24) hours after satisfaction of the
requirements for release set forth in subsection A of this section.
D. Hearing Request: After release of a towed vehicle pursuant to this section, the owner of the vehicle in question may subsequently appeal the tow and
request a hearing pursuant to section 6-8D-11 of this article. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8D-11: POST-TOW APPEALS:
The registered owner of a towed vehicle may challenge the validity of any tow and related fines and fees by prosecuting an appeal pursuant to this section.
A. Initiation Of Appeal: To initiate a post-tow appeal, the registered owner of the towed vehicle shall deliver a "notice of post-tow appeal" to the Police Chief
no later than ten (10) days after the earlier of:
1. The towed vehicle's release pursuant to section 6-8D-10 of this article; or
2. The delivery or mailing of a post-tow notice pursuant to subsection 6-8D-9A of this article.
The notice of post-tow appeal shall state whether a post-tow hearing is requested and shall state the general nature of the registered owner's
defense.
B. Waiver: The registered owner of a towed vehicle shall be deemed to have waived the right to a post-tow appeal if the registered owner fails to initiate a
post-tow appeal pursuant to subsection A of this section.
C. Post-Tow Hearing:
1. Scheduling Of Hearing; Waiver: The Police Chief shall schedule, in consultation with the registered owner of the towed vehicle, a post-tow hearing
no later than three (3) days, excluding weekends and holidays, after the Police Chief receives the notice of post-tow appeal pursuant to subsection A
of this section, or on such later day as is mutually agreed by the parties. The registered owner shall be deemed to have waived the right to a posttow
appeal if the registered owner fails to appear for the post-tow hearing without prior notice of absence and good cause shown therefor.
2. Conduct Of Hearing; Burden: The Police Chief may conduct the post-tow hearing or may appoint a Hearing Officer to conduct the hearing. The
Enforcement Officer responsible for the decision to tow the vehicle shall not serve as the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer may be the same
Hearing Officer as presided over the pre-tow hearing regarding the same vehicle. The registered owner of the vehicle must appear in person at the
hearing. To invalidate the tow, the registered owner must submit evidence that conclusively demonstrates that the towing of the vehicle was not
authorized pursuant to this article or was otherwise invalid. The Police Chief or Hearing Officer shall have the authority to require the presence of the
Enforcement Officer who was responsible for the tow and any other Village personnel, and to request the presence of other witnesses at the hearing.
3. No Determination Of Violations: A post-tow appeal and hearing shall not be determinative of, and shall not be used or construed to adjudicate, any
citation or violation of any Village ordinance relating to the vehicle in question.
D. Decision On Post-Tow Appeal:
1. Decision: Based on the hearing record, the Police Chief shall issue a written decision: a) affirming, in whole or in part, the validity of the tow or any
related fines and fees, or b) invalidating, in whole or in part, the tow or any related fines and fees. The Police Chief shall deliver a copy of the Police
Chief's decision to the registered owner of the vehicle in question within three (3) days after the conclusion of the post-tow hearing. The decision of
the Police Chief on a post-tow appeal shall be final.
2. Action If Affirmation: If the Police Chief affirms the validity of the tow of a vehicle that has been released pursuant to section 6-8D-10 of this article,
then the Village shall retain all amounts paid pursuant to subsection 6-8D-10A of this article. If the Police Chief affirms the validity of the tow of a
vehicle that has not been released pursuant to section 6-8D-10 of this article, then the Police Chief shall include in the Police Chief's decision: a) an
explanation that the registered owner may secure the release of the towed vehicle pursuant to the provisions set forth in section 6-8D-10 of this
article, and b) the total amount of fines and fees, accrued to that date, that must be paid prior to release of the vehicle in question.
3. Action If Invalidated: If the Police Chief invalidates in whole the subject tow, then the Village shall, in the case of a previously released vehicle, return
to the registered owner all amounts received pursuant to section 6-8D-10 of this article, or, if the vehicle has not been released, authorize the
immediate release of the vehicle. (Ord. 2017-3-186, 3-20-2017)
6-8D-12: DISPOSITION IF NO RELEASE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 178/524
If the registered owner of a towed vehicle does not secure the release of the vehicle pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article within thirty (30)
days if the vehicle is seven (7) years old or newer or within ten (10) days if the vehicle is older than seven (7) years old after the delivery or mailing of the
post-tow notice, then the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of pursuant to the Vehicle Code and all other applicable State and local statutes,
codes, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 2017-3-186, 3-20-2017)
6-8D-13: FEES:
A. Towing Fee: The fee for towing any vehicle pursuant to this article shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
B. Impoundment Fee: The fee for impounding any vehicle towed pursuant to this article shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this
Code.
C. Nonresident Emergency Lock Out Service Fee: The fee for entry into a locked vehicle by the Police Department is pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee
Schedule", of this Code for nonresidents. This fee will not be imposed: (Ord. 2017-3-186, 3-20-2017; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
1. On a Village resident requesting entry to a locked vehicle that he or she has a current right to operate; or
2. On an operator of a vehicle owned by any Federal, State, County, or Municipal agency if the operator is engaged in the course of his or her Federal,
State, County, or Municipal duties; or
3. For entry into a vehicle owned and currently being operated by a Village employee; or
4. On an operator of a vehicle when that vehicle or its contents poses an immediate hazard and the vehicle therefore must be removed immediately
from its current location; or
5. On an operator, regardless of Village residency, of a locked vehicle that is occupied by a person who cannot unlock the vehicle and there is a
potential health or safety risk; or
6. For other exigent circumstances as determined by the responding police officer. (Ord. 2017-3-186, 3-20-2017)
6-8D-14: PARKING INOPERATIVE VEHICLES:
A. No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway, Municipally owned parking lot, or on property owned by the Village in an inoperative
condition for more than ten (10) hours.
B. An inoperative vehicle parked as described in subsection A of this section may be towed away at the owner's expense after ten (10) hours, unless the
parking of the vehicle constitutes an immediate safety hazard, in which case the vehicle may be towed away immediately at the owner's expense. The
Police Department shall make an effort to notify the registered owner of the vehicle of the intent to tow the vehicle prior to its towing. If the Police
Department attempts to locate the owner of the vehicle at the address the vehicle is registered at, and the owner could not be located, the Police
Department has complied with this section. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8D-15: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator, or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner, a legal representative of the registered owner or former registered owner, or any other person legally entitled to the
possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this article. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-
2005)
ARTICLE E. PENALTIES; IMPOUNDMENT
6-8E-1: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that an automobile that is illegally operated or parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that the person
was in control of the automobile at the time of the violation. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
6-8E-2: PENALTIES:
A. Citation Fine: Any person to whom a parking citation has been issued under this article, other than for a violation of subsection 6-8A-5A of this chapter,
who has removed the offending vehicle from the place where it had been illegally parked (before the vehicle had been removed or impounded by police
order) may avoid prosecution for the citation by paying the sum pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-
2005; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
At any time after twenty (20) days after such citation is issued, the fine shall be as prescribed in subsection C of this section.
B. Disabled Persons Parking Spaces: Any person violating subsection 6-8A-5A of this chapter shall be penalized in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle
Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 179/524
C. Fines Forwarded For Collection: If the Village of Lake Zurich does not receive payment pursuant to subsection A of this section, then the Village may
implement collection proceedings to recover the payment in accordance with the following procedure: (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
1. The Village shall issue notice to the registered owner of the offending vehicle by first class postage prepaid U.S. mail, which notice shall state that
the owner may pay pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code to the Village within ten (10) days after the date of that notice in full
satisfaction of the citation, and that, if the payment is not received within the ten (10) day period, then the fine applicable to the violation shall
increase pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code, and that the Village may initiate collection proceedings if payment is not
received within the ten (10) day period. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
2. If payment is not received within the ten (10) day period, then the Village shall issue a second notice to the registered owner of the offending vehicle
by first class postage prepaid U.S. mail, which notice shall state the following: (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
a. The fine for the violation is pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code; and
b. The fine may be paid on or before a date certain not less than ten (10) days after the date of the second notice; and (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005;
amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
c. If payment is not received, then the Village shall immediately implement collection proceedings against the owner. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
D. Exceptions: The procedures established in this section shall not apply to the following circumstances:
1. Persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of any place where police, fire, or other emergency apparatus or vehicles are
located; or
2. Persons parking a vehicle so as to block any emergency entrance to any hospital or other medical facility; or
3. Persons parking a vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley or so as to reduce traffic on any arterial street to one-way traffic only;
or
4. Persons who refuse to move a vehicle parked illegally at the request of any member of the Lake Zurich Police Department.
The department shall take such actions under these circumstances as may be authorized by law. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2009-10-
666, 10-5-2009)
6-8E-3: IMPOUNDING VEHICLES:
A. Members of the Police Department of this Village are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a private parking space or lot to the nearest Village
vehicle pound or authorized garage as determined and designated by the Chief of Police, under the following circumstances:
1. When the private space or lot is clearly marked or posted with a sign containing a warning "Private Parking, No Trespassing, Violators Will Be Towed
Away At Their Expense", or words to that effect; and
2. When the owner or proprietor of the space or lot, or his authorized agent, signs a written complaint for trespassing, as defined by the Illinois Criminal
Code; and
3. When the owner or proprietor of the space or lot, or his duly authorized agent, deposits with the Police Department a sum of money sufficient to
cover the minimum towing and storage charges to be incurred by the Village in removing and storing the vehicle.
Vehicles shall also be impounded when required by the Vehicle Code, such as for operating a motor vehicle without a license.
B. Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded pursuant to this title shall first pay all towing and storage charges incurred by the Village, as a
condition precedent to the right to redeem the vehicle. (Ord. 2005-02-333, 2-7-2005)
Chapter 9
VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
6-9-1: VEHICLES SUBJECT TO IMPOUNDMENT:
Pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.7 a motor vehicle may be impounded upon probable cause to believe that an individual has used a
motor vehicle in the commission of any of the following offenses:
A. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited
pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1; or
B. Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501; or
C. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act1; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 180/524
D. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act2;
or
E. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1,
Unlawful Use of Weapons; 5/24-1.5, Reckless Discharge of a Firearm; or 5/24-3.1, Unlawful Possession of Firearms and Firearm Ammunition; or
F. Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
303; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to
failure to comply with emission testing; or
G. Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined by
the Cannabis Control Act3 or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act4; or
H. Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, if the period of expiration is
greater than one (1) year; or
I. Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, or
operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age; or
J. Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges that
the driver violated 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, 5/6-303, or 5/11-501; or
K. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of article 16, Theft and Related Offenses,
or article 16A, Retail Theft, of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes; or
L. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., when so provided by this Code. (Ord. 2012-01-806, 1-16-2012)
6-9-2: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section 6-9-1 of this
chapter, the police officer may cause the vehicle to be towed to a facility approved by the Chief of Police. A reasonable administrative fee pursuant to
title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code may be imposed by the Village upon the owner of record or the agents of the registered owner. For
purposes of this chapter, owner of record is the person or entity recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State as the vehicle owner or listed in the registry
of motor vehicles of another state. It is not necessary for criminal charges to be filed, prosecuted or proven in order to seize and impound a motor
vehicle pursuant to this section. An administrative fee shall not be assessed if verifiable proof is presented confirming that the motor vehicle was stolen
at the time the motor vehicle was impounded. (Ord. 2016-7-141, 7-5-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
B. Any administration fee imposed shall be in addition to: 1) any other penalties that may be assessed by a court of law for the underlying violations; and
2) any towing or storage fees, or both, charged by the towing company.
C. The administrative fee assessed shall be uniform for all similarly situated motor vehicles. (Ord. 2016-7-141, 7-5-2016)
6-9-3: NOTICE OF HEARING:
The registered owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of record shall be provided with a notice of hearing. The notice shall:
A. Be served upon the owner, lessee and any lienholder of record either by personal service or by first class mail to the interested party's address as
registered with the Secretary of State;
B. Be served upon interested parties within ten (10) days after a vehicle is impounded by the Village; and
C. Contain the date, time and location of the administrative hearing. An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than forty five (45) days
after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing. (Ord. 2012-01-806, 1-16-2012)
6-9-4: IMPOUNDMENT HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. The Chief of Police shall designate the Hearing Officer for hearings pursuant to this section. The Hearing Officer may not determine or adjudicate any
citation issued relative to the vehicle. The Hearing Officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for no less than three (3)
years and shall, at all times, be in good standing with the Illinois Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission.
B. All interested persons must be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at an impoundment hearing pursuant to this section. The formal rules of
evidence will not apply at the hearing. The hearing shall be recorded.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 181/524
C. A violation citation is prima facie evidence that a motor vehicle was used in violation of section 6-9-1 of this chapter, and the burden of proof is on the
owner of record of the vehicle to prove that a violation was not committed.
D. After reviewing all relevant evidence presented at an impoundment hearing, the Hearing Officer must determine, based on a preponderance of the
evidence, whether lawful cause existed for the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle. The Hearing Officer must record this determination and the
basis for the determination in writing, and must provide the owner of record with a copy of the written determination.
E. If the Hearing Officer determines that lawful cause existed for seizure and impoundment of the motor vehicle, then the written determination of the
Hearing Officer must state that the vehicle was being used in violation of section 6-9-1 of this chapter and indicate the administrative penalty due in
accordance with section 6-9-6 of this chapter. Any administrative fee posted with the Village shall be forfeited to the Village upon entry of an order that
lawful cause existed for seizure and impoundment of the motor vehicle.
F. If the Hearing Officer determines that lawful cause did not exist for seizure and impoundment of the motor vehicle, then the written determination of the
Hearing Officer must direct that the vehicle be released. The written determination is an order for release that entitles the owner of record to release of
the vehicle without payment of any administrative penalty or towing or storage charges. If the Hearing Officer finds that the Village exceeded its
authority in impounding a vehicle, the Village shall be liable to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle for the costs of storage fees and
reasonable attorneys' fees. The motor vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee or lienholder of record upon full payment of the administrative fee
and all towing and storage charges. (Ord. 2017-2-173, 2-6-2017)
6-9-5: UNPAID PENALTIES:
Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty or administrative fee imposed under this chapter which remains unpaid in whole or in
part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking review under section 6-9-11 of this chapter, may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment
entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2012-01-806, 1-16-2012)
6-9-6: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY:
The owner of record of a motor vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to section 6-9-1 of this chapter must pay an administrative penalty pursuant to title
13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code plus applicable towing and storage costs, unless otherwise determined by the Hearing Officer. An
administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this section constitutes a debt due and owing the Village, and is due immediately. In the event of a hearing
before the Hearing Officer or an appeal of the Hearing Officer's decision, payment of an administrative penalty under this section will be deemed due on
the date of issuance of the Hearing Officer's decision or the final court order. (Ord. 2017-2-173, 2-6-2017; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6-9-7: DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE:
A vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter will remain impounded until:
A. The owner pays the amount of the penalty due in accordance with section 6-9-6 of this chapter; or
B. The owner posts a bond in accordance with section 6-9-8 of this chapter; or
C. The Hearing Officer issues a written determination pursuant to subsection 6-9-4F of this chapter directing that the vehicle be released, in which case
the Village will be responsible for towing and storage fees due to the towing service; or
D. The vehicle is deemed abandoned pursuant to section 6-9-9 of this chapter, in which case the vehicle may be disposed of in the manner provided by
law for the disposition of abandoned vehicles. (Ord. 2012-01-806, 1-16-2012)
6-9-8: POSTING OF BOND:
A. A vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to section 6-9-1 of this chapter will be released to the owner of record if a bond in the amount of four hundred
dollars ($400.00) is posted with the Police Department.
B. All bond money posted pursuant to this section will be held by the Village until the Hearing Officer issues a decision pursuant to section 6-9-4 of this
chapter, or if judicial review is sought, until the court issues its decision.
C. An individual posting the prescribed bond may waive his right to a hearing by indicating such in writing any time prior to the assigned hearing date/time.
(Ord. 2017-2-173, 2-6-2017)
6-9-9: ABANDONMENT:
If a penalty due under section 6-9-6 of this chapter is not paid within thirty five (35) days, then the vehicle is deemed abandoned and may be disposed of in
the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned vehicles. (Ord. 2012-01-806, 1-16-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 182/524
6-9-10: MONIES DEPOSITED:
All penalties collected and retained by the Village for a violation of this chapter must be deposited with the Finance Director. (Ord. 2012-01-806, 1-16-
2012)
6-9-11: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Any owner of record, lienholder or other person with a legal interest in the motor vehicle, shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Hearing Officer
to the 19th Judicial Circuit Court, pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., as amended. Any respondent
seeking review of a final decision shall be required to reimburse the Village for the costs of preparing and certifying the record of proceedings. Failure of
the respondent to reimburse the Village shall be grounds for the dismissal of a complaint for administrative review pursuant to 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-109. In the event the reviewing court reverses the findings, decision and order of the Administrative Law Judge, the Village will reimburse the
respondent for the costs for preparing and certifying the record of proceedings. Any administrative fee posted with the Village to secure the release of a
motor vehicle prior to a hearing shall be held by the Village until the Hearing Officer issues a decision or, if there is judicial review of the Hearing Officer's
decision, until a reviewing court issues a final decision. (Ord. 2012-01-806, 1-16-2012)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7-1-1: DATUM AND BENCH MARK:
A permanent base or datum for the village is hereby established as 863.80 USGS sea level datum and is established as a cross cut in the top of the
anchor bolt on the northwest leg of the water tower on Route 22 (Main Street) behind the village hall. (1989 Code)
7-1-2: DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
A. No person shall deposit or drop any dirt, clay or garbage on any street within the village. Any person depositing or spilling dirt, clay, garbage or any
foreign substance on a village street or right of way shall immediately stop and remove the same.
B. It is required that any person engaged in construction work and using the village roadways and rights of way shall remove from the village roadways
and rights of way, at least twice each day, or more often if so directed by the police department, all foreign materials deposited by such person on the
roadways and rights of way. "Twice each day" shall mean twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. Scraping the road surface and
depositing the material on the shoulder of the road may be permitted in the intervals prior to the specified removal times, and the material deposited on
the shoulder of the road shall then be removed as specified above or as directed by the police department. Such direction by the police department
shall be exercised in its discretion to maintain driving safety in cases of extremely heavy deposits, extremely light deposits or construction projects
carried on during hours other than the normal eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M., five (5) day workweek. (1989 Code)
7-1-3: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS RESTRICTED:
A. Merchandise On Sidewalks: Goods, wares and merchandise may be placed on sidewalks for such reasonable time as may be necessary while loading
and unloading; provided pedestrian traffic is not obstructed.
B. Storage Of Building Materials: Any person not holding a building permit shall not store any materials on any street, sidewalk or public place without a
permit therefor from the village. (1989 Code)
7-1-4: ENCROACHMENTS:
A. Permit Requirements: No person shall erect or maintain any structure or thing on, over or under any street, alley, sidewalk or public way except by
permit from the board of trustees. Application for such permit shall describe the nature of the encroachment in such detail as the board shall require.
The board in its discretion may issue or deny the permit and may impose any conditions to such permit it deems appropriate.
B. Exemption From Permit: Awnings made of a pliable substance attached to a building and extending not less than eight feet (8') above the surface of the
sidewalk may be erected and maintained without a permit.
C. Maintenance Of Encroachment: Any encroachment on any street, alley, sidewalk or public way shall be maintained so that it does not endanger or
obstruct the public.
D. Violations Declared A Nuisance: Any encroachment maintained in violation of this section is declared a nuisance and may be abated by the village.
(1989 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 183/524
7-1-5: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Obstructing Public Ways: No person shall obstruct or endanger the free passage or proper use of the public of any street, sidewalk, alley or public
place, except as may be permitted by this code.
B. Damaging Public Ways And Property: No person shall damage or deface any street, alley, sidewalk, public way, park or other public property, or any
post, wire, lamp, street sign, traffic sign, tree, grass, vegetation, gutter, drain, manhole or any other appurtenance thereon, except as may be
authorized by the village. (1989 Code)
C. Games On Sidewalks: No person shall engage in any game, sport or amusement of any kind upon any sidewalk in any commercial or industrial zone in
such a manner as to interfere with the passage of persons using same. (Ord. 90-03-378, 3-19-1990)
D. Metal Detectors: No person shall use or operate on public property a metal detector, or any other similar sensing device, for the purpose of locating or
removing objects from below the grass or the surface of the soil, and no person shall, as a corollary of such use, damage, dig into, or otherwise injure
or alter any public property. (Ord. 97-08-868, 8-4-1997)
7-1-5-1: OBSTRUCTIONS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
A. Obstructions Prohibited: No person shall place, keep, or maintain any "obstruction", as that term is defined in subsection B of this section, in any public
right of way except only as provided in this section or as otherwise specifically provided by village code or ordinance.
B. Definition Of Obstruction: For purposes of this section, the word "obstruction" shall mean all of the following objects located within the public right of way
if such objects are within nine feet (9') of the paved portion of the right of way:
1. Every boulder or large stone or rock; and
2. Every pole, post, or similar object laid on, or set into, the ground which protrudes or extends more than four inches (4") above the ground; and
3. Any other object which protrudes or extends more than eight inches (8") above the ground, except as otherwise provided in this section.
The term "obstruction" shall not include: streetlights, traffic signs and signals, and similar objects and devices authorized by law; or fire hydrants and
other public utility devices and equipment authorized by law; or parkway trees authorized by the village; or flowers and small shrubs not exceeding
eighteen inches (18") in height. (Ord. 95-04-727, 4-17-1995)
C. Removal Of Obstructions: Except as provided in subsection D of this section, all obstructions shall be removed as soon as reasonably practical, but in
no event later than October 31, 1997. (Ord. 96-09-828, 9-16-1996)
D. Exceptions To Removal Requirement:
1. Retaining Walls: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A, B, and C of this section, retaining walls constructed prior to the effective date of
this section shall not be required to be removed. (Ord. 95-04-727, 4-17-1995)
2. Other Exceptions: The village manager may grant additional exceptions to the application of this section, but only after written application
establishing, to the satisfaction of the village manager, all of the following factors: a) the obstruction does not pose, and will never pose, a threat to
the public health or safety, and b) removal of the obstruction poses a hardship on the applicant, and c) the grant of an exception does not create a
special privilege to the applicant not generally available to residents of the village. No exception shall be granted for reasons of aesthetics. The
village manager may impose such conditions on the grant of an exception hereunder as the village manager determines are reasonable and
necessary to protect the public health and safety. (Ord. 95-04-727, 4-17-1995; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
E. Village Removal If Violation: The village shall remove obstructions in accordance with the following standards: (Ord. 95-04-727, 4-17-1995)
1. Immediate Removal: The village manager shall cause the immediate removal of any obstruction that the village manager determines poses a threat
to the public health or safety.
2. Removal After Notice: In the case of any other obstruction placed, kept, or maintained in violation of this section, the Village Manager shall cause
notice of the violation to be given to the owner of the property abutting the right-of-way on which such obstruction is located, which notice shall state
that the violation shall be cured within ten (10) days after the date of such notice. If the violation is not cured within such ten (10) day period, then the
Village Manager shall cause the obstruction to be removed promptly. (Ord. 95-04-727, 4-17-1995; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
7-1-5-2: MAILBOXES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
A. Placement Restricted:
1. Except as provided in this sentence and in subsection A2 of this section, no mailbox shall be placed or maintained within any Village right-of-way
except when required by Federal laws or regulations for delivery of U.S. mail. When so required, only one mailbox per residence or per
nonresidential lot may be placed within the Village right-of-way except multiple user mailboxes approved by the United States Postal Service. All
mailboxes placed within Village right-of-way shall conform to the requirements of this section.
2. A mailbox placed in a Village right-of-way prior to September 1, 1997, may remain in the right-of-way subject to the following conditions: a) the
mailbox is maintained by the property owner in good condition at all times, including prompt repair of any element of such mailbox needing repair; b)
the mailbox may not be rebuilt, enlarged, or moved at any time except only if such mailbox is moved out of the right-of-way; c) the mailbox shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 184/524
removed from the right-of-way immediately if the building it serves has closed or been removed or relocated; d) the mailbox shall be removed from
the right-of-way immediately if the Village determines in the exercise of its sole discretion that such mailbox poses a particular threat to public safety.
(Ord. 97-10-879, 10-6-1997)
B. Location: No mailbox shall be placed so that it extends to a point within eight inches (8") of the edge of the pavement. Every mailbox shall be placed at
a height consistent with Federal laws and regulations. (Ord. 95-04-727, 4-17-1995)
C. Support Structure: Every mailbox permitted within the Village right-of-way pursuant to subsection A1 of this section shall be mounted either on a
wooden post no smaller than four inches by four inches (4" x 4") and no larger than six inches by six inches (6" x 6") or on a light gauge hollow pipe no
smaller than one and one-half inches (11/2") in diameter and no larger than three inches (3") in diameter. The Village Manager may approve a different
support structure, but only if the Village Manager finds that such support structure is as safe as the structures provided herein. The support structure
shall be firmly secured in the ground. Under no circumstances shall any support structure constructed, reconstructed, replaced, moved, or repaired (if
damaged to the extent of 50 percent of its value at the time of repair) after September 1, 1997, include a masonry column, concrete, railroad rails or
ties, a tractor wheel, a plow blade, a milk can, a barrel, a lawn tractor, or any similar object or device. (Ord. 97-10-879, 10-6-1997; amd. Ord. 2012-10-
861, 10-1-2012)
D. Removal Of Nonconforming Mailboxes: Except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, all mailboxes that do not comply with the provisions of this
section shall be removed on or before October 31, 1997. (Ord. 97-10-879, 10-6-1997)
E. Damage By Village: If a mailbox located within the Village's right-of-way is damaged by the Village, then the Village shall be required to, but only to: 1)
repair such mailbox, or 2) replace such mailbox with a standard U.S. Postal Service box and support structure complying with the standards set forth in
the first sentence of subsection C of this section, or 3) reimburse the owner for damages in amounts limited as follows: not more than thirty dollars
($30.00) for replacement of a post; or not more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for replacement of a mailbox; or not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for
replacement of both a post and a mailbox. (Ord. 2007-05-497, 5-21-2007)
F. No Reconstruction, Repair Or Replacement: No mailbox that does not conform to the requirements of this section shall be reconstructed, replaced,
moved, or repaired if deteriorated or damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value at the time of repair, unless such resulting mailbox shall
fully conform to the requirements of subsections B and C of this section. (Ord. 95-04-727, 4-17-1995)
G. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each violation and for each day on which such violation occurs or continues.
H. Payments To Avoid Prosecution: A person charged with a violation of this section may avoid prosecution by paying to the Village the amounts pursuant
to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each violation within the time specified. (Ord. 95-04-727, 4-17-1995; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-
3-2018)
After twenty five (25) days, the fine must be paid in full or a court appearance will be required. (Ord. 95-04-727, 4-17-1995)
7-1-5-3: DAMAGE TO PUBLIC WAYS OR PROPERTY:
No person shall damage or deface any street, alley, sidewalk, public way, park, or other public property or any post, wire, lamp, street sign, traffic sign,
tree, grass, vegetation, gutter, drain, manhole, or any other public property, except as may be specifically authorized in advance by the Village. (Ord. 95-
04-727, 4-17-1995)
7-1-6: STREET NAMES:
All streets of the Village shall be known and designated by the names applied hereto, respectively, on the map of the Village kept on file in the Office of the
Village Clerk and the street names designated on said map shall continue to be the names of streets unless and until changed by ordinance of the Board
of Trustees. (1989 Code)
7-1-7: NUMBERING BUILDINGS:
Buildings located along the streets of the Village shall be numbered in accordance with a chart kept by the Village Clerk showing the proper street number
of each lot. The owner of any such building shall place such number on his building so as to be visible from the street. (1989 Code)
7-1-8: MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS:
A. Definition: For the purposes of this section, "motorized skateboard" means any device that has a deck or platform on which a person may stand or sit,
with two (2) or more wheels, and that is self-propelled by any type of motor or engine; provided, however, that the term "motorized skateboard" shall
not include the following: 1) a motor vehicle1; 2) a motorcycle2; 3) a motor driven cycle3; 4) a motorized pedalcycle4; or 5) a motorized wheelchair5 or
other device designed and used to transport a person with a disability.
B. Limitation On Use: With the exception of authorized employees and officers of the Village of Lake Zurich, United States Postal Service employees, and
other authorized governmental employees, no person shall operate or ride a motorized skateboard on or within any of the following places within the
Village: private streets and rights-of-way, public streets and rights-of-way, public sidewalks, public parking lots or areas, public parks, and any other
public property. (Ord. 2002-12-205, 12-2-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 185/524
C. Fine; Impoundment And Redemption: Any person violating this section may be subject to a citation and imposition of a fine pursuant to the general
penalty provisions set forth in section 1-3-2 of this Code. Additionally, any person who has been issued three (3) or more citations for violations of this
section within any twelve (12) month period will be required to surrender, at the time of issuance of a citation, the motorized skateboard to the police
officer or other authorized official who issues the citation. The surrendered motorized skateboard will be impounded and held by the Lake Zurich Police
Department and will be returned to its owner only after one of the following sets of conditions has been met: (Ord. 2010-02-697, 2-1-2010)
1. The person against whom the citation was issued shall have paid or caused to be paid: a) all outstanding fines and b) the fees and costs of the
Village in the amount pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code; or (Ord. 2002-12-205, 12-2-2002; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-
2018)
2. The person against whom the citation was issued shall have: a) paid or caused to be paid all outstanding fines and b) presented to the Village proof
that a determination of not guilty was made for the cited offense. (Ord. 2002-12-205, 12-2-2002)
D. Payments To Avoid Prosecution: A person charged with a violation of this section may avoid prosecution by paying to the Village the amounts pursuant
to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each violation within the time specified.
After thirty (30) days, the fine must be paid in full or a court appearance will be required. This subsection shall not affect the redemption fee set forth in
subsection C1 of this section. (Ord. 2002-12-205, 12-2-2002; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
ARTICLE A. EXCAVATIONS
7-1A-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A permit shall be required to open or tunnel or to make any excavation in the street, alley or public space within the Village.
Application for such permit shall be made to the Director of Building and Zoning. The application shall describe the location of the intended excavation or
tunnel, size, purpose, contractor and owner of the property affected by said street crossing. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-1995)
7-1A-2: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; FEES:
The Director of Building and Zoning shall issue such permit upon compliance with applicable sections of this article. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 95-02-712, 2-
21-1995)
The fee for such permit, excluding public and quasi-public utilities operating under franchise with the Village, shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee
Schedule", of this Code for excavation not in excess of three feet (3') in width and as determined for those in excess of three foot (3') widths.
The fee for street surface replacement shall be as set forth pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 2018-12-
279, 12-3-2018)
7-1A-3: BOND AND DEPOSIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Bond: Each person applying for such a permit shall file a bond conditioned that he will suitably guard or protect any excavation or obstruction
maintained or created by him, and will indemnify the Village for any loss or damage resulting from injury to any person or property caused by such
excavation or obstruction. For excavations not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet, the bond shall be in the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for each excavation open at one time.
B. Deposit: No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has deposited with the Clerk a cash deposit in the amount of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to insure the proper restoration of the ground and laying of the pavement, if any. From this deposit shall be deducted the
expense to the Village of relaying the surface of the ground or pavement and of making the refill if this is done by the Village or at its expense, and the
balance shall be returned to the applicant without interest after the tunnel or excavation is completely refilled and the surface or pavement is restored.
(1989 Code)
7-1A-4: MANNER OF EXCAVATION:
A. General: All excavations within the street, public properties under pavement, curbing, sidewalk or other public improvement shall be by tunnel or boring,
unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees.
It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing
shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground, and in excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any
portion which extends beyond the opening of the surface.
No injury shall be done to any pipe, cables or conduits in the making of such excavation or tunnel, and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining
any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the Village department or officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by
the making of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed.
No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof.
B. Sidewalks: If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and
convenient for users. (1989 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 186/524
7-1A-5: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
Any person making or maintaining any tunnel or excavation in any street, alley or other public place shall keep the same adequately guarded by
barricades and lights to protect persons and property from injury. (1989 Code)
7-1A-6: RESTORATION OF EXCAVATED SITE:
A. Unpaved Areas: Any person making an excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the Village shall restore the
surface thereof to its original condition if there is no pavement there.
Refills shall be made of fresh clean gravel properly watered and tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground.
B. Paved Areas: Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be repaired and the surface relaid by the applicant within seventy two (72)
hours, in compliance with all applicable ordinances.
If the excavation or opening has necessitated an opening in a pavement, the refill shall be properly made so that the surface pavement can be relaid by
the Village in the same manner and thickness and character as the surrounding pavement. Notice shall be given to the Clerk when such opening is
prepared for pavement, and the pavement shall be laid by the Village, either by contract or by Village employees. In either event, the surface relaid
may extend for at least one foot (1') in every direction beyond the original opening.
An accurate account of the expense and the cost of relaying such pavement shall be kept, and this amount shall be deducted from the cash deposit
mentioned in subsection 7-1A-3B of this article before the balance shall be returned. (1989 Code)
7-1A-7: SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION:
The Director of Public Works and the Director of Building and Zoning shall, from time to time, inspect all excavations and tunnels being made in or under
any public street, alley or other public place in the Village to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this article. Notice shall be given to them at least
ten (10) hours before the work or refilling of any such excavation or tunnel commences. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-1995)
7-1A-8: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article relative to securing permits shall not apply to officers or employees of the Village engaged in doing work for the Village, nor to
persons or corporations doing work for the Village under contract, nor to persons or corporations which are operating under a franchise or grant from the
Village if such franchise provides for the making of excavations and tunnels without securing a permit therefor. (1989 Code)
ARTICLE B. DRIVEWAYS
7-1B-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct a new driveway or to resurface, extend or enlarge an existing driveway without having first secured a Village permit
therefor, issued by the Village Director of Building and Zoning.
If the proposed driveway originates at a State highway or a County highway, a permit when applicable shall also be obtained from the State of Illinois,
Division of Highways, or the County Highway Commissioner. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-95)
7-1B-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE:
Application for such a Village permit, if the driveway is to be constructed in connection with construction of a new building or the extension of an existing
building, shall be accompanied by a plat or sketch showing the length and width of the driveway and its location with respect to adjacent street and
buildings. If a driveway or its resurfacing, extension or enlarging provides for work to be done in the Village street beyond the lot line, the permit shall be
made subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works.
The fee for all driveway permits shall be the sum provided for permits as set forth in this Municipal Code, said fee paid to the Village Collector before
permit is granted. (1989 Code)
7-1B-3: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Grade of Driveway:
1. No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step, projection or sharp depression between the street pavement and the lot line of the
property; provided, however, that where an existing street pavement includes a combination concrete curb and gutter, the curb section may remain in
place if approved by the Director of Public Works in order to preserve the gutter section of the storm water raceway.
2. If a driveway crosses an existing or proposed sidewalk, the elevation of the surface of the driveway at the sidewalk shall be coincident with the
sidewalk.
3. Where permissible by the grade of the lot, all driveways shall slope toward the street at a grade of not more than four percent (4%).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 187/524
4. The surface of the driveway shall have a uniform slope from the sidewalk or lot line to the intersection with the curb or street surface.
B. Culverts: When a driveway is constructed from a street having no curbs or gutters, but where surface drainage is cared for by a depressed swale or
ditch, a corrugated iron pipe culvert shall be installed below the surface of the driveway and at an elevation and slope to provide proper raceway for
surface water without obstructing the flow along the swale or ditch. Said culvert shall be not less than twenty feet (20') long and not less than ten inches
(10") in diameter, but such culvert shall be large enough to permit the drainage of all storm water so as to protect the street and other public property
from flooding or from stagnant water; provided, however, no culvert need be installed if in the opinion of the Director of Public Works no culvert will be
required where storm water can drain adequately without flooding, and without the creation of stagnant pools when no culvert is installed.
Culverts shall be installed before construction of or excavation for a building being served by the driveway in question is started.
C. Design and Materials of Construction:
1. That part of the driveway between pavement and lot line for driveways originating from State highways or County highways shall be designed by the
State Division of Highways or County Highway Commissioner, if required when State or County permit has been obtained by the applicant. Such
driveways shall be constructed and curbs, gutters, manholes and appurtenances provided as required by the design submitted by the State Division
of Highways or County Highway Commissioner.
2. The materials to be used and the construction detail of driveways beyond lot line (except the section of those originating at State or County highways
between the State or County highway pavement and the lot line as aforesaid), including the size and shape of culverts and the reconstruction of
sidewalks if necessary, shall be determined by the Director of Public Works before permit is granted or work started.
3. Driveways for business or industrial establishments shall be provided with substantial concrete curbs on each side of the driveway from the
intersection of the street pavement to the lot line or sidewalk in such manner as to provide adequate drainage to street gutter or swale and so as not
to obstruct pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk. (1989 Code)
7-1B-4: TEMPORARY DRIVEWAYS:
No temporary driveway will be permitted unless authorized by the Board of Trustees who shall designate type of construction and length of time that the
driveway will be permitted and how all such temporary work shall be removed. (1989 Code)
7-1B-5: INSPECTIONS:
The Director of Public Works will make inspections of driveways and culverts beyond the lot line to provide for proper construction and adequate drainage
of storm water and the Director of Building and Zoning will make the inspections within the lot lines. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-95)
Chapter 2
PARADES AND OPEN-AIR MEETINGS
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
OPEN-AIR MEETING: Any assemblage, demonstration or any congregation of citizens held outdoors and upon any public property for the purpose of
hearing speakers or discussing some matter of common interest where the number of participants expected may reasonably be assumed to exceed fifty
(50).
PARADE: Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other
public place in the Village. (1989 Code)
7-2-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
No person shall participate in a parade or open-air meeting held on any public way or on any public property unless a written permit therefor shall first be
obtained from the Village Clerk. (1989 Code)
7-2-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
An application to conduct a parade or open-air meeting shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk at least seventy two (72) hours prior to the event, by a
representative of the group seeking the permit, and shall set forth the following information: (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, organization or corporation seeking to conduct such a parade or open-air meeting.
B. If the parade or open-air meeting is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 188/524
C. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman or chairman of the open-air meeting.
D. The date when the parade or open-air meeting is to be conducted.
E. The amount of any admission or attendance charge expected to be required from those participating or attending.
F. The route to be traveled, the starting point, the termination point, the location of speakers' platforms and the total time and distance expected.
G. The approximate number of persons who will and, animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade or open-air meeting and the type of animals,
and description of the vehicles.
H. The hours when such parade or open-air meeting will start and terminate.
I. A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
J. The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade or open-air meeting.
K. The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly areas. (1989 Code)
7-2-4: PERMIT FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-2-5: ACTION ON PERMITS:
Following receipt of an application or reapplication, the Village Clerk shall refer it to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall either, within twenty four
(24) hours, recommend issuance of a permit for the holding of a parade or open-air meeting or recommend rejection of the application. Permits may be
rejected on the basis of incomplete application or application not in compliance with this chapter. The reasons for rejection shall be made known to
applicant, in writing, at the time of rejection. The applicant shall be allowed to correct or complete said improper application and resubmit it to the Village
Clerk for referral to the Chief of Police; the original seventy two (72) hour required advance notification time being still valid if a corrected application is
resubmitted within twenty four (24) hours will be imposed prior to which the event may not be held. Such forty eight (48) hour period shall commence upon
receipt of the corrected application. (1989 Code)
7-2-6: MULTIPLE PERMITS:
If the Village Clerk shall receive more than one application for a parade or open-air meeting at the same time and the same place, or on the same day, the
applications filed first in time shall take precedence. An application shall be considered to be "at the same time" if the event is scheduled to commence
within two (2) hours before or after the holding of another event at the same place. An application shall be considered to be "at the same place" if the
open-air meeting is to be conducted within one-half (1/2) mile of another open-air meeting. If the Village Clerk receives an application for more than one
parade or open-air meeting in a single day, the Clerk may set a time for the duration of each parade or open-air meeting, which time shall not, without the
consent of the group seeking the permit, be less than three (3) hours.
The Village Clerk shall issue permits for more than a single parade during one day in accordance with the requirements of this section and section 7-2-5 of
this chapter; provided, however, that he may not issue multiple permits beyond the point at which the issuance of an additional permit would require the
continuing diversion of so great a number of police officers or other Village personnel so as to prevent normal police protection or other service to the
Village. A single permit may cover more than one group or person if their identities are properly reported on the application. (1989 Code)
7-2-7: HOURS:
All parades shall be held during daylight hours at times other than peak traffic periods (7:30 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M. to 6:00 P.M., Monday through
Saturday), and not before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays. All open-air meetings shall conclude by twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and shall not
be held before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sunday. (1989 Code)
7-2-8: TRAFFIC LIMITS:
Parades and open air meetings shall be limited to such numbers as will not obstruct traffic either vehicular or pedestrian, in an unreasonable manner. The
Chief of Police may request reasonable regulations as to spacing of paraders, length of parade, duration of time so police manpower will not be diverted
for too long a period of time from its other duties, giving consideration to the day of the week, the expected amount of vehicle and pedestrian traffic,
weather conditions and the holiday conditions, if any. The time requested may be reset or diminished if necessary to avoid relocating or re-routing overly
large amounts of vehicles or pedestrian traffic covered by peak periods of traffic. The Village Clerk may then issue a permit with those conditions. (1989
Code)
7-2-9: DISTRIBUTING LITERATURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 189/524
Literature may be passed from person to person, but may not be put upon or affixed to any property. (1989 Code)
Chapter 3
PUBLIC PARKS
7-3-1: GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations shall apply to all persons using any village park:
A. Hours Of Operation: Unless otherwise specifically authorized by permit issued by the village for Breezewald or Paulus Parks, following proper
application for a private event and approval therefor by the village (provided however that no permit shall authorize park use beyond 12:00 midnight on
any day), village parks shall be open daily to the public as provided by the village from time to time, generally during the hours between six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. and dusk. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than village employees conducting village business, to occupy or be present in any
village park at any time when such park is not open to the public. (Ord. 2013-09-909, 9-3-2013)
B. Cleanliness: It shall be unlawful for any person to litter or otherwise deposit trash or debris of any kind in any village park. Every person shall leave the
premises used by that person in a neat and clean condition, free from all litter, trash, and debris.
C. Use Of Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized village employee to operate any automobile or other motor driven vehicle
in any area of any park other than designated roadways, driveways, and parking lots. (Ord. 99-12-1004, 12-6-1999)
D. Pets And Other Animals: All pets and other animals are prohibited in all village parks except only guide dogs for visually disabled persons or animals
specifically authorized by the village to perform activities in a park that are beneficial to the public health, benefit, and welfare. (Ord. 2003-03-222, 3-3-
2003)
E. Restricted Areas: It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into any part of any village park or building where entry is forbidden as indicated by sign or
notice.
F. Closings: The village may close any village park at any time for any reason. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than village employees conducting
village business, to occupy or be present in any village park at any time when such park has been closed by the village.
G. Prohibited Activities: The following activities are prohibited in all village parks unless specifically authorized by the village in a specifically designated
area: skating, sledding, tobogganing, skiing, sliding, golf, and skateboarding.
H. Swimming: It shall be unlawful for any person to swim except only in swimming areas designated by the village, and only at the times and in the manner
set forth in the rules and regulations of the village.
I. Vendors And Peddlers: All vendors and peddlers are prohibited in all village parks at all times except only with the specific prior written approval of an
authorized village officer.
J. Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain any signs in any village park at any time.
K. Weapons: It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or possess any gun, firearm, knife, explosive device, or any other weapons of any kind in any
village park at any time. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, or shoot any stone, arrows, or other projectile or missile in any village park at
any time. (Ord. 99-12-1004, 12-6-1999)
7-3-2: SPECIFIED PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts in any village park at any time:
A. To operate any aircraft of any type and kind in any village park at any time.
B. To wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace, or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, sign, notice, placard, or
other village property.
C. To throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the water of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent
to any park, any substance, matter, or thing, liquid or solid, that will or may result in the pollution of said water.
D. To bring in or to dump, deposit, or leave any rubbish, waste, garbage, trash, or refuse of any kind, except only in designated waste containers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 190/524
E. To disturb the peace or use any profane, obscene, or blasphemous language.
F. To endanger, by any conduct or act, the safety of any person.
G. To commit any assault or battery or to engage in fighting.
H. To violate any village rule or regulation regarding the use of the village park.
I. To prevent or interfere with the use of park facilities by any person.
J. To swim, bathe, or wade in any water except as specifically authorized by the village.
K. To dress or undress, whether at the beach or in a vehicle, toilet, or any other place except only in a bathing house or structure provided by the village for
changing clothes.
L. To dig into, damage, or remove any soil, landscaping, or any other property of the village.
M. To camp and to erect or use any tent, shelter, motor home, trailer, or other such equipment or device.
N. To light or maintain any fire except only as specifically authorized by the village in a place specifically designated for that purpose by the village.
O. To use or operate a metal detector, or any other similar sensing device, for the purpose of locating or removing objects from below the grass or the
surface of the soil or sand. (Ord. 99-12-1004, 12-6-1999)
7-3-3: LAUNCHING OF WATERCRAFT:
A. Motorized Watercraft Prohibited: No motorized watercraft may be launched into the lake of Lake Zurich from any village park.
B. Nonmotorized Watercraft: Nonmotorized watercraft may be launched into the lake of Lake Zurich only from Paulus Park, but only after a permit
authorizing such launch has been issued by the village. Such a launching permit shall be issued by the park and recreation department after proper
application therefor and compliance with all regulations applicable to operation of watercraft within the village. (Ord. 99-12-1004, 12-6-1999)
7-3-4: GROUP ACTIVITIES:
No organized group shall use any village park facility for an organized purpose, including, but not limited to, a picnic, a party, or a theatrical performance,
unless such group shall first have obtained a permit therefor from the village and paid the fee established therefor from time to time by the board of
trustees.
A. Application for such permit shall be made to the village park and recreation director at least thirty (30) days prior to any such organized group use,
providing such information as may be requested by the village.
B. The issuance of any permit hereunder to allow the use of a village park facility shall remain subject to the termination of such permit, up to and including
the day of use, if in the sole discretion of the chief of police of the village, or his or her designee, it is in the best interests of the village to further
regulate, to designate or limit the area being used, or to terminate the permit and revoke the permission of the organized group to use the village park
facility for their specified purpose.
C. The hours of use for such permit shall be as provided (or approved) hereinabove at section 7-3-1 of this chapter.
D. An additional fee may apply to a request for a permit by an organized group to use a village park facility if such request exceeds a certain number of
participants or involves extended hours of use.
E. The possession or service of any alcoholic beverages as part of any organized group activity authorized by permit in Breezewald or Paulus Park is
strictly prohibited unless such group first qualifies for and has been issued a liquor license by the local liquor commissioner, after proper application for
and approval of such a request under the liquor control requirements set forth in this code.
F. No consumption or possession of alcohol is allowed in the water, on the beach or in the children's play or playlot areas. (Ord. 2013-09-909, 9-3-2013)
7-3-5: PAULUS PARK AND BREEZEWALD PARK BEACHES:
A. Paulus Park Beach Entry Requirement: No person shall use the beach at Paulus Park without first having obtained a season pass or having paid the
daily entry fee in accordance with this section. (Ord. 2007-01-475, 1-15-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 191/524
B. Breezewald Park Beach: A resident of the village must provide proof of that residency to use the beach at Breezewald Park without a pass. No entrance
pass or fee is required for residents to use the beach at Breezewald Park. No person who lives outside the corporate limits of the village may use the
beach at Breezewald Park without first having obtained a nonresident beach season pass in accordance with this section. Breezewald Park does not
accept a daily entry fee for use of the beach at Breezewald Park. (Ord. 2009-03-619, 3-16-2009)
C. Beach Season Passes For Residents: Residents may purchase either a beach season pass for a family or individual beach season passes by
completing a form provided by the village and paying the required fee. The form provided by the village shall require identification of all family members
living at the resident address. Individual identification passes will be issued to each such family member. Only one beach season pass form may be
completed for each individual or family. (Ord. 2007-01-475, 1-15-2007)
D. Resident Daily Guests: A resident who has purchased a beach season pass for the beach at Paulus Park may bring guests to the beach at Paulus Park
by purchasing guest passes or by paying the daily fee therefor. Resident daily guest passes are not available for access to the beach at Breezewald
Park; a nonresident beach season pass is required for nonresident access to the beach at Breezewald Park. (Ord. 2009-03-619, 3-16-2009)
E. Entry Fees For Residents: The fees applicable to residents for: 1) beach season passes, 2) guest passes, and 3) daily admissions shall be as
established from time to time by the board of trustees.
F. Beach Season Passes For Nonresidents: Persons who live outside the corporate limits of the village may secure nonresident beach season passes by
registering on a form provided by the village and paying the required fee. Individual identification passes will be issued to each person living at the
registered nonresident address. Only one nonresident beach season pass form may be completed for each nonresident individual or family.
G. Nonresident Daily Guests: All nonresidents who have purchased a nonresident beach season pass may bring guests to the beach by paying the daily
fee therefor. Guest passes shall not be issued to nonresidents.
H. Entry Fees For Nonresidents: The fees applicable to nonresidents for: 1) beach season passes and 2) daily admissions shall be as established from
time to time by the board of trustees. (Ord. 2007-01-475, 1-15-2007)
7-3-6: SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR LION'S PARK PARKING LOT:
The following regulations apply to the municipal parking lot south of U.S. Route 22 adjacent to Lion's Park (the "lot"):
A. Parking Hours: No vehicle shall be parked in the lot at any time between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day.
B. Parking Restricted: No vehicle shall be parked in the lot other than in designated parking areas. No vehicle shall block the flow of traffic or be parked in
any drive aisle, driveway, entranceway or exit.
C. Speed Limit: The maximum speed in the lot shall be five (5) miles per hour.
D. One-Way Traffic: The flow of traffic through the lot shall be one way from U.S. Route 22 to the public alley adjacent to 20 South Old Rand Road.
E. Weight Limit: No vehicle with a gross weight of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds shall use the lot.
F. Towing For Violation: Any vehicle violating any provision of this section shall be towed away at the vehicle owner's expense by authority of the Chief of
Police or his or her designee. (Ord. 99-12-1004, 12-6-1999)
G. Fines: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each offense.
(Ord. 99-12-1004, 12-6-1999; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-3-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision in section 7-3-1 or 7-3-2 of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of
this Code for each offense.
B. Payments To Avoid Prosecution: Any person who receives a citation for a violation of any provision in section 7-3-1 or 7-3-2 of this chapter may avoid
prosecution by paying a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2010-07-723, 7-6-2010; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-
2018)
Chapter 4
LAKE OF LAKE ZURICH AND BEACHES
7-4-1: TITLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 192/524
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the SAFE USE OF THE LAKE AND BEACHES. (Ord. 2010-01-689, 1-18-2010)
7-4-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes specific regulations affecting the operation of watercraft on the lake of Lake Zurich, the equipment that watercraft must maintain,
and the recreational and sporting activities on and in the lake and the beaches, including ice fishing, skiing, swimming, and similar activities. (Ord. 2010-
01-689, 1-18-2010)
7-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, mean as follows:
AIRBOAT: Any vessel (but not including airplane or hydroplane) propelled by machinery applying force against the air rather than the water as a means of
propulsion.
BEACH FLOAT DEVICES: Includes tire tubes, inflatable floats, floating chairs, inflatable boats, etc.
DEPARTMENT: The Department of Conservation of the State of Illinois.
DESIGNATED SWIMMING AREA: The area within fifty feet (50') of a swimming buoy.
OPERATE: To navigate or otherwise use a vessel.
OWNER: A person, other than lienholder, having title to a vessel or structure.
SAILBOAT: Any watercraft propelled by sail or canvas. For the purpose of this chapter, any watercraft propelled by both sail or canvas or machinery of any
sort shall be deemed a vessel when being so propelled.
STRUCTURE: Any shelter which is placed on or used on such water or ice of any waterway in the Village shall be a portable structure vessel for fishing
purposes only and may be constructed of a framework of metal or wood covered with canvas, paper, plastic material or any similar fabric.
SWIMMING BUOY: A buoy placed in a public waterway by the Village for the purpose of marking a designated swimming area.
VESSEL OR WATERCRAFT: Every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of
transportation on water. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 90-06-389, 6-18-1990; Ord. 91-09-478, 9-3-1991; Ord. 2008-05-564, 5-19-2008)
7-4-4: MARINE UNIT OFFICERS:
The Chief of Police, with the consent of the Village Manager, may appoint marine unit officers to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The compensation
of the marine unit officers shall be set by the Board of Trustees. The duties of the marine unit officers shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter and
the applicable laws and regulations of the State. The marine unit officers shall have the authority to board and inspect any watercraft at any time it is being
used on any waterway in the Village to determine whether such watercraft complies with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-02-247, 2-5-2018)
7-4-5: VESSELS AND WATERCRAFT:
7-4-5-1: LAKE WATERCRAFT MAINTENANCE AND USE PERMIT:
A. Lake Watercraft Maintenance And Use Permit Required: No watercraft may be moored or operated on the lake of Lake Zurich without first obtaining
and displaying a lake watercraft maintenance and use permit from the Lake Property Owners' Association of Lake Zurich (the "LPOA") and paying the
fee required by section 7-4-5-2 of this section 7-4-5.
B. Applications: Each person seeking a lake watercraft maintenance and use permit must apply for that permit on a form approved by the Village and
provided by the LPOA. That application form will be available from the LPOA. The completed form must be submitted to the LPOA by mail or at the
location stated on the application form. The Village may post the location on the Village's website. Each person submitting an application for a lake
watercraft maintenance and use permit must provide the following information with the application:
1. The name, address, telephone number, and other pertinent contact information related to the owner of the watercraft for which the permit is sought.
2. The make, model, and Illinois Department of Natural Resources registration number for the watercraft for which the permit is sought.
3. For motorized watercraft, three (3) copies of proof of liability insurance establishing the existence of coverage for not less than the full length of the
operating season for which the permit is sought.
4. Documentation regarding the right of legal access to the lake of Lake Zurich.
C. Display Of Permit: No watercraft may be moored or operated on the lake of Lake Zurich at any time unless a current, valid lake watercraft maintenance
and use permit is affixed to that watercraft at the lower starboard stern.
D. Liability Insurance: The holder of a lake watercraft maintenance and use permit for a motorized watercraft must notify the LPOA if the liability insurance
coverage for the permitted motorized watercraft lapses or otherwise is no longer in force or effect during the term of the permit. It is unlawful to operate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 193/524
a motorized watercraft on the lake of Lake Zurich at any time without liability insurance.
E. Lake Access For Multiple Mooring Sites: For any mooring site on the lake of Lake Zurich that includes moorings for more than two (2) watercraft owned
by unrelated parties (a "multiple mooring site"), each application for a lake watercraft maintenance and use permit for a watercraft moored at that
multiple mooring site must include: 1) the name and contact information of the deeded lake rights owner or authorized representative of that multiple
mooring site and 2) a statement that the owner or authorized representative has approved the submission of the application. No application will be
processed that does not include that information.
F. Exception For Village Parks And Official Business: The provisions of this section do not apply to Village operated watercraft programs at Village owned
parks, official lake maintenance watercraft, or other government agency watercraft. (Ord. 2017-7-208, 7-17-2017)
G. Violation: A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2017-7-208, 7-17-
2017; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-4-5-2: LAKE WATERCRAFT MAINTENANCE AND USE PERMIT FEE; FINANCIAL REVIEWS; RESERVE FUND:
A. Annual Budget: The Lake Property Owners' Association of Lake Zurich (the "LPOA") must submit to the Village, on or before March 15 each year, its
detailed budget for maintenance and protection of the lake of Lake Zurich during the upcoming boating season, including matters such as weed control;
fish stocking; police services; insurance costs; supplies, postage, and third party administrative costs related to the Lake Watercraft Maintenance and
Use Permit Program; and a reserve fund for extraordinary maintenance.
B. Uniform Fee: For each boating season the LPOA will establish a fee structure that is reasonably related to the costs of the budgeted maintenance and
protection activities for that season.
C. Financial Reviews: The Village, from time to time, may conduct a limited financial review to confirm the actual costs and expenses incurred, and
expenditures made, by the LPOA for maintenance and protection services for the lake of Lake Zurich. The Village will provide the LPOA a written
notice of a financial review, and the LPOA within ten (10) business days, or another date agreed to by the Village and the LPOA, must provide receipts
and other relevant records to Village representatives, to verify that the permit fee structure is consistent with the actual and necessary expenditures.
D. Extraordinary Maintenance Reserve Fund: The budget submitted under subsection A of this section may include, and an increment of the fees
established under subsection B of this section may be related to, creation and maintenance of a Maintenance Reserve Fund. The Maintenance
Reserve Fund may not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the lake maintenance and protection services' portion of that budget. The LPOA may apply
money from the Maintenance Reserve Fund to the costs of extraordinary maintenance activities for the lake of Lake Zurich not included in the LPOA's
annual budget. No extraordinary maintenance activity may be undertaken without the prior approval of the LPOA Board in accordance with its chart
and bylaws and acceptance of that activity by the Village. (Ord. 2017-7-208, 7-17-2017)
7-4-5-3: OPERATION OF WATERCRAFT; RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR OPERATORS:
A. Traffic Regulations:
1. Direction Of Traffic: All powered watercraft shall travel in a counterclockwise direction around the lake of Lake Zurich at all times when being
operated outside of the marked no wake areas of the lake. (Ord. 98-06-917, 6-15-1998)
2. Speed: No vessel will be allowed to operate at a speed greater than thirty five (35) miles per hour.
3. Right Of Way:
a. When two (2) vessels are approaching each other "head on" or nearly so (so as to involve risk of collision), each vessel shall bear to the right and
pass the other vessel on its left side.
b. When vessels approach each other obliquely, or at right angles, the vessel approaching on the right has the right of way.
c. One vessel may overtake another on either side but must grant right of way to the overtaken vessel.
d. When a vessel is approaching another vessel propelled solely by sail or oars, the vessel shall yield right of way to the sailboat or rowboat.
B. Careless Operation: No person shall operate any vessel in a careless or heedless manner so as to be grossly indifferent to the person or property of
another person, or at a rate of speed greater than that which will permit him, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the vessel to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead. (1989 Code)
C. Reckless Activities Prohibited: No person shall operate any vessel or watercraft, or manipulate any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device, in such a
manner as to:
1. Wilfully or wantonly endanger the life, limb, or property of any person;
2. Weave through congested traffic;
3. Jump the wake of another watercraft unreasonably or unnecessarily close to such other watercraft or when visibility around such other watercraft is
obstructed;
4. Operate any watercraft toward or near another watercraft in such a manner as to require swerving or other sudden movement to avoid collision; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 194/524
5. Operate any watercraft so as to approach or pass another watercraft in such a manner or at such a rate of speed as to create a hazardous wake or
wash. (Ord. 2004-12-330, 12-20-2004)
D. Interference With Water Traffic: No person shall operate any vessel in a manner which unreasonably or unnecessarily interferes with other vessels or
with the free and proper navigation of the waterways of the village.
E. Prohibited Areas: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any sailboat, rowboat, houseboat, pontoon boat or boat propelled by machinery or other
watercraft in any pond, lake, river, canal or other body of water where posting clearly indicates that certain specific boating usage is prohibited. (1989
Code)
F. Night Operations: All motorized watercraft are restricted to low speed with no wake between sunset, as determined by the national weather service for
the Lake Zurich area, and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. every day. The village may further restrict such activities at any time when the village determines
that the current weather has reduced visibility to less than five hundred feet (500') or otherwise has created an unsafe or potentially unsafe condition.
(Ord. 2008-05-564, 5-19-2008)
G. Overloading:
1. No vessel shall be loaded with passengers or cargo beyond its safe carrying capacity, taking into consideration weather and other existing operating
conditions.
2. The owner of any vessel or any person having such in charge or in control shall not authorize or knowingly permit to overload any vessel having a
two (2) person capacity.
3. The owner of any vessel or person having such in charge or in control shall not authorize or knowingly permit any vessel to be overloaded in
violation of the vessel's capacity plate and state statute.
H. Minors And Incapable Operators:
1. The owner of any vessel or any person having such in charge or in control shall not authorize or knowingly permit the same to be operated by any
person who by reason of physical or mental disability is incapable of operating such vessel under the prevailing circumstances; nor shall the owner of
any vessel or vessel's motor, or any person having such in charge or in control, permit any minor to operate such motor attached to a vessel or to
operate a vessel without having first determined that such minor is familiar with the provisions of this section. The owner of a vessel or vessel's motor
shall be liable for any damage to person or property caused by the vessel or the vessel's motor being operated in violation of this section; nor shall
said owner permit a minor to operate a vessel when the owner has knowledge that the minor has violated this section.
2. No person under ten (10) years of age may operate a vessel equipped with a motor. Persons at least ten (10) years of age and less than twelve (12)
years of age may operate a motorboat only if they are accompanied on the motorboat and under the direct control of a parent or guardian.
3. Persons between the age of twelve (12) years and eighteen (18) years may operate a motorboat if they have in their possession a valid boating
safety certificate issued by the department of conservation, department of law enforcement, authorizing the holder to operate motorboats.
4. Persons between the ages of twelve (12) years and eighteen (18) years may operate a motorboat without a boating safety certificate, issued by the
department of conservation, department of law enforcement, only when accompanied on the motorboat by a parent or legal guardian over the age of
eighteen (18) years. (1989 Code)
I. Personal Flotation Devices:
1. Passengers Under Thirteen Years Of Age: No owner, operator, or person in charge or control of any watercraft shall authorize or knowingly permit
any person under thirteen (13) years of age to ride in the vessel or watercraft without wearing a U.S. coast guard approved personal flotation device.
2. Nonswimmers: No owner, operator, or person in charge or control of any watercraft shall authorize or knowingly permit any person who cannot swim
to ride in the watercraft unless such person wears a U.S. coast guard approved personal flotation device. (Ord. 2004-12-330, 12-20-2004)
J. Swimming From Watercraft:
1. Designated Swim Area: Swimming from watercraft is allowed only in a designated swimming area and is subject to the following requirements:
a. The watercraft must be a minimum of eighteen feet (18') in length. Swimming from any watercraft less than eighteen feet (18') in length is
prohibited.
b. The watercraft must be anchored and equipped with a ladder or rear platform for swimmer recovery.
c. The watercraft must have an occupant ratio of no more than three (3) children per adult.
d. One person at least sixteen (16) years of age must remain in the watercraft at all times.
e. All swimmers must remain within twenty feet (20') of their watercraft and within the designated swimming area.
f. Children ten (10) years of age and younger who are swimming must wear a U.S. coast guard approved life vest at all times.
g. All types of beach float devices are prohibited in conjunction with swimming from boats.
h. Swimming from boats is prohibited between sunset, as determined by the national weather service for the Lake Zurich area, and nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. every day. The village may further restrict such activities at any time when the village determines that the current weather has reduced
visibility to less than five hundred feet (500') or otherwise has created an unsafe or potentially unsafe condition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 195/524
2. Appropriate Equipment Required Outside Designated Swim Area: Except as provided in subsection J1 of this section for swimming in a designated
swimming area, no person may dive, jump, or otherwise disembark from any vessel except for waterskiing or a similar activity, with appropriate
equipment. (Ord. 2008-05-564, 5-19-2008)
K. Top Or Cover When Towing: When a vessel is used as a towing vehicle, no convertible top or weather cover will be allowed to be in place while towing
so as not to restrict or impair the watcher's or driver's vision of any skiers or other vessels.
L. Beach Floats: Beach float devices shall be restricted to marked swimming areas or within one hundred feet (100') of the shoreline. (1989 Code)
M. Restricted Areas: No person shall operate a motorboat within a water area which has been clearly marked by buoys or some other distinguishing
device as a bathing, fishing, swimming or otherwise restricted area by an owner or lessee of property in accordance with his rights to the use of said
property; provided, that this subsection shall not apply in the case of an emergency, or to patrol or rescue craft; except further that such boat may be
operated in the manner prescribed by the buoys or signs. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 90-06-389, 6-18-1990)
N. Distance From Beach Areas: No person shall operate a watercraft within one hundred feet (100') of any swimming area marked by line buoys or any
posted swimming area when swimmers are present, except only when docking with a pier or leaving a pier. (Ord. 98-06-917, 6-15-1998)
7-4-5-4: EQUIPMENT:
A. Lights:
1. Every vessel less than twenty six feet (26') in length shall carry and display when underway the following lights from sunset to sunrise:
a. A bright, white light aft, capable of rotating a full circle, and being visible for a distance of two (2) miles. The word "visible", as used herein, means
visible on a dark night with clear atmosphere.
b. A combination of light in the forepart of the vessel lower than the white light aft, showing green to the starboard and red to port, so fixed as to
throw a light from dead ahead to two (2) points aft the beam on their respective sides and visible for a distance of not less than one mile.
2. Watercraft propelled by muscular power shall not be operated from sunset to sunrise unless it has a lantern or flashlight capable of showing a white
light visible all around the horizon at a distance of two (2) miles or more, and shall display such lantern to avoid collision with another watercraft.
3. Every vessel twenty six feet (26') or more in length shall carry and display when underway such additional or alternate lights as shall be required by
the United States coast guard for watercraft of equivalent length and type. (1989 Code)
4. Every vessel when operated between sunset and sunrise, shall carry a bright white lantern or flashlight ready at hand which shall, upon the
approach of another watercraft, be exhibited and shall be flashed continually in sufficient time to avert collision. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 90-06-389, 6-
18-1990)
5. Dinghies, tenders and other watercraft, whose principal function is as an auxiliary to other larger watercraft, when operated between sunset and
sunrise, need carry only a flashlight visible to other craft in the area, anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding.
B. Muffler: Except in case of a vessel actually competing in a race or regatta sanctioned by the department of conservation or the village, it is unlawful to
use a vessel propelled in whole or in part by an internal combustion engine unless the same is provided with a serviceable muffler or underwater
exhaust capable of adequately muffling the sounds of the exhaust of the engine. The phrase "adequately muffling" shall mean that the motor's exhaust
at all times be so muffled or suppressed as not to create excessive or unusual noise. The discharge of cooling water through the exhaust of an inboard
engine shall be considered an adequate muffling device.
C. Backfire Prevention: Carburetors on all engines of vessels other than those propelled by a detachable outboard motor shall be fitted with or protected
by a United States coast guard approved device for arresting backfire. (1989 Code)
D. Horn: It shall be unlawful to operate any watercraft with a motor, regardless of size or horsepower, without a mouth, hand, or power operated whistle,
horn or other appliance capable of producing a blast of two (2) seconds or more duration and audible for at least one-half (1/2) mile. (Ord. 2004-12-330,
12-20-2004)
E. Fire Extinguisher: All vessels powered by an internal combustion engine shall carry at least one United States coast guard approved fire extinguisher,
so placed as to be readily accessible and in such condition as to be ready for immediate and effective use.
F. Ventilation System: All watercraft, other than those which are entirely open, carrying or using fuel or any other flammable or toxic in any enclosure, shall
be provided with an efficient natural or mechanical ventilation system which shall be capable of removing resulting gases prior to and during the time
such watercraft is occupied by any person. (1989 Code)
G. Life Preservers:
1. No person shall operate a watercraft unless at least one U.S. coast guard approved personal flotation device (PFD) of one of the following types or
their equivalents is on board for each person: type I, type II or type III.
2. No person shall operate a watercraft of sixteen feet (16') or greater in length, except a canoe or a kayak, unless at least one type IV U.S. coast
guard approved PFD or its equivalent is on board in addition to the PFDs required pursuant to subsection G1 of this section.
3. All persons shall wear a U.S. coast guard approved PFD at all times when operating a sailboat or a sailboard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 196/524
4. Every watercraft used to assist or tow a person on water skis, an aquaplane or any similar device shall be equipped with at least one U.S. coast
guard approved PFD for each person being assisted or towed.
5. No person shall operate a watercraft unless each PFD required pursuant to this subsection G is:
a. Readily accessible; and
b. In serviceable condition; and
c. Of appropriate size for the person for whom it is intended; and
d. Legibly marked with the U.S. coast guard approved number.
6. PFDs approved for use pursuant to this subsection G shall be as defined by article IV, section 314-1 of the Illinois board registration and safety act.
(Ord. 92-08-548, 8-3-1992)
H. Prohibited Equipment: It shall be unlawful for any person to use a vessel equipped with a siren, or to use any red or blue flashing light, except duly
designated patrol boats, and such siren or flashing lights used in violation of this subsection shall be considered a public nuisance subject to
confiscation and disposal as determined by a competent court of jurisdiction. (1989 Code)
7-4-5-5: ACCIDENTS:
A. Assistance: The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident or other casualty, so far as he can do so without serious danger to his own vessel,
crew, passengers and guests, if any, shall render to other persons affected by the collision, accident or other casualty, such assistance as may be
practicable and as may be necessary in order to save them from or minimize any danger caused by the collision, accident or other casualty, and also
shall give his name, address and identification of his vessel to any person injured and to the owner of any property damaged in the collision, accident
or other casualty.
B. Reports Required: In the case of collision, accident or other casualty involving a vessel, the operator thereof, if the collision, accident or other casualty
results in death or injury to a person or damage to property in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00), shall file with the department and the village a
full description of the collision, accident or other casualty, including such information as the department and the village may, by regulation, require.
(1989 Code)
7-4-6: ICE FISHING SHEDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-1995)
7-4-7: WATER SPORTS AND ACTIVITIES:
A. Waterskiing:
1. Minimum Number Of Boaters: No watercraft which has in tow, or otherwise is assisting, a person on water skis, aquaplane, inflatable tube or toy,
kneeboard, or any similar device shall be operated or propelled in or upon any waterway unless such watercraft is occupied by at least two (2)
competent persons, including one (1) person operating the watercraft and one (1) person observing who is physically capable of assisting in the
rescue or helping the towed person in the water. The person operating the watercraft shall be at least sixteen (16) years of age.
2. Maximum Number Of Skiers: No watercraft shall be used at any time in or upon any waterway to tow or otherwise assist more than two (2) persons
at one time on water skis, aquaplanes, inflatable tubes or toys, kneeboards, or any similar device. (Ord. 2003-07-231, 7-7-2003)
3. Prohibited Hours; Exceptions: No vessel or watercraft may be used to tow or otherwise assist any person on water skis, aquaplane, inflatable tube or
toy, kneeboard, or similar device on any waterway between sunset, as determined by the national weather service for the Lake Zurich area, and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. every day. The Village may further restrict such activities at any time when the Village determines that the current weather has
reduced visibility to less than five hundred feet (500') or otherwise has created an unsafe or potentially unsafe condition. (Ord. 2008-05-564, 5-19-
2008)
4. Careful Operation Required: All watercraft shall be operated in a careful and prudent manner at all times and shall remain at a reasonable distance
from, and shall not endanger, persons and property. No watercraft used to tow or otherwise assist any person on water skis, aquaplane, inflatable
tube or toy, kneeboard, or any similar device shall be operated in a manner to collide, or threaten collision, with any person, object, or property. (Ord.
2003-07-231, 7-7-2003)
B. Skin Diving: No person may engage in underwater diving or swimming with the use of swimming fins or skin diving gear in waters other than marked
swimming areas. The foregoing shall not apply to training by rescue organizations authorized by the Village. (1989 Code)
C. Regattas And Special Events:
1. Authority: The Village and the Lake Property Owners' Association of Lake Zurich, and no others, may authorize the holding of a regatta, other vessel
races, triathlons, fishing derbies, or other special events on the lake of Lake Zurich. The Village may from time to time adopt regulations concerning
the safety of vessels on the lake and of observers of, and participants in, any regatta or other vessel race. (Ord. 2010-01-689, 1-18-2010)
2. Application For Permit: Whenever a regatta or other vessel race is proposed to be held, the person in charge thereof shall, at least fifteen (15) days
prior thereto, file an application with the Department of Conservation and the Village for permission to hold such regatta or other vessel race. The
application shall set forth the date, time and location where it is proposed to hold such regatta or other vessel race and it shall not be conducted
without authorization of the Department of Conservation and the Village, in writing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 197/524
3. Interpretation: The provisions of this subsection shall not exempt any person from compliance with applicable Federal law or regulation, but nothing
contained herein shall be construed to require the securing of a State permit where there has been obtained a permit from an authorized agency of
the United States. (1989 Code)
7-4-8: SWIMMING ONLY IF LIFEGUARD:
It shall be unlawful to swim at any Village owned public beach unless there is on duty a qualified, Village employed lifeguard. (Ord. 99-12-1004, 12-6-1999)
7-4-9: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Intoxicated Persons:
1. No person shall operate any watercraft or vessel or manipulate any water skis, aquaplane or similar device while intoxicated or under the influence
of any narcotic drug, barbiturate or marijuana.
2. The owner of any watercraft or any person having such in charge or in control shall not authorize or knowingly permit the same to be operated by
any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotic or habit forming drug.
B. Aircraft: The taking off or landing of any aircraft, including, but without limitation, airplanes or hydroplanes, shall not be permitted on the waterways of
the Village.
C. Prohibited Use On Waterways: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any jet ski, wet bike, wave runner, snowmobile or similar vehicle of any
kind on any waterway of the Village.
D. Buoys: It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper written authorization, to move or to relocate any buoy placed in any waterway for the purpose
of designating areas for powerboat traffic. (Ord. 2017-7-208, 7-17-2017)
E. Private Property Launch: It shall be unlawful for any person to launch any type of watercraft from their individual private property or from a shared
homeowner's association property without a lake watercraft and use permit. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine pursuant to title 13,
chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for motorized watercraft. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1,
"Fee Schedule", of this Code for non-motorized watercraft such as rowboats, canoes, paddleboats and similar watercraft. (Ord. 2017-7-208, 7-17-2017;
amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-4-10: UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS; POLLUTING WATERWAYS AND BEACHES:
A. Unlawful Deposits In Waterways:
1. Soil, Rock, Sand: It shall be unlawful to fill in or to place soil, rock, sand or any similar material in any part of any waterway within the Village without
having obtained a permit.
2. Garbage And Refuse: It shall be unlawful to throw, place or deposit any garbage, refuse or waste materials of any kind in or upon any waterway
within the Village.
B. Offensive Matter On Beaches Or In The Water: The throwing, depositing or permitting to remain of any ashes, offal, dirt, garbage or any offensive
matter on any beach or in any waterway in Lake Zurich and/or the discharging of any inadequately treated liquid, liquid carried wastes or solid
substances of a decomposable or putrescible, acid or other character which may cause pollution of any waterway in Lake Zurich, either over the
surface of the ground or through the ground, the seepage of which enters any waterway in Lake Zurich and/or the discharging of any of said liquid,
liquid carried wastes or solid substances into any pipe, tile, ditch or natural watercourse discharging any said liquid, liquid carried wastes or solid
substances on the surface of the ground or in the ground, any seepage of which enters any storm sewer, surface drain or tile discharging into the
waterways in Lake Zurich, are prohibited. (1989 Code)
C. Sewage Treatment: (Rep. by Ord. 90-06-389, 6-18-1990)
D. Public Beach Waters: The waters of all bathing beaches shall be maintained free from dangerous pollution, and all dead aquatic plants and dead
animal, bird and fish life floating on the surface of the waters of any waterway in Lake Zurich or on the shore shall not be left to decompose but shall be
removed and disposed of in such a manner as not to contaminate any waterway in Lake Zurich and, whenever it is found by the Village or
representatives of the State Department of Public Health and/or Lake County Health Department, that any beach is unsafe for bathing, the Village shall
order said beach closed to the public.
E. Application Of Provisions: For the purpose of this section, all waterways and/or waterways that are frozen shall be deemed to be included. (1989 Code)
7-4-11: STATE LAWS ADOPTED:
The Boat Registration and Safety Act1 of Illinois is hereby incorporated by this reference and made a part of this Code. Any person violating the provisions
of the aforementioned Act shall be deemed as having violated a provision of this Code, and any person charging such a violation shall do so by citing this
chapter and section and in the specifications thereunder shall also set forth the section of the Boat Registration and Safety Act so violated. (1989 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 198/524
7-4-12: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Any police officer or other authorized Village officer may arrest, or issue a citation to, any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter.
The Village will promptly investigate reports of potential violations of the provisions of this chapter and may, when appropriate, cause a citation to be
issued and a complaint to be filed for a violation.
B. Any police officer or other authorized Village representative may inspect any watercraft or structure at any time for the purpose of determining
compliance of that watercraft or structure with the provisions of this chapter. If the inspector discovers any violation of any provision of this chapter, then
that inspector may issue a citation to the operator or occupant of such watercraft or structure requiring that the operator or occupant appear before the
Village's administrative hearing system or before the Illinois Circuit Court for the Nineteenth Judicial Circuit (Lake County).
C. Prosecutions under the provisions of this chapter may be brought before the Village's administrative hearing system or before the Illinois Circuit Court
for the Nineteenth Judicial Circuit (Lake County). (Ord. 2010-02-697, 2-1-2010)
7-4-13: PENALTIES:
A. General: Any person who violates or assists in the violations of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor and
shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each such violation. Each day on which, or during which, a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Payments To Avoid Prosecution: Any person who receives a citation for a violation of this chapter may avoid prosecution by paying a fine pursuant to
title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
If payment in the amount of citation is not made within thirty (30) days after issuance of the citation, then a court appearance shall be required. (Ord.
2018-02-247, 2-5-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Chapter 5
WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
7-5-1: POLICY; CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Policy: The Board of Trustees hereby finds that the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare requires a continuous source of safe,
clean, potable water, and proper sanitary sewer service. The Village has, and shall continue to maintain, such a water supply and sewer service, which
supply and service are available to every potable water user within the Village's corporate limits. It is the policy of the Village, therefore, that all users of
potable water shall be connected to the Village's water supply system. It also is the policy of the Village that all such users shall be connected to the
Village's sewer system.
B. General Connection Requirement: Every new development and new structure in the Village that uses potable water shall be connected to the Village's
water supply system and to the Village's sewer system. No building or development permit shall be issued for any such development or structure
unless provisions have been made for such connections, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any such development or structure until
after such connections have been made properly. All nonresidential connections to the Village's water supply system shall be at least two inches (2") in
diameter.
C. No Sewer Connection Without Water Connection: No connection to the sanitary sewer system of the Village shall be permitted unless a connection is
made to the Village water system.
D. Connection Requirement For Existing Buildings And Structures: Every building or structure that currently is within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the
Village's water system and the Village's sanitary sewer system, or that in the future becomes within such two hundred fifty feet (250') because of
extensions of those systems, shall connect to said systems.
E. Free Service Prohibited: No free water or sanitary sewer service shall be furnished to any person, firm, organization, or corporation, public or private.
F. Resale Of Water Or Sewer Service:
1. No water service or sewer service may be resold at a rate greater than that charged by the Village.
2. No landlord may charge its tenants more or less for water or sewer service than would be charged by the Village if served directly; provided,
however, that the renting of premises with the cost of service included in the rental is deemed not to be resale of service. (Ord. 2001-07-112, 7-16-
2001)
7-5-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; ESTABLISHMENT OF CREDIT:
A. No water or sanitary sewer service shall be extended except on application for said service in the form provided by the Village, and no existing service
shall be deemed transferable without application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 199/524
B. The Village may require an applicant to establish his credit or to pay a cash deposit to secure payment of water and sewer bills. Credit will be deemed
to have been established if the applicant is the owner of the property being served, or if, during the last twelve (12) consecutive months, the applicant
has paid all water and sewer bills promptly without disconnection for nonpayment. Credit must be reestablished for customers whose service has been
discontinued. (1989 Code)
7-5-3: SPECIAL CONTRACTS:
Contracts, other than accepted applications for service, are not normally required. However, under the following conditions, a special contract and
regulations will be required:
A. When the construction of special extensions or pretreatment facilities are necessary.
B. When temporary service is to be supplied.
C. When standby service or fire service is required.
D. When interconnections with other utility jurisdictions are involved. (1989 Code)
7-5-4: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
All water and sewer lines constructed and all sewer and water connections made shall be in accordance with the "Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois", of September 1978, as amended. (1989 Code)
7-5-5: STREET OPENINGS:
A fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each square foot of opening will be required with each permit issued to connect or
reconnect to any water or sanitary sewer system lying within a public street. The fee shall pay the cost of restoration and repair of any damage to public
property. Permits to public utilities shall be in accordance with the resolution administering franchise agreements. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-
16-2015; Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-5-6: WATER METERS:
A. Meters Required:
1. All premises using the Village water supply must be equipped with an adequate water meter furnished by the Village, but paid for by the consumer;
provided, that such water service may be supplied by the Village at a flat rate of charge until such meter is installed.
2. During the construction of any building and before any water is installed as is herein provided, the contractor so constructing such building may be
permitted to use the Village water supply by making application therefor and paying the flat fee prescribed by the Board of Trustees.
3. Before any premises are occupied, a water meter shall be installed therein as herein required, or application be made for such water service at the
flat rate of charge until the meter can be installed, or no water shall be furnished such premises. (Ord. 2017-10-217, 10-2-2017)
4. Water meters and remote readers are the property of the Village. Removing, tampering or disabling the meter shall result in a tampering fee
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code, charges for the new water meter and restoration of service being added to the water bill.
5. Village personnel must have access to the water meter and remote reader; consumers are prohibited from blocking access to the meter or remote
reader. Keep shrubs and vegetation from the remote reader. Obstructing a meter or remote reader may result in an obstruction fee pursuant to title
13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each occurrence being added to the water bill. (Ord. 2017-10-217, 10-2-2017; amd. Ord. 2018-12-
279, 12-3-2018)
B. Type Of Meter: All meters and metering configurations shall be approved by the Superintendent of Water. The American Water Works Association
(AWWA) standards for metering devices shall apply as a minimum standard.
C. Reading Meters: The Superintendent of Water shall read or cause to be read every water meter used in the Village at such times as are necessary, but
not less than once annually to determine accuracy of Village records as they relate to actual meter readings. (Ord. 2017-10-217, 10-2-2017)
D. Testing Meters: Any customer may request that the Village test that customer's Municipal water meter. If such test indicates that the water meter is not
within plus or minus two percent (±2%) of being accurate, then the Village, in the exercise of its sole discretion and without charge, either shall repair
and reinstall the water meter or shall install a new water meter. If such test indicates that the water meter is accurate within plus or minus two percent
(.2%), a testing fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code shall be added to the customer's water bill. The Village shall notify the
customer of such test results in writing within fifteen (15) days after the Village receives written test results, and the Village shall provide the customer
with a copy of the report documenting such test results. Nothing in this section shall be construed or applied to require the Village to reimburse to any
customer any fees or charges paid by such customer for water, and the Village shall not be required to so reimburse any customer.
E. Temporary Metering: On request and in the exercise of the Village's sole discretion based on factors such as the proposed use of the water, the
availability of a sufficient supply of water to satisfy the request, the capability of the water supply system to satisfy the request without adverse impact
on customers of the water supply system, the timing of the request, the overall effects on the Village's water system if water is supplied as requested,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 200/524
the potential impacts on the general public health, safety, and welfare from satisfying the request, and other factors as the Village reasonably may
determine, the Village may authorize temporary use of the Village's fire hydrants and other water supply sources and temporary placement of water
meters to measure water flow from such sources. No such temporary use shall be allowed, and no water meter shall be placed, except after payment
of a fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. The required fee shall apply each time a water meter is placed, moved, or
replaced up to a maximum of three (3) times the required fee in any day. The cost of the water thereby supplied shall be as determined by the Board of
Trustees from time to time, but in no event shall be less than the highest cost of water supplied by the Village to a regular customer. (Ord. 2017-10-217,
10-2-2017; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
F. Meter Replacement: From time to time it may become necessary to replace water meters throughout the Village. As part of a large-scale water meter
replacement:
1. The Village shall introduce the Meter Replacement Program through press releases, mailings and information posted on the Village website and
social media outlets.
2. Consumers are to cooperatively schedule replacement of the meter with the Village or its designee. (Ord. 2017-10-217, 10-2-2017)
3. Failure to schedule a meter replacement within forty five (45) days of the introduction of the large-scale program shall result in a monthly old-meter
fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code being added to the water bill until the meter is replaced.
4. Failure to provide access on two (2) consecutive scheduled meter replacement or repair appointments shall result in a monthly old-meter fee
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code being added to the water bill until the meter is replaced. (Ord. 2017-10-217, 10-2-2017;
amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
5. Consumers that have incurred the old-meter fee for six (6) consecutive months shall be added to the shut-off list. (Ord. 2017-10-217, 10-2-2017)
7-5-7: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
A. Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this
section, have the meanings indicated in this subsection:
AGENCY: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
AGENCY'S REGULATIONS: 35 Illinois Administrative Code 653.
APPROVED: Those backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation for Cross Connection Control of the University of
Southern California, the American Waterworks Association, the American Society of Sanitary Engineering, the American National Standards Institute,
or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water source or system on or available to any premises, other than the waterworks system, and includes the water
so supplied. Auxiliary water may include water from a public water supply system; or water from a private or emergency water supply system; or water
from a source such as wells, lakes, or streams; or process fluids; or used water. Auxiliary water may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or
constitute a water supply system over which the Village does not have control.
BACK SIPHONAGE: Type of backflow in a pipe or plumbing device in which used, contaminated, or polluted water flows back from a receptacle or
other source into a negative pressure in such pipe or plumbing device.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source
other than the intended source of the potable water supply system.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the waterworks system or other potable water supply system by entrance of any substance to a
degree that could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable
water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other. A direct
cross connection is a cross connection formed when the waterworks system or other potable water supply system is physically joined to a source of
unknown or unsafe substance. An indirect cross connection is a cross connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by a
vacuum or otherwise introduced into the waterworks system or other water supply system.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE: Any approved assembly intended to prevent backflow into the waterworks system or other potable water
supply system. The term "backflow prevention device" shall be included in the definition of cross connection control device. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code and the agency.
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR: Any person approved by the Agency who is responsible for inspecting cross-connection
control devices.
CUSTOMER: The owner, occupant, and/or person in possession, charge or control of any premises.
CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM: All parts of the water facilities beginning at the service connection used to convey water from the waterworks system
to the premises, which facilities are deemed to be operated, controlled or owned by the customer.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE standard 1015. A
double check valve assembly must include tight shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the
watertightness of each check valve.
FIXED AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device, or practice in a water system or its operation resulting in a real or potential danger to a person's health and
well-being. The term "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 201/524
significant reduction in the quality of life.
ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE: 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping, and appurtenances, appliances, and installations
of a plumbing system for compliance with the requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code and this Section.
NONPOTABLE: The quality of water that does not meet public health standards for drinking water and is not suitable for human consumption.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE: The quality of water that meets public health standards for drinking water and is suitable for human consumption.
PREMISES: Any lot or a part of a lot, any building or a part of a building, or any parcel or tract of land whatever.
PROCESS FLUIDS: Any fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such
as would constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the waterworks system, a customer's water system, or any other potable
water supply system. This includes, but is not limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated water;
B. Used water originating from the waterworks system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
C. Cooling waters;
D. Contaminated natural water taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
E. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
F. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACK-FLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting check
valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE
standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply
pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the
pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the
device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at a water main of the waterworks system through which water is
supplied to the customer.
SURVEY: The collection of information regarding the location of all connections between a customer's water system and the waterworks system and
must include the location, type, and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within that
customer's premises. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing inspection.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by the waterworks system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control
of the Village.
VILLAGE: The Village of Lake Zurich.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM OR WATER SYSTEM: Any water source, supply, or system, including all pipes, fittings, and control valves, as well as the
water so supplied. The term "water supply system" shall not include the waterworks system, however.
WATERWORKS SYSTEM: The entire system operated, controlled, or owned by the Village of pipes, hydrants, boxes, cocks, taps, meters,
connections, reservoirs, tanks, engines, property, and all appurtenances thereto, whereby water is or may be supplied to the public or to private
parties within the Village. The term "water service system" shall be included in the definition of waterworks system.
B. Cross-Connection Prohibited:
1. No Cross-Connection: Connections between the waterworks system or other potable water supply systems and other systems or equipment
containing nonpotable water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved crossconnection
control devices or methods are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis. No physical
connection shall be permitted between the waterworks system or any potable water supply system and any auxiliary water supply not of equal or
better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Agency. There shall be no arrangement or connection by
which an unsafe substance may enter the waterworks system or other potable water supply system or an auxiliary water supply approved by the
Superintendent of Water and the Agency.
2. No Auxiliary Cross-Connection: No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or maintain, or permit to be established or maintained, any connection
whereby an auxiliary water supply may enter the waterworks system or the customer's water system, unless such auxiliary water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the Superintendent of Water and the Agency.
C. General Requirements For Cross-Connection Control Devices:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 202/524
1. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to install, remove, or replace any cross-connection control device without first having obtained a permit therefor
in accordance with the Lake Zurich Building Code. Any violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of two (2) times the
required permit fee. (Ord. 90-08-399, 8-6-90)
2. Approved Devices Only: Only approved cross-connection control devices or methods can be used to satisfy the requirements of this Section. No
such device or method that contains or utilizes nonmetallic checks shall be permitted. (Ord. 95-06-740, 6-5-95)
3. Type Of Protection: The type of protection required shall depend on the degree of hazard that exists as follows:
a. An approved fixed air gap separation shall be installed when the waterworks system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a
severe health hazard.
b. An approved fixed air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed when the
waterworks system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard.
c. An approved fixed air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device or a double check value assembly
shall be installed when the waterworks system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
d. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on premises
when it is impractical to determine whether cross-connections exist or it is impossible to make a complete cross-connection survey or on premises
having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or re-established.
4. Fire Safety Systems: Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the waterworks
system when:
a. The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or other chemicals;
b. Water is pumped into the system from a source other than the waterworks system;
c. Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source or water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any source other than the waterworks
system; or
d. There is a connection whereby a source other than the waterworks system can be introduced into the fire safety system.
All other fire safety systems connected to the waterworks system shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
5. All Other Systems: The type of cross-connection control devices required for any other potable water supply system shall be equivalent to the
devices used to protect the waterworks system from similar hazards, unless the Superintendent of Water permits otherwise.
D. Installation, Inspection, Maintenance, And Repair Of Cross-Connection Control Devices:
1. Prevention; Removal Of Cross-Connections: The customer shall prevent backflow and back siphonage into the waterworks system by ensuring that
either all cross-connections are removed or cross-connection control devices are installed, inspected, maintained, and repaired. (Ord. 90-08-399, 8-
6-90)
2. General Installation Requirements: The customer shall ensure that a cross-connection control device be installed wherever necessary to prevent
cross-connections to the waterworks system or any other potable water supply system. Cross-connection control devices shall be installed by an
Illinois licensed plumber and maintained and inspected by an Illinois licensed CCCDI as provided for in the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Agency's
regulations and in accordance with the manufacturers' instructions. The manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on the premises. All
cross-connection control devices shall be installed in a location accessible for observation, maintenance, replacement, and testing, and shall be
protected against freezing and flooding. (Ord. 91-02-428, 2-4-91)
3. Specific Conditions Requiring Installation: In addition to the foregoing, the customer shall ensure that a cross-connection control device be installed
on each service line to a customer's water system serving premises having any of the following conditions:
a. Premises for which the Superintendent of Water makes an independent determination that actual or potential hazards to the waterworks system
exist.
b. Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the Superintendent of Water and
the source is approved by the Agency.
c. Premises on which any substance is handled that can create an actual or potential hazard to the waterworks system. Such premises shall include
premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the waterworks system that are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Superintendent of Water.
d. Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete crossconnection
survey.
e. Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or re-established.
4. Specific Service Lines Requiring Installation: An approved cross-connection control device shall be installed on each service line to a customer's
water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities, unless the Superintendent of Water determines that no actual or
potential hazard to the waterworks system exists:
a. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, and nursing homes;
b. Laboratories;
c. Piers, docks, and waterfront facilities;
d. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, and storm water pumping stations;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 203/524
e. Food or beverage processing plants;
f. Chemical plants;
g. Metal plating industries;
h. Petroleum processing or storage plants;
i. Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
j. Car washes;
k. Pesticide, herbicide, or extermination plants and trucks;
l. Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks;
m. All other commercial or industrial facilities;
n. Any facility utilizing a heat exchanger; and
o. All underground sprinkler systems.
5. Inspections; Maintenance: Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually, or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, by a cross-connection control device inspector. The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical
testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The customer shall cause all required repairs or maintenance to be performed promptly,
and in any event within three (3) days after notice that such repairs or maintenance are required.
6. Tagging: Each cross-connection control device shall have a tag attached to it listing the date of the most recent test or visual inspection, the name
and CCCDI number of the cross-connection control device inspector, and the type and date of repairs.
7. Maintenance Log: A maintenance log shall be maintained by the customer and shall include:
a. Date of each test or visual inspection;
b. Name and approval number of the person performing the test or visual inspection;
c. Test results;
d. Repairs or servicing required;
e. Repairs and date completed; and
f. Servicing performed and date completed.
The customer shall forward a copy of this maintenance log to the Superintendent of Water within fourteen (14) days after its completion.
8. Costs: The installation, inspection, and maintenance of all cross-connection control devices shall be at the sole cost and expense of the customer.
Whenever cross-connection control devices required by these regulations are defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the sole cost and
expense of the customer without delay.
9. No Bypasses or Removal: Cross-connection control devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed, or otherwise made ineffective
without specific authorization by the Superintendent of Water.
E. Survey and Investigations:
1. Village Surveys; Investigations: The Superintendent of Water shall cause surveys and investigations to be made of all premises served by the
waterworks system to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the waterworks system may exist. A reasonable fee covering the cost of the
survey or investigation may be levied against each customer whose premises are surveyed and investigated. Such surveys and investigations shall
be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least once every two years, or more often as the Superintendent of Water shall deem
necessary. Such surveys may be conducted by telephone, mail, or personal visit to the premises and is not intended to include an actual visual
inspection of piping or plumbing systems. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of a least five years.
2. Information: On request by the Superintendent of Water, the customer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or systems or water use
within the customer's premises. The refusal of such information, when requested, shall, within the discretion of the Superintendent of Water, be
deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this Section.
3. Customer Surveys and Inspections: The customer shall arrange periodic surveys and inspections of his or her water system and of water use
practices on his or her premises to determine whether the elements of the customer's water system comply with the Illinois Plumbing Code and this
Section and whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to the customer's water system through which contaminants or pollutants could
backflow into the customer's water system or the waterworks system. Such surveys and inspections shall be conducted by a duly licensed and
bonded plumber and a cross-connection control device inspector and shall be at the sole cost and expense of the customer, and a copy of the results
shall be forwarded to the Superintendent of Water. (Ord. 90-08-399, 8-6-1990)
F. Booster Pumps: Cross-connection control devices must be installed on the suction side of all booster pumps. When a booster pump has been installed
on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off device designed to shut off the booster pump
when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less. It shall be the duty of the customer to maintain
the low pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the Superintendent of Water, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
(Ord. 91-02-428, 2-4-1991)
G. Cross-Connection Violations:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 204/524
1. Access To Premises: The customer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the cross-connection control device inspector and the
Superintendent of Water or his or her designees for the purposes of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, inspecting the
installation, testing, maintenance, and repair of cross-connection control devices, verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the
required cross-connection control device inspection, and ensuring that the requirements of this section have been properly executed.
2. Notice To Install; Compliance: If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Superintendent of Water, a cross-connection
control device is necessary for the safety of the waterworks system, the Superintendent of Water may, two (2) weeks after serving a written notice on
the customer to install a cross-connection control device, deny or discontinue water service to such customer's premises if no proper crossconnection
control device is installed. The Superintendent of Water may, after two (2) weeks' written notice to a customer, deny or discontinue water
service to any customer's premises wherein any cross-connection control device required by this section is not installed, tested, maintained, or
repaired in a manner acceptable to the Superintendent of Water, or if it is found that the cross-connection control device has been removed or
bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cut-off or other device required by this section is not
installed and maintained in working order, or if any person is found to be violating any provisions of this section.
3. Emergencies: If, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Water, an emergency exists whereby the waterworks system is immediately threatened,
then the Superintendent of Water shall have the right to enter the premises of a customer, providing oral notice only if such is possible, and may
immediately without any notice deny or discontinue water service to that customer's premises. In the event of such denial or discontinuance, the
Superintendent of Water, as soon as practical, shall serve written notice as herein provided.
4. Content Of Notice; Service: The written notice herein provided for shall state the nature of the request or violation and shall provide a reasonable
time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. This written notice may be served by personal service or by mailing such notice upon the customer.
(Ord. 90-08-399, 8-6-1990)
5. Restoration Of Service: Water service that has been denied or discontinued shall not be restored until the customer has corrected or eliminated any
conditions or defects in conformance with this section and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Water, and a reconnection fee in the amount
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code shall have been paid to the Village. (Ord. 90-08-399, 8-6-1990; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279,
12-3-2018)
6. No Liability Of Village: Neither the Village nor the Superintendent of Water, nor their agents or assigns, shall be liable to any customer of the
waterworks system for any injury, damages, or lost revenue that may result from the termination of a customer's water supply, whether such
termination was with or without notice.
7. Liability Of Customer Or Other: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, in addition to the foregoing, shall become liable to the
Village for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the Village by reason of such violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice.
If contamination of the waterworks system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained, or repaired crossconnection
control device, or a cross-connection control device that has been bypassed, the customer responsible for such contamination shall bear
the cost of cleanup or repair to the waterworks system. (Ord. 90-08-399, 8-6-1990)
8. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 90-08-399, 8-
6-1990; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
H. Minimum Requirements; Inconsistencies: The provisions of this section shall be construed to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and welfare. When the provisions of this section impose greater requirements than those of any other ordinance or regulation,
then the provisions of this section shall be controlling. When the provisions of any other ordinance or regulation impose greater requirements than this
section, then the provisions of such other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling. In the case of any inconsistency between any provision of this
section and any provision of any other ordinance or regulation, the provision imposing the greater requirements shall be controlling. (Ord. 90-08-399, 8-
6-1990)
7-5-7-1: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS FOR SPECIFIC SERVICES:
A. Fire Service Connections: All connections to the water system which service suppression equipment shall be provided with flow detection devices and
central stationing alarms in accordance with Village specifications.
B. Temporary And Bulk Service: All unmetered service provided during construction shall be billed at the temporary service rate established. All bulk
service shall be taken from locations to be determined by the Superintendent of Water and shall be paid for at the bulk service rate established.
C. Swimming Pools And Water Tanks: Abnormally large amounts of water for swimming pools or other water storage may not be drawn during
conservation restriction and may not be discharged into the sanitary sewer system at any time. (1989 Code)
7-5-8: OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF CONNECTION FACILITIES:
A. Water Main Connection: The Village shall own and maintain the water service pipes from the water main up to, and including, the curb stop and valve
box. The customer shall own, properly maintain, and be liable for all repairs of the water service pipes from the connection to the curb stop and to the
plumbing connection at the water meter spread. The Village shall be responsible for the maintenance and repairs of water meters. The customer shall
be liable for all damage to the water meter by any person or source other than an authorized Village official or agent. The customer shall keep all debris
from entering into and/or damaging the curb stop, valve box, and Village's water main.
B. Sewer Main Connection: The customer shall own, properly maintain, and be liable for all maintenance and repairs of the building drain and building
sewer from its connection to the Village sewer main. The customer shall keep all debris from damaging the Village's sewer main.
C. Village Right To Maintain; Payment Of Cost: If the customer at any time fails to properly maintain any pipe or equipment for which the customer is
responsible, then the Village may immediately perform such maintenance as the Village determines is required and charge all costs and expenses
related thereto to the customer. If the customer does not pay all such costs and expenses within ninety (90) days after receipt of a written invoice
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 205/524
therefor from the Village, then the Village may convert such costs and expenses into a lien against such premises and may proceed against and
foreclose such lien in the manner provided by law. The Village also shall have the right to pursue any other legal means of collecting delinquent service
charges, whether by collection service or other means and regardless of whether the Village has filed a lien for such charges. (Ord. 2001-07-112, 7-16-
2001)
7-5-9: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES:
A. Base Fees For Connections Within The Village's Corporate Limits: Fees for connection to the Village's water supply system and sewage collection and
transmission system from within the Village's corporate limits shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
B. Base Fees For Connections Outside Of The Village's Corporate Limits: Fees for connection to the Village's water supply system and sewage collection
and transmission system from outside the Village's corporate limits shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
C. Irrigation Fees For Connections Within The Village's Corporate Limits: Fees for connection to the Village's water supply system from within the Village's
corporate limits and for irrigation purposes only shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
D. Irrigation Fees For Connections From Outside Of The Village's Corporate Limits: Fees for connection to the Village's water supply system from outside
of the Village's corporate limits and for irrigation purposes only shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
E. Multiple-Unit, Multiple Tenant, And Multiple Bed Development Connection Fees For Connections Within The Village's Corporate Limits: Fees for
connection to the Village's water supply system and sewage collection and transmission system from within the Village's corporate limits shall be
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code in addition to the applicable base fee provided in subsection A of this section.
1. For the purposes of this subsection E, "rooming unit" means any habitable room used or intended to be used for living and sleeping.
2. For the purposes of this subsection E, multiple-unit, multiple tenant, and multiple bed developments shall include, without limitation, structures for
townhouses, condominiums, and all other forms of multiple-family dwellings, industrial and commercial multiple-unit buildings, and hotels, motels,
hospitals, and long term care facilities.
F. Multiple-Unit, Multiple Tenant, And Multiple Bed Development Connection Fees For Connections Outside The Village's Corporate Limits: Fees for
connection to the Village's water supply system and sewage collection and transmission system from outside of the Village's corporate limits shall be
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code, in addition to the applicable base fee provided in subsection A of this section.
1. For the purposes of this subsection F, "rooming unit" means any habitable room used or intended to be used for living and sleeping.
2. For the purposes of this subsection F, multiple-unit, multiple-tenant, and multiple bed developments shall include, without limitation, structures for
townhouses, condominiums, and all other forms of multiple-family dwellings, industrial and commercial multiple-unit buildings, and hotels, motels,
hospitals, and long term care facilities. (Ord. 2004-05-290, 5-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
G. Expansion Of Existing Connection: If any use with an existing connection to the water supply system shall expand, then the user shall pay the
difference, if any, between the base fee for the original connection as set forth in the applicable subsection of this section and the base fee applicable
to the expanded use (not including capacity required solely for fire suppression purposes).
H. Fees Of Other Governmental Agencies: The base fee established in subsection A of this section is assessed in addition to any fee required by the
County of Lake for sewage treatment services and in addition to any other fee for services from any governmental agency. (Ord. 2004-05-290, 5-17-
2004)
I. Newly Annexed Property: For property annexed into the Village, the Board of Trustees may authorize the applicable base fee to be paid in equal
installments over a period of time not greater than three (3) years; provided, however, that no such installment payments may be authorized unless the
owner shall have entered into a binding agreement with the Village, in a form satisfactory to the Village Manager and recorded against the subject
property, which agreement requires such payments and authorizes the Village to place, and if necessary foreclose, a lien against the subject property
in the event of nonpayment. (Ord. 2004-05-290, 5-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
J. No Superseder Of Ordinances Establishing Special Fees: In a few instances prior to January 1990, the Board of Trustees adopted ordinances
establishing special connection fees for certain property in certain location in the Village. This section is not intended, and shall not be applied, to
supersede any such ordinances.
K. Effective Date For Revised Connection Fees; Exception:
1. Effective Date For Revised Connection Fees: The revised water and sewer connection fees outlined in this section shall apply to all connections
made on and after July 19, 2004.
2. Exception: Subject to the condition stated in the next sentence of this subsection K2, the water and sewer connection fees in effect prior to July 19,
2004, shall apply to any fully and properly completed application for development approval related to property located within the Village's corporate
limits that is on file on or before July 19, 2004. If, however, the necessary building permits for the development have not been obtained within thirty
(30) months after the date of such application, then the revised water and sewer connection fees outlined in this section shall apply. (Ord. 2004-05-
290, 5-17-2004)
L. Authorization For Access To Village Records: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency ("IEPA"), or any authorized representative of the IEPA, shall
have access to all Village records and documents relating to the Village's system of, or accounting for, user charges for water and sewer service, but
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 206/524
only for the purpose of conducting an audit, examination, or review thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of any relevant loan agreement
currently in effect between the Village and the IEPA. (Ord. 2005-09-375, 9-6-2005)
7-5-10: FIRE SUPPRESSION CAPACITY:
For purposes of determining the applicable base fee, capacity required solely for fire suppression purposes shall not be included, and the base fee shall be
determined by the service connection that would be required in the absence of required capacity for such fire suppression purposes. (Ord. 2001-07-112, 7-
16-2001)
7-5-11: SERVICE CHARGES FOR RESIDENTS:
Subject to the provisions of this section, the following charges shall apply for water and sewer services provided by the Village to residents of the Village:
A. Water And Sewer Service Charge: Every user of combined water and sewer service shall pay the then effective rates outlined in section 7-5-21 of this
chapter per one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof of all water and sewer services used.
B. Automatic Adjustment Of Lake County Treatment Charge: The rates for water and sewer service outlined in section 7-5-21 of this chapter include the
charge assessed to the Village by the County of Lake for sewage treatment services provided by the County of Lake. The Lake County sewage
treatment charge shall be adjusted automatically by an equal amount to reflect any increase or decrease in the County charge enacted by Lake
County.
C. Minimum Service Charge Per Billing Period: Every user of combined water and sewer service shall pay a minimum charge each billing period based on
a usage of two thousand (2,000) gallons of water and sewer services regardless of actual usage.
D. Sanitary Sewer Service Only Charge: Every resident user of sanitary sewer service only shall pay the then effective rates outlined in section 7-5-21 of
this chapter per month for such service.
E. Reduced Rate For Senior And Disabled Citizens: After written application, proof of eligibility, and approval of eligibility by the Director of Finance, any
resident who owns and occupies, or who leases and occupies, a dwelling unit for which he or she is liable for payment of the service charge for water
service shall be entitled to the then effective discount outlined in section 7-5-21 of this chapter for water service, if he or she has attained the age of
sixty five (65) years or if he or she can establish that he or she is qualified for social security because of a physical handicap.
F. Periodic Review Of Charges: The adequacy of water and sewer service charges shall be reviewed not less than annually to reflect any changes in
operation, maintenance and replacement costs. (Ord. 2017-12-235, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
G. Penalty: Payment of invoices for water and sewer services is due upon receipt of invoice. A penalty pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of
this Code will be applied to the unpaid balance three (3) business days past the due date as shown on each monthly invoice. (Ord. 2017-12-235, 12-4-
2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-5-12: SERVICE CHARGES FOR NONRESIDENTS:
Subject to the provisions of this section, the following charges shall apply for water and sewer services provided by the Village to every user outside of the
Village's corporate limits:
A. Water And Sewer Service Charge: Every user of combined water and sewer services outside of the Village's corporate limits shall pay the then effective
rates outlined in section 7-5-21 of this chapter per one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof of all water and sewer services used.
B. Automatic Adjustment Of Lake County Treatment Charge: The rates for water and sewer service outlined in section 7-5-21 of this chapter include the
charge assessed to the Village by the County of Lake for sewage treatment services provided by the County of Lake. The Lake County sewage
treatment charge shall be adjusted automatically by an equal amount to reflect any increase or decrease in the County charge enacted by Lake
County.
C. Minimum Service Charge Per Billing Period: Every user of combined water and sewer service shall pay a minimum charge each billing period based on
a usage of two thousand (2,000) gallons of water and sewer services regardless of actual usage.
D. Water Service Only Charge: Every user of water service only outside of the Village's corporate limits shall pay the then effective rates outlined in section
7-5-21 of this chapter per one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof for all water service used.
E. Minimum Charge For Water Service: Every user of a water service only outside of the Village's corporate limits shall pay a minimum charge each billing
period based on a usage of two thousand (2,000) gallons of water and sewer services regardless of actual usage.
F. Sanitary Sewer Service Only Charge:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 207/524
1. Non-Metered Service: Every user of non-metered sanitary sewer service only outside of the Village's corporate limits shall pay the then effective
rates outlined in section 7-5-21 of this chapter for such service.
2. Metered Service:
a. Every user of metered sanitary sewer service only outside of the Village's corporate limits shall pay the then effective rates outlined in section 7-5-
21 of this chapter per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered consumption.
b. A minimum service charge for metered sanitary sewer service only shall pay a minimum charge each billing period based on two thousand (2,000)
gallons of service regardless of actual metering. (Ord. 2017-12-235, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
G. Penalty: Payment of invoices for water and sewer services is due upon receipt of invoice. A penalty pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of
this Code will be applied to the unpaid balance three (3) business days past the due date as shown on each monthly invoice. (Ord. 2017-12-235, 12-4-
2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-5-13: IRRIGATION SERVICE ONLY:
A. Usage Charge: Irrigation only water supply services shall be permissible only for nonresidential users, and shall not be available for any dwelling unit.
Every user of irrigation service shall pay the then effective rates outlined in section 7-5-21 of this chapter per one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction
thereof for all irrigation service used.
B. Minimum Service Charge: Every user of irrigation service only in the Village's corporate limits shall pay a minimum charge each billing period based on
a usage of two thousand (2,000) gallons of service regardless of actual usage. (Ord. 2017-12-235, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
C. Penalty: Payment of invoices for irrigation only services is due upon receipt of invoice. A penalty pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this
Code will be applied to the unpaid balance three (3) business days past the due date as shown on each monthly invoice. (Ord. 2017-12-235, 12-4-
2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-5-14: PRIVATE WELLS:
Every owner of nonresidential property within the Village on which a private water well is maintained shall pay, in addition to every other applicable charge
pursuant to this Code, such charge as may be set from time to time by the Board of Trustees, regardless of actual water usage from the private water well
or from the Village's water system (for which the regular applicable charges also must be paid). (Ord. 2001-07-112, 7-16-2001)
7-5-15: REVIEW OF COMPUTATIONS:
The Village shall provide to any water or sewer service user, within seven (7) days after receipt by the Village of a written request therefor from such user,
all pertinent information regarding the computation of the charge applicable to such user. Any user who disputes the calculation applicable to such user
shall file written notice of such dispute, detailing each charge in dispute and the particular dispute about each such charge, within thirty (30) days after
receipt of such pertinent information from the Village. The Village shall render a decision on each such dispute within forty five (45) days after receipt of
such notice from the user. (Ord. 2001-07-112, 7-16-2001)
7-5-16: BILLS FOR SERVICES; DELINQUENCIES:
A. Rendition Of Bills; Payment: Bills for sewer and water services shall be sent to the owner or owners of premises served. Service shall be furnished to
the premises by the Village only subject to the condition that there is joint and several liability among the owner of the premises and all occupants and
users of the service. All bills for service shall be rendered monthly succeeding the period for which the service is billed, unless otherwise determined by
the Village. All bills shall be payable at the Village office not later than the close of business on the fifteenth day after the billing date. The gross amount
shall be assessed on all bills paid after fifteen (15) days of date of billing. When the fifteenth day of any month is on a weekend or a legal holiday, then
such bills for service shall be payable no later than the next succeeding business day. (Ord. 2001-07-112, 7-16-2001)
B. Delinquent Bills; Lien:
1. Notice And Hearing On Delinquencies; Water Shut Off: All delinquent service charges shall be subject to notice and hearing requirements as
provided by law. Upon completion of such requirements, the water supply to any premises for which a service charge remains unpaid may be shut
off. As part of such notice and hearing requirements, the Village, prior to shutting off a water supply for delinquent service charges, shall cause a final
notice to be displayed on the premises and the Village's Billing Department shall notify, in writing, the owner of the premises (if known), the occupant
of the premises, and the user of the service that such delinquency exists and that service will be discontinued without further notice. No water supply
shall be restored until every other applicable charge has been satisfied, including a charge pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this
Code for administrative costs and expenses related to final notice, which charge shall be added to the next bill for water service. (Ord. 2004-07-301,
7-19-2004; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
2. Meter Access: Refusal to allow access to water meters by Village personnel shall constitute sufficient basis for denial of water service, after notice
and hearing, in the same manner as is provided for refusal to pay a water bill.
3. Lien Procedure: Charges for water may be a lien on the premises as provided by statute. Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid thirty (30)
days after it has been rendered, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and the Village Clerk may file with the
Recorder of Lake County a statement of lien claim. If a lien is filed, the following procedure shall be followed: The statement of lien shall contain the
legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the Village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all
charges for water served subsequent to the period covered by the bill. The Village Clerk shall mail a notice to the owner of the premises stating
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 208/524
failure of the Village Clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of
the lien or the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as provided in this subsection.
4. Property Sold For Nonpayment: Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of
such sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting the costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. The Village Attorney shall
be authorized to institute such proceedings in the name of the Village in any court having jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for
which the water bill has remained unpaid thirty (30) days after it has been rendered.
5. Village Right; Collect Delinquent Service Charges: The Village shall have the right to pursue any and all legal means of collecting delinquent service
charges, whether by collection service or other method, regardless of whether a lien for such charges has been filed. (Ord. 2001-07-112, 7-16-2001)
7-5-17: CHARGE FOR DISCONNECTION AND RECONNECTION:
At any time that water service to any premises shall be shut off by the Village pursuant to this chapter or for any other reason whatsoever, a charge
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code shall be assessed automatically against the water account for such premises. Such charge
shall be paid in full before water service is restored. If unpaid for more than thirty (30) days after it is assessed, the Village may convert such charge into a
lien against such premises that shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of section 7-5-16 of this chapter. The Village shall have the right to
pursue any and all legal means of collecting delinquent service charges, whether by collection service or other method, regardless of whether a lien for
such charges. (Ord. 2001-07-112, 7-16-2001; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-5-18: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Control Valves, Manholes: No person, other than those authorized by the Village, shall operate any curb stop, distribution valve, or fire hydrant. No
person, other than those authorized by the Village, shall open any sanitary manhole, lamp hole or flow control device.
B. Ground Wire Attachment: No ground wire or fault device may be connected to any water system.
C. Wasting Water: The Village reserves the right to discontinue service to any customer who is negligent or wasteful in the use of water. (Ord. 2001-07-
112, 7-16-2001)
7-5-19: NOTICES:
A. Notices From Village To Customer: When it is necessary for the Village to give notice to its water and sewer customers, such notice shall be as follows:
1. Statement of service charges; by United States mail to last known address, or by telephone.
2. Failure to comply with regulation, or violation of ordinance provision; by written notification sent by certified U.S. mail stating nature of violation and
regulation violated or by personal delivery of citation order.
3. Temporary interruption of service; by U.S. mail, by telephone, or in person.
4. Possible contamination or quality change, "boil order"; by newspaper publication or by radio or television announcement.
5. Conservation measures; by newspaper publication or by radio or television announcement.
B. Notices From Customer To Village: When it is necessary for the customer to contact the Village regarding water or sewer service, such contact shall be
made as follows:
1. Request for service or discontinuance of service, or complaints; by U.S. mail to the Village office, or by telephone, or in person at Village office
during regular business hours.
2. To report leaks, interruption of service or other emergency; by telephone, or in person at Village office during regular business hours, or at the
Village's Public Safety Center when Village office is closed. (Ord. 2001-07-112, 7-16-2001)
7-5-20: WATER CONSERVATION REGULATIONS:
A. Policy: The Board of Trustees hereby establishes the policy of the Village to protect the Village's water supply system, to maintain at all times adequate
water pressure to meet the needs of the Village's Fire/Rescue Department in combating fires, and to provide a consistent level of water capacity for use
by residents, commerce and industry. It is necessary therefore to restrict the use of water furnished by the Village's water supply system during certain
seasons and under certain conditions, as provided in this section.
B. Seasonal Restrictions On Outdoor Water Uses: From June 1 through September 15 of each year, no person shall use water for lawn or garden
purposes, washing of automobiles or other outdoor use, except between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. These restrictions shall apply to all commercial, industrial and residential properties except only for the
following uses:
1. Residential use of water in watering cans and buckets for gardens, annual flowers, and the like; and
2. Residential use of water for filling small children's wading pools and water oriented play devices when those play devices are being actively used;
and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 209/524
3. Residential use of water for car washing so long as the hose, if any, is fitted with a water shutoff nozzle or valve and the water is shut off when not
being applied to rinse the vehicle; and
4. A commercial or industrial service involving water usage as part of an ongoing business operation, such as a car wash center. (Ord. 2003-07-233, 7-
21-2003)
C. Emergency Restriction Of Outdoor Use: The Village Manager, at any time, may restrict some or all outside use of water, except only for a commercial or
industrial service involving water usage as part of an ongoing business operation, if the Village Manager determines that an emergency situation exists
that threatens the public health or safety. In such event, the Village Manager shall cause notice of the emergency restriction to be given to the general
public and news media. The notice shall provide that all outdoor use of water is prohibited until further notice. The Village Manager shall cause notice
to be given to the general public and news media of the lifting of such restriction promptly after the condition that required such restriction has been
alleviated. (Ord. 2003-07-233, 7-21-2003; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
D. Penalties: Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this section shall, on conviction, be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter
1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each offense. Each day during which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense. Any
person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this section a second time within the same calendar year shall, on conviction, be
fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this section
a third or subsequent time within the same calendar year shall, on conviction, be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
(Ord. 2003-07-233, 7-21-2003; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-5-21: WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES:
Refer to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
ARTICLE A. SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL1,2
ARTICLE B. DISCHARGES INTO STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM
7-5B-1: PURPOSE; OBJECTIVE:
The purposes of this article are to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the village of Lake Zurich through the regulation of
nonstorm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any user;
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. (Ord.
2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Watershed enforcement officer or designees of the public works director/engineer of the village of Lake Zurich
designated to enforce this article.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention
and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly
to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one
acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property,
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstorm water discharge to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in section 7-5B-7 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An "illicit connection" is defined as either of the following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 210/524
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, without limitation, any conveyances that allow any nonstorm water discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drainage system; and any connections to the storm drainage system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by the EPA (or by a
state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit
is applicable on an individual, group, or general area wide basis.
NONSTORM WATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the
owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, without limitation: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances
and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including, without limitation, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and humanmade
or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORM WATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document that describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water,
storm water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-3: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the village of Lake Zurich. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this article, or the application of any provision of this article, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect,
impair, or invalidate other provisions of this article, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this article. (Ord. 2004-
04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-6: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-7: PROHIBITIONS ON DISCHARGES:
A. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited
except as follows:
1. Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water
infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water dewatering
systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than 1 PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 211/524
2. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
3. Dye testing, but only with prior oral notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
4. Nonstorm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the United States environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm
drainage system.
B. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
1. The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-8: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The authorized enforcement agency may suspend, without prior notice, MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply
with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to the public.
B. Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have MS4 access terminated if
such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-9: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-10: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
A. Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.
B. Access To Facilities:
1. The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, then the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency.
2. Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination, and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of
any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge.
4. The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used
to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit
and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits
an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any
activity authorized or required by this article.
7. If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able
to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 212/524
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-11: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REQUIRED:
The authorized enforcement agency will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility that may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial
or industrial establishment shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into
the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural
and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed
compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance
with requirements of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-12: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-13: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials that are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drainage system, or water of the United States said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized
enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2004-04-
276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-14: ENFORCEMENT:
Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized
enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
A. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
B. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
C. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
D. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
E. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
F. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or
restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-
2004)
7-5B-15: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received
within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place
within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. (Ord. 2004-
04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-16: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 213/524
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within days of the
decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or
designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-17: COST OF ABATEMENT:
Within fifteen (15) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs.
The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as
determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special
assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more
than twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day following
the discovery of the violation. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-18: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues
to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities that would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-19: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-20: VIOLATIONS DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
7-5B-21: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the
discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 2004-04-276, 4-5-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 6
TREES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-1-1: APPLICABILITY; EMERGENCIES; INTENT:
A. Applicability: The village has the right and authority to impose the regulations of this chapter on all lots of record and public and private rights of way
throughout the village. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of title 10 of this code or any other village
code or ordinance, the provision deemed by the public works director to be most protective of promoting the proliferation and maintenance and care of
trees will apply and control. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
B. Emergencies: In case of emergencies such as tornados, windstorms, floods, freezes, or other natural disasters, the requirements of this chapter may be
waived by the village manager, the public works director, or the village president. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 214/524
C. Intent: It is the intent of this chapter to promote increases in the quality of trees and tree care in the village and to promote increases in tree populations
in the village whenever practicable.
It also is the intent of this chapter to preserve trees on both public and private property and, in the event that tree removal is necessary, to ensure that
appropriate replacement trees are planted.
It also is the intent of this chapter to help provide for and sustain buffers between neighboring properties, to preserve historic streetscapes, to minimize
the visual and environmental impacts of paved surfaces and buildings, and to ensure landscaping in conjunction with new development and
redevelopment in a manner that preserves indigenous vegetation.
It also is the intent of this chapter to balance the property rights of individual property owners with the overall health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of the village and the village itself. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings ascribed to them:
APPLICANT: An owner or occupant, or a representative of an owner or occupant, of a lot, parcel, or tract of land for which an application has been filed for
a subdivision, special use permit, or any activity requiring the issuance of grading, building, utility, or demolition permits.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Any manmade change, other than maintenance of existing structures, paved areas, or utilities, to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, without limitation: a) the construction or installation of new, or the enlargement of, existing structures, streets, or utilities, b) dredging,
filling, clearing, drilling, mining, grading, paving, or excavating operations, c) demolition, and d) open storage of materials.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY AREA: The area of the subject property that is the smallest area reasonably needed to undertake the proposed construction
activity as determined by the public works director. See subsection 7-6-4-3C of this chapter.
CUTTING: The felling or removal of a tree, or any procedure that results in the death or substantial destruction of a tree. Cutting does not include normal
pruning or trimming of trees consistent with this chapter.
DAMAGE: To take any direct or indirect action that causes, or is reasonably likely to cause, the death of a tree or a significant loss of a tree's structural
integrity, including, without limitation, destruction; poisoning; carving; mutilating; girdling; severing the main trunk, leader, or large branches or roots;
removing any portion of the bark from the main trunk, leader, or large branches; touching with live wires; crushing or exposing the roots; digging or drilling
any hole or trench within the root zone; filling with soil or other materials within the root zone; compacting a substantial portion of the soil in the root zone;
or moving a tree to another location. Without limitation of the foregoing, "damage" does not include pruning in accordance with the national pruning
standards.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): The diameter of the trunk of a tree measured at fifty four inches (54") above the ground at the base of the tree.
DISEASED TREE: Any tree determined by the director of public works in consultation with a certified arborist to be diseased, including, without limitation,
all of the following: trees infected with Dutch elm disease or oak wilt; trees in a dead or dying condition that may serve as breeding places for the European
elm bark beetle, Dutch elm disease, or oak wilt; and trees infected with, or that may serve as breeding places for, the Asian long horned beetle, the Asian
cerambycid beetle, the emerald ash borer, or any other type of severely destructive infestation.
LOT: Any lot of record in the village.
NATIONAL PRUNING STANDARDS: The National Arborist Association pruning standards.
PROTECTED PRIVATE TREE: Any tree located in any required yard of any lot in the village, or in any common open space of any subdivision or
development, with a dbh equal to or greater than ten inches (10").
PUBLIC TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation located within any village park or right of way or other public property.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The director of public works of the village of Lake Zurich or his or her designee.
REGULATED TREE ACTIVITY: Any activity that anticipates or involves the actual or reasonably likely damage to or removal of any protected private tree
anywhere on the lot on which the activity does, or is to, take place.
REMOVE OR REMOVAL: The physical detachment or elimination of a tree, or the effective detachment or elimination of a tree, through damage or
otherwise, whether directly or indirectly.
REQUIRED YARD: Any yard required to be established on any lot pursuant to the applicable zoning district regulations of the Lake Zurich zoning code.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs of a tree to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown, including, without limitation,
such cutting as would remove the tree's normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
TREE EMERGENCY: The existence of any tree within the village that has become an immediate danger or hazard to persons or property as a result of
any tornado, windstorm, flood, freeze, or other natural disaster.
TREE PERMIT: See sections 7-6-3-1 and 7-6-3-2 of this chapter.
TREE PROTECTION AREA: The area of the subject property identified in a construction activity protection plan or otherwise designated by the village
within which trees are to be protected. See subsection 7-6-4-3D of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 215/524
7-6-1-3: LAKE ZURICH TREE COMMISSION:
There is hereby created and established the Lake Zurich tree commission, constituted as follows:
A. Appointment; Term: The tree commission consists of five (5) members appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
Two (2) of the five (5) original appointees will serve a term of one year; two (2) of the five (5) original appointees will serve a term of two (2) years; and
one of the five (5) original appointees will serve a term of three (3) years. Successors will be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees and will serve terms of three (3) years. The president may adjust the terms of the appointees as necessary to effectuate and
maintain the staggered nature of the terms provided in this subsection.
B. Compensation: Members of the tree commission shall serve without compensation.
C. Quorum; Officers; Rules Of Order: Three (3) members constitute a quorum of the tree commission for the conduct of all business. The tree commission
must choose from among its members a chairperson, a vice chairperson, and a secretary. The tree commission may set its own rules of order, subject
to the approval of the board of trustees.
D. Responsibilities: The tree commission has the responsibility to develop and review the village's official tree plan for village owned trees as provided in
section 7-6-2-1 of this chapter. The tree commission also has the responsibility to analyze the village's trees and to make recommendations to the
village arborist from time to time on areas where trees should be added, on trees that should be pruned, on trees that may be diseased or dying, and
on trees that should be removed. The tree commission has no jurisdiction to consider proposed plats of subdivision, natural resources management,
zoning approvals, or any matters other than matters related to trees as set forth in this subsection. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2: PUBLIC TREES:
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-1: OFFICIAL TREE PLAN:
The tree commission has the responsibility to study, investigate, and draft, for review and approval by the board of trustees, an official tree plan relating to
all public trees. The official tree plan should include provisions for the planting, replanting, pruning, preservation, and general care of public trees and for
the removal or other disposition of dead, dying, or diseased public trees. The tree commission may present a draft official tree plan to the president and
board of trustees for its review and approval. After the official tree plan has been approved by the board of trustees, which approval must be in the form of
a written resolution, the tree commission may periodically review and analyze the plan in light of current conditions in the village. The tree commission may
recommend to the board of trustees changes to the official tree plan, and the tree commission should report annually to the board of trustees its findings
as to the operation of the plan and state of public trees. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-2: PUBLIC TREE SPECIES:
The following species of trees, and no others unless approved by the board of trustees, are approved for planting as public trees. Until specifically
approved by the board of trustees and regardless of the species shown in the following table, no ash trees except for mountain ash may be planted
anywhere in the village:
Silver linden Hedge maple Amur maple
Littleleaf linden
"Greenspire linden"
American hornbeam Purple blow maple
American linden
"Redmond linden"
Chanticleer pear Crabapple
"David crabapple"
"Prairie fire crabapple"
"Red jewel crabapple"
"Sugar time crabapple"
Norway maple
"Crimson king"
"Emerald queen"
Aristocrat pear Witch hazel
Red maple
"Autumn blaze"
"Red sunset"
Mountain ash
Sugar maple
"Green mountain"
Ginkgo (male only)
Large
(40 Feet Or More)
Medium
(30 Feet To 40 Feet)
Small
(29 Feet Or Less)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 216/524
Honey locust
"Skyline"
"Shademaster"
Black alder
American sweetgum
Oak
"Red oak"
"Pin oak"
"White oak"
"Swamp white oak"
Hackberry
Hickory
Butternut
Chestnut
Catalpa
River birch
(Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-3: PUBLIC TREE SPACING AND DIVERSIFICATION:
A. Spacing: The spacing of public trees is based on the three (3) species sizes listed in section 7-6-2-2 of this chapter. The recommended spacing for
public trees is: 1) not less than thirty feet (30') between small trees, 2) not less than forty feet (40') between medium trees, and 3) not less than fifty feet
(50') between large trees. When different size trees are planted next to each other, the spacing standard for the larger of the two (2) trees applies.
Public trees should not be planted closer than the recommended spacing, but the public works director, on the recommendation of the village arborist,
may reduce spacing on a case by case basis for special planting areas designed or approved by a landscape architect or for extraordinary
circumstances when reduced spacing is in the best interests of the village.
B. Diversification: Public trees must be planted so that the genus and species are diverse, in accordance with this subsection. In every defined area of
planting, as designated by the director of public works, no more than ten percent (10%) of the public trees should be from one tree genus and no more
than five percent (5%) of the public trees should be from one tree species. For example, for every one hundred (100) public trees that are planted,
there should not be more than ten (10) trees of one tree genus and not more than five (5) trees of any one tree species. The "defined area of planting"
to be designated by the public works director may include, but is not limited to, a subdivision, or a portion of a subdivision, or a several block area, or
any other area on village owned property or right of way reasonably determined by the public works director as logical to assure tree diversification.
(Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-4: DISTANCES FROM CURBS AND SIDEWALKS:
A. Trees planted within the public right of way must be planted at distances from curbs and sidewalks consistent with the following criteria:
1. The midpoint of the area between the back of the curb and the edge of the sidewalk; or
2. If there is a consistent existing tree line, then in a location consistent with that existing tree line to the extent practicable; and
3. Not less than four feet (4') from the back of the curb, to the extent practicable. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-5: DISTANCES FROM CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
No tree planted in the public right of way may be planted closer than thirty five feet (35') to any street corner, measured from the point of nearest
intersecting curbs or curb lines. No tree may be planted closer than ten feet (10') to any fire hydrant. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-6: DISTANCES FROM UTILITIES:
Large
(40 Feet Or More)
Medium
(30 Feet To 40 Feet)
Small
(29 Feet Or Less)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 217/524
No tree may be planted in any public right of way under, or within ten (10) lateral feet of, any overhead utility wire, except small trees as listed in section 7-
6-2-2 of this chapter. No tree may be planted on top of or within a two foot (2') offset from any underground public utility unless circumstances make it
unavoidable to do so. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-7: MINIMUM PUBLIC TREE ROOT ZONE PROTECTION:
The minimum root zone of all public trees within a public right of way is established in the following table. That minimum root zone must be protected by
augering in the manner shown in the following table. No work affecting public tree root zone may be undertaken without prior notice to the department of
public works, and the department will monitor and enforce the standards set forth in this section.
2.5 inches to 4 inches 2 feet from face of tree in all directions if trench located within this radius
More than 4 inches to 9 inches 5 feet from face of tree in all directions if trench located within this radius
More than 9 inches to 14 inches 10 feet from face of tree in all directions if trench located within this radius
More than 14 inches to 19 inches 12 feet from face of tree in all directions if trench located within this radius
More than 19 inches 15 feet from face of tree in all directions if trench located within this radius
The minimum depth of auger within a root zone must be thirty inches (30"). No trenching is permitted within the minimum root zone. (Ord. 2007-10-527,
10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-8: VILLAGE AUTHORITY TO CARE FOR, REMOVE TREES:
The village and its authorized agents have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove public trees as may be necessary to ensure public safety,
preserve, and enhance the quality of vegetation and as appropriate to beautify the village. The village, for the same purposes, also may prune or remove
all portions of any tree or shrub that overhangs any village right of way or other village owned property.
The village will cause to be removed as soon as practicable any tree within a village right of way or on other village property that is diseased or dying, or
that poses an irreconcilable threat to a utility, or that otherwise threatens the public health, safety, or general welfare. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-9: TOPPING PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in this section, no person may cause or allow the topping of any public tree or protected private tree. The village may permit the
topping of a tree under circumstances determined by the director of public works to be exceptional, including, but not limited to, when the tree has been
severely damaged by a storm or other cause, when topping is otherwise the only practicable action, or when required to accommodate an overhead utility.
(Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-10: SITE CLEARANCE PRUNING:
The owner of a tree that overhangs a public right of way within the village must prune the branches of that tree, if necessary, so that the tree does not
obstruct the light from any streetlamp or the view of any street intersection. The owner also must prune that tree so that the lowest hanging branch on that
tree is a minimum of twelve feet (12') above the ground. The failure to prune such a tree in accordance with the requirements of this section is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. The village has the right to prune any tree that does not meet the requirements of this section, with village forces or with
forces hired by the village for such purposes, if the owner fails or refuses to accomplish such pruning within five (5) days after written notice to do so from
the village. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-2-11: INTERFERENCE WITH VILLAGE TREE WORK:
No person may prevent, delay, or in any other way interfere with work undertaken by the village and its authorized representatives to plant, cultivate,
mulch, prune, spray, or remove any public tree or other tree as authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-3: PROTECTED PRIVATE TREES:
Diameter At Breast Height Augering Method
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 218/524
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-3-1: PROTECTED PRIVATE TREE PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Protected Private Tree Permit Required For Regulated Tree Activity: Except as expressly provided in subsection C of this section, no person or entity
may commence any "regulated tree activity", as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining a protected private tree permit from the public works
director.
B. Group Permits For Utility Companies: Utility companies having overhead facilities within public rights of way, utility easements, or within required yards
of private property may apply for group tree permits to conduct scheduled, nonemergency pruning of groups of trees. Prior to issuance of a permit to a
utility company, a degreed forester or arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture on behalf of the utility company must meet with the
public works director and agree on the manner of pruning of the affected trees. The village will not issue a group permit for pruning of any species of
elm between April 1 and October 31 or any species of oak between April 1 and July 31, unless approved by the public works director to alleviate an
imminent hazard.
C. Exceptions To Permit Requirement:
1. Pruning: A protected private tree permit is not required for the pruning of any tree on private property by the property owner or his representative in
compliance with the national pruning standards.
2. Tree Emergency: In the case of a "tree emergency", as defined in this chapter, the public works director is authorized to: a) issue a tree permit
without a protected private tree permit application, b) waive the requirement for a protected private tree permit set forth in this section, or c) waive
any of the other regulations of this section or this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other regulations of this code, in the event of a tree emergency, the person endangered by the tree emergency may take any
reasonable action necessary to avoid or eliminate the immediate danger or hazard. The action taken must be an action that is least likely under the
circumstances to cause damage or removal of any trees, and the village assumes no responsibility or liability for any such action taken. The person
taking such action must document the reasons for the tree emergency by photograph or videotape of the tree emergency condition and the damage
or hazard created by such condition, and must report the action taken to the public works director within forty eight (48) hours after the action is
taken. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-3-2: PROTECTED PRIVATE TREE PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND APPROVALS:
A. Application: Each application for a protected private tree permit must be submitted to the public works director on a form provided by the village at the
village hall setting forth or otherwise providing the following information:
1. The owner's name and address and the owner's signed consent to the application;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different from the owner, and her or his interest in the property;
3. The size, genus and species, and location of the affected trees and the location of the property on which the regulated tree activity will occur,
including street address or legal description;
4. A brief explanation of reasons for the proposed regulated tree activity;
5. A tree replacement plan, if applicable, in accordance with section 7-6-4-2 of this chapter;
6. A construction activity protection plan, if applicable, in accordance with section 7-6-4-3 of this chapter; and
7. Such other data and information as the public works director deems necessary to allow full and fair consideration of the tree permit application.
B. Property Inspection And On Site Consultation: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of a protected private tree permit application, the public works
director will:
1. Visit and inspect the property and contiguous and adjoining lots to determine the existence of protected private trees and to evaluate the tree permit
application; and
2. Provide an on site consultation with the applicant to: a) review the proposed regulated tree activity, b) suggest alternatives to the proposed regulated
tree activity when the proposed activity may result in the possible damage or destruction of a protected private tree, and c) provide instruction on the
long term continuing care of any protected private tree that is subject to the tree permit application and any other protected private trees on the
property.
C. Approval Of Application: The Public Works Director will approve a protected private tree permit application if, based on the protected private tree permit
application, inspection of the property, and the on site consultation with the property owner or applicant, as well as all other reliable and relevant
information, the Public Works Director determines that all of the following conditions have been met:
1. The proposed regulated tree activity has been planned and will be performed in such a manner, to such a degree, and with such equipment and
personnel, so as to: a) reasonably involve the least amount of damage or removal of trees and b) not defeat, or be inconsistent with, the purposes
and intent of this chapter as expressed in section 7-6-1-1 of this chapter. Further, any tree proposed for removal that, because of its location, poses a
threat of damage to an adjacent property will be removed by a crew under the direct supervision of a certified arborist or degreed forester.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 219/524
2. The protected private tree permit application, including, without limitation, the construction activity protection plan if required, satisfies the
requirements of this chapter.
3. The applicant has submitted a replacement guarantee in a form satisfactory to the Public Works Director and consistent with subsection 7-6-4-2B of
this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
D. Issuance Of Permit; Payment Of Permit Fee: If a protected private tree permit application is approved, then the Public Works Director will promptly
issue a protected private tree permit upon payment by the applicant of a permit fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. No fee
will be required if the Public Works Director determines that no permit is required. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
E. Conditions On Protected Private Tree Permit: As a condition of the issuance of a protected private tree permit, the Public Works Director may require
one or more of the following:
1. That any or all protected private trees that may be affected by such regulated tree activity, wherever located on a lot, be preserved and protected;
and
2. That any or all protected private trees that may be affected by such regulated tree activity, wherever located on a lot, be replaced in accordance with
the tree replacement standards in section 7-6-4-2 of this chapter.
F. Denial: If the protected private tree permit application, inspection of the property, on site consultation, and consideration of all other reliable and relevant
information reveal that the applicant has not satisfied the conditions of subsection C of this section, or has not otherwise justified the damage or
removal of trees to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director, then the Public Works Director will promptly notify the applicant that the protected
private tree permit application is denied and that no protected tree permit will be issued. No fee will be required if the application is not approved.
G. Exemptions: The Public Works Director has the authority to exempt a regulated tree activity from the protected private tree permit application
requirements of this chapter if the Public Works Director determines that any of the following circumstances exist:
1. When a protected private tree, due to natural causes, is dead, dangerous, or interferes with any existing or proposed public improvements, is in
dangerous proximity to any public utility lines or related facilities, or is a diseased tree or otherwise unsafe, unhealthy, or insect infected and
constitutes a hazard to persons, property, or other trees.
2. When a protected private tree, due to natural causes, obstructs any street, sidewalk, or pedestrian path to such an extent that such protected private
tree interferes with free passage and clear view along that street, sidewalk, or path or at any street or driveway intersection.
3. When removal of a protected private tree is necessary to comply with the current standards generally observed by professionals in the arboricultural,
forestry, landscaping, or landscape architecture professions.
4. When removal of a protected private tree is necessary to properly enhance the health and appearance of existing trees, shrubs, and other vegetation
or to implement a landscaping scheme that the public works director determines complies with the current standards generally observed by
professionals in the arboriculture, forestry, landscaping, or landscape architecture professions.
5. When removal of a protected private tree is necessary to avoid denying an applicant a reasonable economic use of the applicant's property, or when
the applicant otherwise demonstrates a hardship or special and unique circumstances.
H. Appeals: See section 7-6-5-1 of this chapter for appeals related to the provisions of this section.
I. Term Of Protected Private Tree Permit; Expiration And Renewal: A tree permit will expire automatically if the activity authorized by the permit is not
commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after the permit's issuance or if the activity is not completed within one year after the permit's
issuance, except that the public works director, upon application of the permit holder, may grant reasonable extensions of time for commencement or
completion of such activity, but for not more than fifty percent (50%) of the original time period.
J. Revocation And Remedies: Protected private tree permits are subject to revocation and other remedies as provided in section 7-6-5-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-4: GENERAL TREE STANDARDS:
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-4-1: TREE PROTECTION REQUIRED:
A. General: All regulated tree activities must be planned and performed in such a manner, to such a degree, and with such equipment and personnel, so
as to: 1) reasonably involve the least amount of damage to or removal of trees and 2) not defeat, or be inconsistent, with, the purposes and intent of
this chapter as expressed in section 7-6-1-1 of this chapter.
B. Construction Activity: To ensure the protection of protected private trees during construction activity, a construction activity protection plan is required in
accordance with section 7-6-4-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 220/524
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-4-2: REPLACEMENT OF PROTECTED PRIVATE TREES REQUIRED:
A. Replacement Required: Installation of a replacement tree is mandatory when a protected private tree is damaged or removed in the course of a
regulated tree activity, except for damage or removal of a protected private tree that, due to natural causes, is dead, is dangerous, interferes with any
existing or proposed public improvements, is in dangerous proximity to any public utility lines or related facilities, is a diseased tree, or is otherwise
unsafe, unhealthy, or insect infected and constitutes a hazard to persons, property, or other trees. Tree replacement is required regardless of whether
the protected private tree that is damaged or removed is located on the same lot on which the regulated tree activity takes place.
B. Protected Tree Replacement Guarantee:
1. Except as provided in subsection B4 of this section, the public works director may not issue a protected private tree permit for the removal of any
protected private tree without first receiving from the permit applicant a replacement guarantee in the form of cash or a letter of credit. If the
replacement guarantee is a letter of credit, then the letter of credit must be in a form provided by the village.
2. The required amount of the replacement guarantee will be calculated as follows:
a. If cash: Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) times the number of replacement trees calculated in accordance with subsection C of this section.
b. If a letter of credit: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) times the number of replacement trees calculated in accordance with subsection C of this
section.
3. The public works director may draw on and use the replacement guarantee only when the applicant fails to replace the total number of all protected
private trees actually removed, and only after providing the applicant with thirty (30) days' notice of such failure to replace, delivered in person or by
certified mail, return receipt requested. The village will return to the applicant any amount of the replacement guarantee remaining after the
replacement work has been completed by the applicant or the village. When the replacement guarantee is secured by a letter of credit, the letter of
credit may be drawn on by the village only up to the amount required to ensure reimbursement of all costs incurred by the village for replacement of
all protected private trees actually removed, and thereafter the letter of credit will be returned or canceled pursuant to the terms of the letter of credit.
4. No replacement guarantee is required when no replacement trees are required pursuant to subsection A of this section or any other provision of this
chapter. Also, no replacement guarantee is required when the regulated tree activity is being undertaken in conjunction with other work pursuant to a
building permit issued by the village for which a performance security has been posted with the village by the applicant.
C. Protected Private Tree Replacement Formula: Replacement of a protected private tree must be on a one to one basis.
D. Tree Replacement Specifications: All tree replacements must be:
1. Of a dbh of not less than two and one-half inches (21/2");
2. Of a species listed in section 7-6-2-2 of this chapter;
3. In good health and structurally sound;
4. Made pursuant to a written time schedule approved by the public works director; and
5. Planted at approximately the same location as the trees they replace, when possible in accordance with good construction practices and current
standards generally observed by professionals in the forestry, landscaping, and landscape architecture professions, unless otherwise approved in
advance by the public works director.
E. Replacement Tree Care: The applicant is solely responsible for the care, watering, and feeding of newly planted trees for a period of two (2) years, and,
with regard to such care, watering, and feeding, the applicant must adhere to all tree care standards.
F. Alternative Tree Replacement Location: If the public works director determines that full tree replacement pursuant to the specifications provided herein
will result in the unreasonable crowding of trees on a public right of way immediately adjacent to the subject property or would otherwise be
inconsistent with current standards generally observed by professionals in the forestry, landscaping, or landscape architecture professions, then the
public works director may reduce the number of replacement trees to be planted on the subject property and designate nearby public rights of way or
other public property suitable for the location of new trees.
G. Fee In Lieu Of Tree Replacement: An applicant may request that the village acquire and plant the required replacement trees in locations determined
by the village on payment by the applicant of a tree replacement fee to the village. The public works director has complete discretion whether to
approve such a request based on the best interests of the village at the time of the request, and the public works director has no obligation to approve
any such request. If the public works director determines to approve such a request, then the following standards apply:
1. The fee for replacement trees required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter will be the amount set by ordinance of the board of trustees from
time to time.
2. The fee must be received by the public works director within thirty (30) days after the date of the damage or removal for which replacement is
required. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-4-3: CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PROTECTION PLAN:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 221/524
A. Plan Required: A construction activity protection plan must be filed with all protected private tree permit applications when the proposed regulated tree
activity is part of construction activity.
B. Contents Of Construction Activity Protection Plan: A construction activity protection plan must include a site plan of the property drawn to a scale not
less than one inch equals ten feet (1" = 10'). The plan must be drawn on a topographic map if deemed necessary by the public works director. The
drawing must be graphically and accurately marked with all of the following information:
1. Location of the property, including street address or legal description.
2. Existing and proposed contours of the lot on which the construction activity is to take place.
3. Building elevations, if applicable.
4. The name of the general contractor or project representative, if any, responsible for the proposed construction activity.
5. A demonstration of the ways in which the applicant will ensure that the level of tree protection required by section 7-6-4-1 of this chapter will be
achieved.
6. The location of all existing protected private trees that are located on or near the subject property, and the location of all trees four inches (4") or
larger dbh other than protected private trees that are reasonably likely to be damaged or removed during the proposed construction activity.
7. A legend referencing the dbh, genus and species, general condition, and proposed disposition of existing protected private trees that are located on
or near the subject property and trees other than protected private trees that are reasonably likely to be damaged or removed during the construction
activity, including, without limitation, each tree located on a lot adjacent to the construction activity whose drip line overhangs the area of the
proposed construction activity.
8. Detailed specifications for protection of protected private trees and for the protection of trees other than protected private trees that are reasonably
likely to be damaged or removed during implementation of the proposed construction activity, including, without limitation, proposed measures such
as construction pruning, root pruning, installation of a retaining wall or high visibility plastic mesh fencing, and augering of utility lines when such
augering is determined by the public works director to be necessary to improve the chances of tree survival. Such specifications also must include
the identification and clear delineation on the site plan of the construction activity area, the tree protection area, and their respective perimeters.
C. Construction Activity Area: The construction activity area is the area of the subject property that is the smallest area reasonably needed to undertake
the proposed construction activity, as determined by the public works director. The construction activity area must include the entire area affected by
the proposed construction activity and any access route across the public right of way. Construction activity may not be conducted or staged in any
area of the property located outside the construction activity area. No excess soil, additional fill, liquids, or any construction debris may be placed or
located outside the construction activity area. All buildings, structures, and driveways must be located so as to reasonably involve the least amount of
damage or removal of trees while complying with minimum required yard and setback requirements of the Lake Zurich zoning code.
D. Tree Protection Area: The tree protection area is the area of the property, within the construction activity protection plan, in which no construction
activity may be conducted. All reasonable measures and protective materials must be employed to protect trees within the tree protection area.
Protective materials may include, without limitation, the temporary installation of high visibility plastic mesh fencing or other, similar materials
specifically approved by the public works director. All such fencing must be at least four feet (4') in height and be secured to metal posts driven into the
ground and spaced not more than six feet (6') apart. All protective measures and materials must be in place and approved by the public works director
before commencement of any construction activity. Protective materials may not be removed until the public works director approves such removal
after the completion of all construction activity. No attachments, fences, or wires, other than those approved for bracing, guying, or wrapping may be
attached to any protected private tree during the construction activity. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-4-4: GENERAL MAINTENANCE; REMOVAL OF DISEASED, DEAD, AND DANGEROUS TREES:
A. General Maintenance Standards: Every property owner must maintain the trees and shrubs on her or his property and on the parkways abutting her or
his property in a safe and healthy manner; must keep trees and shrubs properly watered, trimmed, pruned, sprayed, treated, and preserved so as to
avoid disease, insect infestation, or other conditions detrimental to such trees and to avoid hazards to persons, property, and other vegetation; and
must remove trees and shrubs on her or his property that are so unsafe, unhealthy, diseased, or insect infested as to constitute a hazard to persons,
property, or other vegetation.
B. Removal Of Diseased, Dead, And Dangerous Trees:
1. Obstructions And Other Dangerous Conditions: Every owner or occupant of any house, building, lot, or premises in the village must keep trees,
shrubs, vines, and other vegetation located on her or his property trimmed and maintained so as to prevent or remove the following:
a. Any tree that is diseased, dead, dangerous, or likely to fall or that is otherwise so unsafe, unhealthy, or insect infected as to constitute a hazard to
persons, property, or other vegetation;
b. The obstruction of any street, pedestrian path, or designated village path to any extent that interferes with free passage and clear view along such
streets and paths and at any street or driveway intersection;
c. The obstruction of any sewer, drainageway, or septic field; or
d. The dangerous proximity of any tree or other vegetation to public utility lines.
Any tree or other vegetation located on private property that is maintained in violation of any of the foregoing standards is a public nuisance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 222/524
2. Notice Of Violation: If a tree or other vegetation has not been trimmed or cut as required by this section, then the public works director must cause a
written notice of violation to be issued as follows:
a. The notice must be served personally or sent by registered mail to the person to whom was sent the last preceding general tax bill for the property
on which the subject tree or trees are located, and a copy of the notice must be mailed to the occupant of such property.
b. The notice must identify, in general, the affected tree or trees and the violation or violations. The notice also must state that the violation or
violations must be cured within thirty (30) days after the date of delivery or mailing shown on the notice and that, thereafter, the village may issue a
citation and may itself undertake all action necessary to cure the violation or violations.
3. Village Action If Violation Not Cured; Costs And Expenses: If the owner of the property has not cured all violations stated in the notice within thirty
(30) days after the date shown on the notice, then the village, with its own forces or forces hired by the village, may take all necessary actions to
cause the violation or violations to be cured. The village will assess all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred in connection therewith,
including the costs of collection, against the property owner. If those costs and expenses are not paid by the property owner within thirty (30) days
after receipt of a written invoice, then the village may place a lien on the subject property and perfect that lien in the manner provided by law. (Ord.
2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
4. Inspections: The public works director may cause inspections and surveys to be conducted as necessary to determine the existence, nature, and
extent of violations of this section, and the public works director will report the results of such inspections and surveys to the village manager. (Ord.
2007-10-527, 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
5. Appeals: See section 7-6-5-1 of this chapter for appeals related to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-4-5: WAIVERS OR MODIFICATIONS THROUGH ZONING OR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
When a zoning approval or a subdivision approval is so conditioned as to fully accomplish the goals and purposes of this chapter, then the board of
trustees may waive or modify the requirements of this chapter as part of that zoning or subdivision approval. Such waiver or modification may be revoked
by the board of trustees at any time if any condition imposed pursuant to such approval is violated and such violation persists for more than ten (10) days
after notice to the owner of the property of such violation. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-5: APPEALS; PENALTIES; PERMIT REVOCATION:
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-5-1: APPEALS:
A. Appeals Related To Protected Tree Permits; Stay Of Activities: An applicant may appeal any decision of the public works director: 1) denying a
protected private tree permit application, 2) revoking a protected private tree permit, or 3) denying an exemption pursuant to subsection 7-6-3-2G of
this chapter. Any such appeal is taken initially to the village manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the village manager within five (5) business
days after receipt of notice of the public works director's decision from which the appeal is taken. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the written
notice of appeal, the village manager, based on his or her review of the protected private tree permit application and any other reliable and relevant
evidence, documents, or information, may either uphold, reverse, or amend the Public Works Director's decision. The Village Manager must notify the
person who filed the appeal within two (2) business days after such decision has been made. The decision of the Village Manager is final. The filing of
a written notice of appeal to the Village Manager pursuant to this section will stay all regulated tree activity and other activity for which a tree permit
subject to the appeal has been granted or sought.
B. Appeals Related To Maintenance And Removal Standards; Stay Of Activities: An appeal from a decision of, or notice issued by, the Public Works
Director pursuant to section 7-6-4-4 of this chapter may be taken to the Village Manager by an adversely affected person by filing a written notice of
appeal with the Village Manager within five (5) business days after receipt of the decision of the Public Works Director or the date of the delivery or
mailing of the notice. The Village Manager must review the evidence, documents, or information and may hear and receive new evidence, and must
render a decision on such appeal. The decision of the Village Manager is final. The filing of an appeal pursuant to this section will stay enforcement of
the decision or notice unless the Public Works Director makes a written finding that such stay would present an undue threat to the public health or
safety or to property in the Village. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-5-2: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter will be subject to fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each violation.
For purposes of this section, each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs or continues will be deemed a separate violation of this chapter. (Ord.
2007-10-527, 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-05-312- TREES. Go to new ordinance.
7-6-5-3: PERMIT REVOCATION:
Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended if the permit holder violates the terms of the permit or any other provision of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 223/524
chapter. (Ord. 2007-10-527, 10-1-2007)
Chapter 7
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS OF WAY
7-7-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's jurisdiction,
which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village rights of way and the
village as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of the public
ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
5. Protect against increased storm water runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
8. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the
jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated
by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or
similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights of way. Utilities that
are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village
may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the
utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 224/524
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The Lake Zurich municipal code.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village's director of public works or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use
of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary
or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The village engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or
operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 225/524
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 7-7-4 and 7-7-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 7-7-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more
other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-
201(v).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 226/524
VILLAGE: The village of Lake Zurich.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 2007-
12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of public works, providing the utility's
name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section 7-7-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village right
of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4) materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first filing an
application with the director of public works and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit
shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such number
of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The name, address and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of the person or entity responsible for performing the proposed
work; the name, address and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of the person or entity responsible for performing the
restoration if different from the person or entity responsible for the original work; and the names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers
and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
a. If requested, a written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian
and vehicular traffic; and
b. If requested, an emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction
and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the Village
and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations. Such drawings, plans and specifications shall include the following details, where
applicable, of the work to be performed: route location, method of installation, all physical features and public utilities in the immediate area, offset
distance from street edge, right-of-way lines, and property lines;
7. If the work is to be performed within an easement, the recording document number assigned by the Lake County Recorder's Office to the easement;
8. Evidence of insurance as required in section 7-7-8 of this chapter;
9. Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in section 7-7-10 of this chapter;
10. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 7-7-21 of this chapter); and
11. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required
by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 227/524
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been
satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the Village engineering standards, land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Lake County Stormwater Management Commission, have been
satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application, including any change in the actual locations of any facilities which deviates in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings or specification submitted with the permit application, shall be submitted by the
utility in writing to the Village within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. No application fee is required to be paid by any
telecommunications retailer that is paying the Municipal Telecommunications Tax pursuant to title 3, chapter 6 of this Code or by any electricity utility
that is paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. (Ord. 2007-12-546,
12-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
G. Inspection Fees: Any person obtaining a permit under this chapter for which inspections are performed by or on behalf of the Village shall, upon Village
request, reimburse the Village pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for such inspections. The Village Manager shall from time to
time determine the actual per hour costs of Village employees for purposes of calculating the costs of such inspections. No inspection fee is required to
be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012; Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-7-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Director of
Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Director of Public Works is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the
Director of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
B. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it
intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way
upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10)
days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or b)
twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 7-7-4 of this chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications by a
utility that is a holder of a State issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances,
and regulations. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this chapter on Village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights
of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
B. Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required: Unless waived in writing in advance by the Director of Public Works, no construction shall begin pursuant to a permit
issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit
at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with such Village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 228/524
representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction, and access and
egress by adjacent property owners.
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within ninety (90) days after the
completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the
locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for
variance in accordance with section 7-7-21 of this chapter. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility
from the right of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and
naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections
A1 and A2 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X",
"C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following receipt of a
written request therefor from the village.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverage: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: (Ord. 2007-
12-546, 12-17-2007)
This policy may not be canceled nor may the intention not to renew this policy be stated until 30 days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail
or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
(Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this section. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under
subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection A of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that are
the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the
recovery of any amounts thereunder.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 229/524
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally
able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 2007-
12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee
is required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to
perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to
the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection
shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as
good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the director of public works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to
substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the director of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security
fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single
phase.
D. Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village, upon
written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit and expiration of all applicable guarantee and warranty
periods for the work, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 230/524
time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter
or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation,
provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved
by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other
right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights
which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way presents a
direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the
village, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the
village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way to the
satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of way or
change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under
the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of
way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2007-
12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 231/524
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Illinois administrative code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook"; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
9. NPDES phase II regulations.
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the director of public works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers,
when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any
work on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided,
however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 7-7-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention
by the village. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
1. No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the director of public works determines that the proposed
location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance
of any of the village's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 232/524
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right
of way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways may require
the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting
from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83 Ill. adm.
code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The village may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
F. Belowground Installation: Belowground facilities may be installed only if they are located a minimum of five feet (5'), measured from outside edge to
outside edge, from any village owned utility.
G. Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single
pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the
installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
H. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 233/524
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
I. Appearance Standards:
1. The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right of
way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 2007-12-546,
12-17-2007)
7-7-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the director of
public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring
or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all
vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or
around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only one-half (1/2) of
any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the director of public works.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow
for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the director of public works.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic.
If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted under section 7-7-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the director of public works.
b. Restoration of pavement, in-kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 234/524
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as determined by village)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only
if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snow
drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities
shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 235/524
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for
pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage
lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
In Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the director of public works. With the
approval of the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for
ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the director of public works.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and
during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the village.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction are those set forth in title 10 of this code.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-17: TREES AND VEGETATION:
A. Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but instead shall require compliance with the
Lake Zurich tree ordinance, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter or other village code, ordinance, or regulation.
B. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
C. Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 236/524
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of way of
the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting
or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within ninety (90)
days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the director of public works
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility
that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way are
disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the director of public works. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended
by the director of public works for good cause shown. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory
to the village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs.
If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling
public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight (48) hours
after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the director of public
works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The director of public works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in
the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The director of public works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated
that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the director of public works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-22: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the director of public works under the
provisions of this chapter may seek a review of such order, requirement, decision or determination by filing a request for review thereof with the village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 237/524
manager, within thirty (30) days after the notification of the order, requirement, decision or determination. The request for review shall set forth in detail the
basis for the request. The village manager shall thereafter consider the request for review, determine whether the order, requirement, decision or
determination should be affirmed, modified, modified with conditions, or reversed, and provide a written determination thereof. If such utility seeks further
review of the order, requirement, decision or determination, such utility shall file a request to appeal the determination of the village manager with the
village clerk within thirty (30) days after mailing of the determination by the village manager; such appeal shall be considered by the public works
committee of the village board based on the relevant facts available regarding the order, requirement, decision or determination in question and the
materials presented in connection with the request for appeal, as well as materials presented in connection with the village manager's review provided
under this section. The determination of the public works committee shall be final. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
7-7-23: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost
apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
7-7-24: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
2007-12-546, 12-17-2007)
Chapter 8
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
7-8-1: PURPOSE:
Consistent with the requirements of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-585), and in anticipation of a continued increased
demand for placement of small wireless facilities of the type regulated by the Act both within the public rights-of-way and in other locations within the
jurisdiction of the Village, the Village Board has found it to be in the best interests of the public health, safety and general welfare of the Village to adopt
the code amendments set forth in this chapter in order to establish generally applicable standards for the design, permitting, location, construction,
deployment, regulation, operation, maintenance, repair and removal of such small wireless facilities both within the public rights-of-way and in other
locations within the jurisdiction of the Village so as to, among other things:
A. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located both within public rights-of-way and in
other locations within the jurisdiction of the Village;
B. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such small wireless facilities are installed;
C. Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless facilities and prevent visual blight in the neighborhoods in which such facilities are installed;
D. Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to small wireless facilities;
E. Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated historic landmarks or districts within the Village; and
F. Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does not negatively impact public safety and the Village's public safety technology. (Ord. 2018-7-
263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-2: INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS:
A. Other Code Provisions: The provisions of this chapter are intended to supplement general requirements and standards relative to the siting of
telecommunication facilities and generally applicable requirements for construction within public rights-of-way set forth elsewhere within this Code,
including but not limited to the regulations set forth in chapter 7, "Construction Of Utility Facilities In The Rights-Of-Way", of this title. In the event of a
conflict, however, the provisions of this chapter shall control in all matters involving small wireless facilities, as defined below.
B. State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, a wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating such Federal or State laws or regulations.
(Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 238/524
ACT: Means the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-585).
ANTENNA: Means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Means Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Means any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: Means a request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
AUTHORITY: Means the Village or other unit of local government that has jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by the Illinois
Highway Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has zoning or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: Means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole, whether existing or new.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Means cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(33), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: Means a cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as
defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: Shall mean that individual employed by the Village as the Director of Public Works or his designee.
FCC: Means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: Means a one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: Means a building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in
the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked
building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the
Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois
State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: Means a Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: Means a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
PERMIT: Means a written authorization required by the Village or other permitting authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: Means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including an authority.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: Means the functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district
located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services
to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-105.
RATE: Means a recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. "Right-of-way" does not include authority-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: Means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of
no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: Means a person licensed under the laws of the State of Illinois to practice structural engineering.
UTILITY POLE: Means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
VILLAGE: Means the Village of Lake Zurich.
VILLAGE UTILITY POLE: Means a utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications
network, including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. "Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities.
"Wireless facility" does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 239/524
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Means any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider
but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: Means a wireless infrastructure provider and/or a wireless services provider. This does not include, and expressly excludes, any
person who is providing service to or for a private niche market.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Means any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: Means a person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other
existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-4: ZONING:
Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and shall not be subject to zoning review, if collocated in rights-of-way in any zoning district,
or outside rights-of-way in the following zoning districts:
B-1 Local and Community Business District
B-2 Central Business District
B-3 Regional Shopping District
I Industrial
O-1 Office/Residential District
O-2 Limited Office District
O-3 Office Campus District
In all other zoning districts, the Village's normal zoning approvals, processes and restrictions shall apply, if zoning approval, processes or restrictions are
required by the Village's zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-5: PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS:
Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this chapter, a permit to collocate a small wireless facility within the Village is required in all cases. Permits are
subject to the following:
A. Permit Applications: Permit applications for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the Village for such purpose.
In addition to any generally applicable information required of other communications service providers or for other installations in the public right-ofway,
applicants must, when requesting to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure, provide the following
information:
1. Site specific structural integrity and, for a Village utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section
4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
2. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and digital photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles
or structures would be installed. The photographs shall include a digital photo simulation of the proposed location providing "before and after" views
demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed wireless facilities on the surrounding environment;
3. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989,
for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
4. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
5. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
6. Certification that, to the best of the applicant's knowledge, the collocation complies with the written design standards established by the Village, and
with the various other requirements set forth in this chapter and Code;
7. Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by or from the Village (i.e., zoning approval, where required), other agencies and units of
government with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of said small wireless facility. The applicant shall maintain such
licenses, permits and approvals in full force and effect and provide evidence of renewal or extension thereof when granted; and
8. In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to be attached to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure owned by an entity other than
the Village, legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole or wireless support structure to the proposed collocation.
B. Means Of Submission: Permit applications, along with all supporting information, for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be submitted by
personal delivery or by other means approved by the Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 240/524
C. Multiple Applications For Same Location: Multiple applications for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed
based on a first fully complete application, first-served basis. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
D. Permit Application Fees: All applications for collocation of small wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the
amounts pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
E. Permit Review Timelines:
1. Completeness Of Application: Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be reviewed for conformance with the requirements of the
Act, this chapter, and other applicable provisions of this Code. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village must determine
whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing
information. Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends a notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
An application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the date when all
documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
2. Existing Pole Or Wireless Support Structure: Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or wireless support
structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied within ninety (90) days of submission of a completed
application. A permit application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days, subject to
the following: If an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the ninetieth (90th) day after submission of the completed application, or the tenth (10th) day
after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the Village shall not preclude the Village from
denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
3. New Utility Pole: Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities that include the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied within one hundred twenty (120) days of submission of a completed application. A permit
application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days, subject to the
following: If an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of
its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the one hundred twentieth (120th) day after submission of the completed application, or the
tenth (10th) day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the Village shall not preclude
the Village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
F. Tolling: The time limitations for approval or denial of applications shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application is incomplete as set forth
above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by a local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes a delay.
G. Pole Replacement: Permit approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's sole cost
where such replacement is deemed necessary for compliance with the requirements of this chapter or Code relative to the siting of small wireless
facilities, or other applicable codes and regulations that concern public safety.
H. Denial: The Village shall deny an application that does not meet the requirements of this chapter. The reasons for any denial of a permit shall be
provided in a written notice of denial sent to the applicant, and shall include the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based.
I. Resubmittal After Denial: In the case of a permit denial, an applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and resubmit a revised
application once within thirty (30) days after the notice of denial is sent without payment of an additional application fee. The Village shall have thirty
(30) days to approve or deny the resubmitted application or it is deemed approved, if the applicant has notified the Village of its intention to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which notification may be submitted with the resubmitted application. Review of a resubmitted
application is limited to the deficiencies cited in the original notice of denial. This subsection does not apply if a revised application is not resubmitted
within thirty (30) days, or curing any deficiencies in the original application requires review of a new location, new or different structure for collocation,
new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. In such cases, a new application and application fee are
required.
J. Consolidated Applications: Consolidated applications for small wireless facilities for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities shall
be allowed if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. Each
consolidated application shall provide all the information required by this chapter for each small wireless facility at each location. If such an application
includes incomplete information for one or more small wireless facility collocations, or includes requests for small wireless facilities that do not qualify
for consolidated treatment, or that are otherwise denied, the Village may remove such collocation requests from the application and treat them as
separate requests. Separate permits may be issued for each collocation approved in a consolidated application.
K. Alternate Locations: If an applicant is seeking to install a new utility pole as part of its application, the Village may propose that the small wireless facility
be located on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation. The applicant
shall accept the proposed alternate location so long as it has the right to use the location on reasonable terms and conditions, unless the alternate
location imposes technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location based on the
foregoing, the applicant shall provide legally competent evidence in the form of a written certification, under oath, describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons that prevent the alternate location from being utilized.
L. Exemptions: No application, permit approval or fee shall be required from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the right-of-way
when the work in question is for:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 241/524
1. Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless facilities if the wireless provider notifies the Village in writing at least forty eight (48) hours
prior to the planned maintenance;
2. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the
Village in writing at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications, including: a) equipment type and
model numbers, for the replacement of equipment consistent with the equipment specifications information required on a permit application for
original installation; and b) information sufficient to establish that the replacement is substantially similar. The wireless provider shall provide all
information necessary and requested by the Village to establish that the replacement is substantially similar. The Village has the sole right and
responsibility to determine if a proposed small wireless facility is substantially similar to the existing small wireless facility; or
3. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
The foregoing shall not exempt communications service providers from Village permitting requirements where traffic patterns are affected or lane
closures are required. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-6: CONSTRUCTION:
Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance of the permit, unless the Village agrees
to extend the period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Village utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the
site, provided the applicant has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services,
and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Permits that are not
completed within applicable timelines shall be void absent an extension granted in writing by the Village. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-7: PERMIT DURATION:
Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this chapter shall be for a period of five (5) years. Permits are subject to renewal at the end of the
five (5) year permit period for a successive five (5) year term so long as the installation complies with the applicable code provisions in force at the time of
renewal. A finding by the Village at the time of a request for renewal that an installation does not comply with the applicable code provisions in force at the
time of the renewal request shall be in writing. If the Act is repealed or found unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all permits granted by the
Village under this chapter shall terminate at the end of their current term. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-8: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
A. Antenna Installations: The maximum permitted height of a small wireless facility is ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
B. New Poles: The maximum permitted height of new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure on which a small wireless facility is
collocated is the higher of:
1. Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the
application is submitted, and that is located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and
that is in the same right-of-way within the Village. The Village may designate which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
2. Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
C. Waiver Process: A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the Director of Public Works from the maximum permitted height of a new pole set forth
in this section, if the wireless provider can establish that:
1. Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular hardship or practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as distinguished from a
mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has not been created by the wireless provider; and
2. Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this section
cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary to function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and
3. The use of existing utility poles or other wireless support structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by
this section, is not technically feasible. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-9: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Public Safety Technology: A wireless provider's operation of a small wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider must install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause
unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licenses by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate
the interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not making a
good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The burden to
establish the good faith effort shall be on the wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the Village all information necessary to demonstrate its
efforts to resolve the interference consistent with the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited above. Failure to remedy the interference as required
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 242/524
herein shall constitute a public nuisance and the small wireless facility may be abated through the procedures for abatement of such nuisances set
forth in this Code.
B. Wireless Provider Standards: A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any wireless facility that:
1. Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public safety on a right-of-way;
2. Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;
3. Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
4. Violates or conflicts with chapter 7 of this title, or other applicable regulations set forth in this Code or otherwise adopted by the Village, except to the
extent such chapters, sections or regulations may be modified by the provisions of this chapter; or
5. Violates the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 USC section 12101 et seq.).
C. Contractual Requirements: Wireless providers shall comply with all requirements imposed by a contract between the Village and any private property
owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
D. Ground-Mounted Equipment: Wireless providers shall comply with the ground mounted equipment spacing requirements within rights-of-way as set
forth in chapter 7 of this title.
E. Undergrounding:
1. Complying With Code: The wireless provider shall comply with Village Code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements, if
any, that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles or equipment in the right-of-way.
2. Above Ground Waiver: A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the Director of Public Works to allow wireless facilities to be located above
ground in an area where Village ordinances or regulations prohibit or restrict above ground facilities if the wireless provider can establish that:
a. Underground equipment is not technically feasible and there is no reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically favorable to
adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of the right-of-way; and
b. An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location is necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage in a specified area; and
c. An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location will not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or constitute a safety hazard; and
d. An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location will not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies; and
e. Space exists within the public right-of-way to accommodate the above ground wireless facility at the proposed location; and
f. An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location will not create a safety hazard; and
g. The above ground wireless facility is located and designed in such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent properties; and
h. In any historical area, that the above ground wireless facility will not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the area.
3. Screening For Ground Mounted Facilities: Where a ground-mounted facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter in
accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape engineer. Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous and coniferous
planting materials. The owner or wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance of all landscaping as provided in the approved landscape
plan.
4. Future Undergrounding: The Village may, from time to time, make a decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type generally,
such as electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of the Village. In the event that such a utility pole has a collocated small wireless facility in
place at the time of such a decision, the Village shall either:
a. Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install and maintain a reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of the small
wireless facility; or
b. Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole so it can
maintain service from that location.
F. Collocation Limits: Wireless providers shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and
on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subsection, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
G. Code Compliance: Wireless providers shall comply with applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety. (Ord.
2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-10: STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 243/524
Every wireless facility installation shall comply with the following standards:
A. General Stealth, Concealment And Design Standards: Every small wireless antenna, small wireless facility and antenna support structure shall be of
neutral colors that are harmonious with, and that blend with the natural features, buildings, and structures surrounding such antenna and antenna
support structures; provided, however, that directional or panel antennas and omnidirectional or whip antennas located on the exterior of a building that
will also serve as an antenna support structure shall be of colors that match, and cause the antenna to blend with, the exterior of the building. In
addition, installations shall comply with any stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic standards applicable to utility installations in the public right-ofway,
as set forth in chapter 7 of this title, as well as any written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable
stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic requirements that are otherwise identified by the Village in an ordinance, written policy adopted by the
Village Board of Trustees, in the Village's comprehensive plan, or in a written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including
on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
B. Historic Districts And Landmarks: For areas designated as historic districts, or on buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks, in addition to
the stealth, concealment and design requirements referenced above, small wireless facilities shall be comprised of materials that are consistent with
the surrounding elements so as to blend architecturally with any buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks or located within a designated
historic district, and shall be designed to blend with the surrounding historical landmarks and/or district in design and color.
C. Limitations:
1. Any stealth, concealment and design standards, including restrictions on a specific category of utility poles, may not have the effect of prohibiting any
provider's technology. Such stealth, concealment and design measures shall not be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the
size restrictions of a small wireless facility.
2. This subsection shall not be construed to limit the Village's enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the requirements adopted
pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 USC section 300101
et seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-11: RESERVATION OF VILLAGE UTILITY POLE SPACE:
The Village may reserve space on Village-owned utility poles for future public safety uses or for Village electric utility uses. Such reservation may preclude
collocation of small wireless facilities if the Village reasonably determines that the Village's utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. (Ord. 2018-7-263,
7-2-2018)
7-8-12: APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
A. Existing Installations: Subject to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the Village and a wireless
provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect for all small
wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.
B. Applications Received Between June 1, 2018 And June 1, 2020: Subject to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in
place between the Village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1,
2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt by the Village from the wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to accept the rates,
fees and terms of this chapter and the Act received after June 1, 2020, whichever is later.
C. Applications Received After June 1, 2020: Subject to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the Village
and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in
effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2020, until receipt by the
Village of a notice from the wireless provider that it is accepting the rates, fees, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-13: COLLOCATION ON VILLAGE OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE:
A. Fee: The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village-owned utility pole located in a right-of-way shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1,
"Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
B. Exception: Small wireless facilities collocated on Village-owned utility poles located outside of public right-of-way are not subject to the rate limitations in
this section.
C. Attachment Agreement: An attachment agreement in a form approved by the Village is required for any collocation upon any Village owned utility pole
or wireless support structure. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-14: NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER:
A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership or control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of the Village, provide
written notice to the Village of such sale or transfer of control. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
(Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 244/524
7-8-15: ABANDONMENT:
A. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying it of the abandonment. The notice
shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at its last known address. If the small wireless facility is
not removed within ninety (90) days after receipt of such notice, such wireless facility shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the Village may remove or
cause the removal of such facility, and recover or place a lien for its costs, pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment or other agreement for Village
utility poles or through the procedures for abatement of nuisances set forth in this Code.
B. In the event the Village suspects that the wireless provider is no longer using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service, it may send the
wireless provider written notice that requires the wireless provider to remove the small wireless facility or provide proof that the small wireless facility is
operational and still being used within thirty (30) days, and informs the wireless provider that failure to provide proof or to remove the small wireless
facility will result in the Village removing the small wireless facility at the wireless provider's cost. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-16: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Lake County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning
rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles within the right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its
poles at annual rates pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. (Ord.
2018-7-263, 7-2-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
7-8-17: INDEMNIFICATION:
Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole negligence of the Village or its employees or agents, a wireless provider shall indemnify
and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in
part, the use or occupancy of the Village infrastructure or improvements, or right-of-way associated with such infrastructure or improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider proceeding under this chapter waives any claims it may have against the Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-18: INSURANCE:
At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's facilities are located on Village infrastructure, improvements or in right-of-way, the wireless
provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense, carry the following insurance coverages:
A. Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
B. Workers' compensation insurance within statutory limits as required by law; and
C. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village infrastructure, improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for
bodily injury and property damage, with limits not less than:
1. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
2. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
3. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and shall provide certificates of
insurance and proof of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy to the Village prior to the collocation of any wireless facility, and
shall keep updated certificates and proof of inclusion on file with the Village at all times that the provider maintains small wireless facilities within the
Village.
D. A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limits required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-insures is
not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement that the Village be named an additional insured. A wireless provider
that self-insures shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance limits required by the
Village. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-19: MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
A. A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless facilities installed within the Village in a condition that maintains the safety, integrity and aesthetics
of such facilities. Small wireless facilities shall not appear to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to properly maintain such facilities, the Village shall
notify the wireless provider, in writing, who shall have thirty (30) days to correct the identified maintenance violation. If not corrected within such period,
the Village reserves the right to take such action as it deems necessary, including revocation of the permit. Maintenance and replacement of small
wireless facilities shall be performed by the wireless provider at the wireless provider's sole cost and expense.
B. In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to life or property, the Village may take corrective action to eliminate such emergency at the
wireless provider's expense. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 245/524
7-8-20: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. A permit to collocate a wireless facility may be revoked for one or more of the following reasons:
1. The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud or made a misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit application, or
any required documentation or submittal.
2. The wireless provider failed to construct the small wireless facility in accordance with the approved plans.
3. The wireless provider failed to comply within any material condition of a permit issued.
4. The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered the use or the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was requested in the
permit application or approved, without the approval of the Village.
5. The wireless provider failed to notify the Village of the replacement of small wireless facilities as required by this chapter.
6. A substantial change of law has occurred affecting the wireless provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the small wireless
facility is located.
7. The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or pedestrian use of the public right-of-way.
8. The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and timely restoration of the right-of-way or the property upon which the small wireless facility is
located.
9. The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the wireless facility as required by this chapter.
10. The wireless provider has failed to abate interference with public safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR
90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
11. The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the wireless provider has failed to remove the wireless facilities as provided in this chapter.
B. Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider setting forth the basis
for the revocation. The wireless provider shall, within fourteen (14) days of the notice of revocation, file a written response with the Director of Public
Works setting forth the reasons why the permit should not be revoked along with such evidence in opposition to the revocation as the wireless provider
determines necessary. Failure to file a response with the Director of Public Works shall be deemed an admission of the facts set forth in the notification
of written notification and shall result in automatic revocation of the permit. The Director of Public Works shall render findings and a decision within
twenty one (21) days of the date of receipt of the wireless provider's response, if any.
C. If the Director of Public Works revokes the permit, the wireless provider may file a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk within twenty one (21)
days of notification of the permit revocation. Such notice shall contain a response to the decision of the Director of Public Works. The Village Board
shall hear the revocation appeal and render a decision on such appeal. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
7-8-21: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
A. Nothing in this chapter authorizes or allows the collocation of small wireless facilities on:
1. Property owned by a private party, without the consent of the property owner;
2. Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way (local governments are, however, required to
authorize the collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles owned or controlled by the local government or located within rights-of-way to the
same extent the local government permits access to utility poles for other commercial projects or uses), without the consent of the unit of local
government;
3. A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure, without the consent of the property owner;
4. Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation
purposes, without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are
under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code1;
5. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code2, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act3, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility;
B. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
1. Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with
the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act; or
2. Small wireless facilities owned by the Village. (Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
Title 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 246/524
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
8-1-1: TITLE:
This title will be known as the LAKE ZURICH BUILDING CODE. The official identified herein as the "code official" shall be that person(s) designated and
appointed by the village manager to oversee, implement, interpret and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-
2015)
8-1-2: SCOPE:
These regulations control all matters concerning the construction, alterations, addition, repair, replacement, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy,
and maintenance of all buildings and structures, and the regulations apply to existing or proposed buildings and structures. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
A. General: The provisions of these regulations cover all matters affecting or relating to buildings and structures, as set forth in section 8-1-2 of this
chapter.
B. Exemptions: This title will not be construed as requiring alterations to lawfully constructed existing buildings or equipment, unless specific provision is
made to the contrary or unless the provision is expressly made retroactive.
C. Matters Not Provided For: Any requirement essential for structural, fire, electrical, mechanical, or sanitary safety of an existing or proposed building or
structure, or essential for the safety of the occupants thereof, and which is not specifically covered by this title or other codes and ordinances of the
village, will be determined by the code official based on the exercise of his or her best professional judgment in accordance with customary practice in
the field.
D. Other Regulations: When the provisions herein specified for health, safety, and welfare are more restrictive than other codes, ordinances, or regulations
of the village, this title will apply and control; but, in every case, the most rigid requirements of either this title or such other applicable codes,
ordinances, and regulations as may be in force or legally adopted will apply and control whenever they may be in conflict. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-
2015)
8-1-4: EXISTING STRUCTURES:
A. Unlawful Uses: Any use, building, or structure used or construed unlawfully or that was in violation of any previous codes or regulations, prior to the
adoption of this title, will be deemed a continuing violation and subject to the penalties of this title.
B. Continuation Of Existing Uses: Consistent with the Lake Zurich zoning code, the legal use and occupancy of any structure existing on the date of
adoption of this title or for which building permits have been applied and which meet all provisions of previous regulations may be continued without
change, except as may be specifically covered in this title or as may be deemed necessary by the code official for the general safety and welfare of the
occupants and the public.
C. Changes In Use: It is unlawful to make any change in the use or occupancy of any structure or portion thereof which would subject it to any provision of
this title without the approval of the code official, who will determine that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of all codes and ordinances
governing the new use or occupancy and that such change does not result in any greater hazard to public safety or welfare. When a change of use is
contemplated in any part of an existing structure, that part of the structure must be upgraded to comply with this title.
D. Alterations Or Repairs: Alterations or repairs may be made to any structure without requiring the entire existing structure to comply with all the
requirements of this title provided such alterations or repairs themselves conform to that required of a new structure and provided further that such
alterations or repairs must not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or unsanitary and must not adversely affect the performance of the
structure. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-5: BUILDING PERMITS:
A. Permit Required: It is unlawful to construct, enlarge, repair, alter, or demolish a structure, or to change the occupancy of a building or structure in a
manner requiring greater strength, an altered exitway, or sanitary provisions, or to change to another use, or to install or alter any equipment for which
provision is made in or the installation of which is regulated by this title, without first filing an application with the code official in writing and obtaining
the required permits therefor; except that "ordinary repairs", as defined in section 105.2.2 of the international building code, 2012 edition, and as further
limited by the Illinois plumbing code, hereinafter adopted by reference, are exempt from this provision.
B. Form Of Application: Every application for a permit must be submitted on a building permit application form supplied by the building department and
must be accompanied by such fees as prescribed in chapter 2 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 247/524
C. By Whom Application Is Made: Every application for a permit must be made by the owner or lessee of the building or structure, or the agent of either, or
by the contractor or licensed engineer or architect employed by the owner or lessee in connection with the work to be done. If the application is made
by a person other than the owner in fee, then it must be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the owner, or the qualified person making the
application, that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee and that the applicant is authorized to make such application. The full names and
addresses of the owner, lessee, and applicant and of the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee is a corporate body, must be stated in the
application.
D. Description Of Work: Every application for a permit must contain a general description of the proposed work, its location, the use and occupancy of all
parts of the building or structure and of all portions of the site or lot not covered by the building or structure, and such additional information as may be
required by the code official.
E. Plans And Specifications: Every application for a permit must be accompanied by at least six (6) copies of specifications and plans drawn to scale,
unless the code official grants permission to submit fewer than six (6) copies. The specifications and plans must be drawn with sufficient clarity, detail,
and dimensions to show clearly the nature and character of the work to be performed. When quality of materials or systems is essential for conformity
to this title, specific information must be given to establish such quality. The terms "this title", "legal", "its equivalent", or any other such terms may not
be used as a substitute for specific information. When the estimated cost of construction exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or the proposed
work involves the structural components of the building, the plans and specifications must bear the signature and seal of an architect or a structural
engineer licensed to work in Illinois and, if appropriate, the signature and seal of a registered professional engineer.
The code official may waive the requirement for filing plans when the work involved is of a minor nature.
When an application is made for an unusually complex or innovative design or magnitude of construction or when code reference standards in chapter
35 of the 2012 international building code, as adopted in chapter 3 of this title, must be extensively applied to determine code compliance, the code
official may require that the plan review be conducted by an approved plan review service/company at the applicant's expense.
F. Plat Of Survey: Every application must include two (2) copies of a certified plat of survey prepared, signed, and sealed by a qualified land surveyor
licensed by the state of Illinois, showing all boundaries of the property, setback lines, existing structures if any, and all easements of record submitted
with the application.
G. Estimate Of Cost: Every application must include an estimate by the owner or his or her representative or agent of the total estimated cost of the work
proposed. Such cost estimate must include, among other things, all costs of site preparation, mobilization, excavation, heating, plumbing, electrical
wiring, carpentry, materials, fire protection, utilities, air conditioning, and the like. If the total cost at completion exceeds such cost estimate, then the
permittee must file with the building department a statement of such total cost at completion.
H. Site Plan: Every application for a permit authorizing new construction must include a fully dimensioned site plan, drawn to scale in accordance with a
plat of survey, showing the size and location of all new construction and all existing buildings and structures on the site, distances of the buildings or
structures to all property lines, and the existing grades at the corners of the site and at as many other locations as necessary to show the topography of
the site. The site plan also must show the proposed final grades of the top of the building foundation walls, the finished site grades at all corners, the
intended surface water drainage plan, all parking lots with the required vehicle parking stalls, all outside lighting, landscaping, utility lines, and other
required elements.
For demolition projects, the site plan must show all buildings and structures to be demolished, the location and size of all existing buildings and
structures that are to remain on the site, and all finished grades, stormwater drainage structures, and swales to drain the site on completion of the
demolition work.
In all cases, the requirement of a fully developed site plan may be modified or waived by the code official in lieu of a simple plat plan for small building
additions, accessory buildings and structures, demolition of minor buildings or structures, or other minor projects.
I. Spot In Survey: When required, a spot in survey (spotted survey) is required after foundation walls have been poured and stripped but before any work
on the superstructure is begun. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-6: PERMIT APPLICATION REVIEWS AND APPROVAL:
A. Action On Application: The code official will examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit, and any amendments thereto, within a
reasonable time after filing. If the application, plans, or other required documents do not conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws and
ordinances, then the code official will notify the applicant of the deficiencies of the application and generally of any additional information or data
necessary to establish that the application will meet the village requirements. When the code official is satisfied that the proposed work as represented
by the permit application, plans, and documents conforms to the requirements of this title and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the code
official will issue a permit as soon as practicable.
B. Signature Validation: No permit is valid unless it is signed by the code official or his or her designee. The code official's signature must be executed on
or attached to every permit, or the code official may designate one or more inspectors or other employees to validate a permit by affixing their
signatures thereto.
C. Approved Plans: The code official or his or her designee must stamp or endorse in writing all sets of approved plans, specifications, shop drawings, and
other required documents with the word "approved". One set of such approved plans and documents will be retained for the permanent property file
records of the village and one or more sets will be returned to the applicant. There must be a complete set of approved plans and documents at the
building site, open to inspection by the village's authorized inspectors at all reasonable times during construction. Other sets of approved plans will be
forwarded to such other agencies as necessary or required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 248/524
D. Compliance Required Regardless Of Plan Approval: Plans approved by the code official are approved with the intent that the plans and specifications
comply in all respects to this title. Any omissions or errors on the approved plans or within the specifications will not relieve the applicant of his or her
responsibility to comply with all applicable requirements of this title and with every other applicable law.
E. Posting Of Permit: The building permit must be posted in a visible position on the street side of the structure under permit during the entire time of the
construction operations.
F. Notice Of Start: The permittee must give at least a twenty four (24) hour notice to the building department before work is started under any issued
permit. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-7: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
A. Payment Of Fees: No permit will be issued until all fees required for such permit have been paid.
B. Required Subdivision And Utilities: No permit will be issued for the construction of any principal building until the village engineer has certified that the
property can be properly served with village sewer and water mains. The village engineer may release the property for permit if construction
improvement plans have been approved and the owner of the property, or his or her agent, has guaranteed the installation of all required construction
improvements with surety bonds or other certified documents acceptable to the village, conforming to the requirements of title 10 of this code and every
other applicable regulation.
C. Other Agency Or Department Approvals: No permit will be issued until required approvals from other agencies or departments are received by the
building department.
D. Permit As License Only; Compliance With Title: A permit is only a license to proceed with the work. No permit is, nor may be construed or applied to be,
authority to violate, cancel, or set aside any of the provisions of this title, except as specifically provided by approved modification or legally granted
variations as described in the application and supporting documents.
E. Compliance With Permit: All work must conform to the approved application and plans for which the permit has been issued and any approved
amendments thereto, except that such applications, plans, and amendments may not be construed or applied to authorize any violation of this code.
F. Compliance With Site Plan: All new work must be located and constructed strictly in accordance with the approved site plan.
G. Change In Site Plan: No site plan or part thereof may be changed, increased, or diminished in area from that shown on the official approved site plan
unless a revised site plan showing such changes, accompanied by the necessary affidavit of the owner or applicant, has been filed and approved by
the appropriate village authorities.
H. Completion Or Removal Of Structure: If a structure is not completed, for whatever cause, then the incomplete structure, including all foundations and
other underground installations, must be removed and the site restored to its original condition as provided in subsection 8-1-9A of this chapter. (Ord.
2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-8: INSPECTIONS:
A. Required Inspections: The code official or his or her duly authorized inspectors will make all of the following inspections and all such additional
inspections as the code official deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this title, the Lake Zurich zoning code, and other applicable codes and
ordinances:
1. After excavation has been made preparatory to any underground installation such as footings, foundations, sewers, water lines, or other
underground systems.
2. After installation of underground systems and before any backfilling.
3. After installation of framing, ducts for heating and ventilation, vents, chimneys, plumbing, electrical system, and other installations that may be
concealed in walls, floors, ceilings, attics, or other inaccessible locations and before such work has been covered by plaster, wallboard, furring, or
any other material.
4. After installation of a central heating plant and its accessories and before it is placed into operation.
5. After all construction and cleanup work has been completed and an occupancy permit has been requested.
B. Request By Permittee: The permittee must request an inspection from the code official at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of the inspection. No
such request will be made until the work and the site are in full compliance with all standards applicable to the work for which the inspection is
requested. The same requirements apply to all reinspections. One reinspection will be allowed at no charge. Subsequent reinspections will be charged
at the rate established in subsection 8-2-5I of this title. "Reinspection" means any additional inspection of the same work previously inspected and not
approved.
C. Exposure Of Covered Work: If any work is covered prior to proper inspection of it, then the code official may require that such work be uncovered at the
permittee's expense so that a proper inspection can be made.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 249/524
D. Inspection Of Existing Conditions: The code official or his or her duly authorized inspectors may enter on all property and structures in the village during
all regular village business hours and all other reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting such property and structures. No person may deny
access to any premises for such inspections. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-9: TIME LIMITS:
A. Building Permits; Restoration: Any building permit issued pursuant to this title will be null and void: 1) if the work authorized by such permit has not
commenced within six (6) months after the date of issuance of such permit, or 2) if such work has begun but is suspended or abandoned for six (6)
months or longer, or 3) if work is not completed within one year or such longer time as may be stated in the permit. The code official may, but is not
required to, extend any such time limit for six (6) months for good cause shown, after written request for such extension and payment of a fee equal to
fifty percent (50%) of the original total permit fee. The code official may grant no more than two (2) such extensions.
If a permit has expired and is not renewed, then all previous construction, if any, must be removed and the property restored to its original condition,
and all fees paid therefor are forfeited to the village and the permit is null and void. If the permittee does not remove all previous construction and
restore the property to its original condition, then the village may complete such removal and restoration and recover all of its costs and expenses by
the filing of a lien on the property or by any other action permitted by law.
B. Applications: Any permit application pending for more than six (6) months for which no permit has been issued will be returned to the applicant or
disposed of after notification of the applicant.
C. Unsafe Structures Or Premises: For certain permits, time limits for permits for restoration, structures or premises found to be in violation of section 8-1-
14 of this chapter will be established by the code official and may be less than one year. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-10: CANCELLATION OF PERMIT; RETURN OF FEES:
After written request therefor from the permittee, the code official may cancel any permit issued under this title and return the permit fees paid therefor
provided that no development of any kind has commenced pursuant to such permit and provided, further, that the village will retain twenty percent (20%) of
such permit fees to reimburse the village's administrative costs and expenses. This section does not authorize, and may not be construed or applied to
authorize, the return of any plan review fees. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The code official may revoke any permit or approval issued under the provisions of this title for: a) any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the
application or on the plans and other documents on which the permit or approval was based, or b) any violation of any applicable provision of this title or
any other code or ordinance, or c) any material deviation from any approved plan, drawing, or specification. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-12: STOP WORK ORDERS:
A. Authorization: The code official is hereby authorized to issue and post stop work orders to stop work on any building, structure, or premises: 1) when
work is being done without a building permit, 2) when false or incomplete information has been given to obtain a permit, 3) when a permit has been
issued but the check for payment of the permit fees has been refused by the permittee's bank, 4) when work is being performed contrary to the
provisions of this title or other applicable village codes or ordinances, 5) when the permittee does not take prompt action to correct violations as
provided in section 8-1-14 of this chapter, 6) when work is being done in an unsafe or dangerous manner, 7) when the conditions on the premises are
unsafe or dangerous either to those working on the premises or to the general public in vehicles or afoot, or 8) for any other good or just cause that
would warrant the issuance of a stop work order to enforce village codes or ordinances or to protect public safety, health, or welfare.
B. Issuance And Effect Of Stop Work Order: The code official, or his or her authorized designee, may issue a stop work order either orally or in writing. If
the stop work order is first issued orally, then it must be followed with a written stop work order within forty eight (48) hours after such oral order. After a
stop work order has been issued, whether orally or in writing, all work or action subject to such order must be stopped immediately. The stop work
order may be given to the owner, permittee, to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work. A copy of the stop work order will be posted on the
premises.
C. Unlawful Continuance: It is unlawful for any person to do any work or to take any action in violation of a stop work order. Any person, other than the
code official or his or her authorized designee, who removes a stop work order or who continues any work in or about the building, structure, or
premises after a stop work order has been served and posted, is guilty of a violation of this section and is subject to prosecution and fines as provided
in this chapter. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, the permittee, after approval of the code official, may do such work as is necessary to
protect the public health and safety and to correct the safety hazards, code violations, or other defects complained of in the stop work order. The code
official will set forth the conditions under which such approval will be given to proceed.
D. Removal Of Stop Work Order: A stop work order may be removed only when the code official is satisfied that the safety hazards have been rectified,
that the violations have been corrected, that the proper building permits have been issued, that such other action has been taken or is forthcoming to
resolve the original complaints, and that proper cash bonds or other guarantees have been filed with the village. After payment of the required fee, as
provided in chapter 2 of this title, written release of the stop work order will be given to all parties who had previously received the original stop work
order. The stop work order then will be removed by the code official and the work may proceed. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-13: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 250/524
A. New Buildings: No new building or structure may be used or occupied, in whole or in part, until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued
certifying that the building or structure has been completed in accordance with the approved permit.
B. Alterations; Use Changes: No part of any building or structure hereafter enlarged, extended, altered, or changed, or in which a use or ownership has
changed, may be used or occupied in such part until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued certifying that the work has been completed in
accordance with the provisions of the approved permit or that the use is properly authorized by, and in compliance with, applicable law. In the case of a
change of ownership without work requiring a permit, a new certificate of occupancy is required.
C. Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy:
1. General: When a building or project has been completed but, for good cause, minor building and site improvements that are affected by weather
conditions, such as seeding or sod, final grading, asphalt or concrete work, or the like, have not been completed, the code official may issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy, but only after a request therefor, payment of the required fee, and posting of the required bond. No temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued except after a finding by the code official that such permit will not adversely affect the health, welfare, or
safety of the occupants or the general public. A final certificate of occupancy is required for all parts of the premises after completion of all work.
2. Business, Office, And Industrial: The code official may issue a separate temporary certificate of occupancy authorizing use and occupation to
conduct business in a business, office, or industrial structure, but only after a request therefor, payment of the required fee and bond, and testing and
approval of the fire suppression and alarm systems granted in the discretion of the village fire department; and then only if the code official
determines that such work will pose no immediate threat to the health, safety, and welfare of workers or of the general public. No such temporary
occupancy permit creates or gives rise to, or may be construed or applied to create or give rise to, any right in the permittee to further occupy the
structure. Every such permit must state that it does not create any right to a final occupancy permit and that all work undertaken pursuant to such
permit is at the permittee's sole risk. No use or occupation for conducting business is permitted except after issuance of such a temporary occupancy
permit.
D. Permission: The code official, at his or her discretion and only after a specific written request from the permittee, may give permission to the owner or
his designee to place inventory, fixtures, racking, material, stock, other types of inventory, or the like in a business, office, or industrial building. This
permission may be granted only if the placement of the materials will not limit the completion of construction or inspections and provided the fire
suppression and alarm systems have been installed, tested, and accepted by the village fire department for granting of such permission. This
permission does not allow occupation of the building or area to conduct business of any kind under any circumstances. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-14: UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND PREMISES:
A. Definition; Removal Required: Any structure or premises that is, or hereafter becomes, unsanitary, deficient in exit facilities, a fire hazard, or an
attractive nuisance, or that is otherwise dangerous to human life, safety, or the public welfare (such conditions hereinafter collectively referred to as
"unsafe") is deemed an unsafe structure or premises. Every unsafe structure must be taken down and removed, in whole or in part, or made safe,
sanitary and secure, as the code official deems necessary or as provided in this title. A vacant structure with unguarded or open doors, windows, or
other openings and accessible to the general public is an attractive nuisance, a fire hazard, and unsafe within the meaning of this section.
B. Examination Of Unsafe Structures And Premises: The code official will examine every structure and premises reported as unsafe and will prepare a
report of his or her findings.
C. Notice Of Unsafe Conditions: If an unsafe condition is found in a structure or premises, then the code official will serve written notice on the owner, the
owner's agent, or the person in control of the structure or premises, describing the unsafe conditions found and specifying the required repairs,
improvements, or actions to be taken to render the structure or premises safe or secured, or requiring the unsafe structure or portion thereof to be
demolished, or such other action as is necessary to remove the hazard within a stipulated time.
D. Restoration Of Unsafe Structure: An unsafe structure may be restored to a safe condition. If the cost of the repairs or reconstruction necessary to put
the structure into a safe condition is estimated by the code official to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value of the structure in its unrestored
condition, then the structure must be made to comply in all respects with the provisions of this title, the Lake Zurich zoning code, and all other
applicable codes and ordinances for the construction of a new structure.
E. Posting Unsafe Notice: If the owner, owner's agent, or person in control of the unsafe structure or premises cannot be found, after diligent search, then
the notice of unsafe condition will be sent by mail to the last known address of one of those persons and a copy of such notice will be posted in a
conspicuous place on the structure or premises.
F. Disregard Of Unsafe Notice: After refusal or neglect of the person served with a notice of unsafe condition to comply with the requirements of the notice
to abate the unsafe condition, the village will institute the appropriate action to compel compliance with the order. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-15: EMERGENCY MEASURES:
A. Vacating Structures: When, in the opinion of the code official, there is an immediate danger of failure or collapse of a structure or any part thereof that
would endanger life, or when any building or structure has collapsed and life is endangered by the continued occupation of the structure, the code
official may order and require the occupants thereof to vacate the structure forthwith. In that case, the code official will cause to be posted, at each
entrance to such structure, a notice reading "DANGER" and stating that the structure is unsafe and its use or occupancy has been prohibited. It is
unlawful thereafter for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of making required repairs or demolishing the structure.
B. Temporary Safeguards: When, in the opinion of the code official there is an immediate danger to life, property, or the safety of the general public by a
collapse or failure of a structure or by other unsafe conditions on or in the structure or premises, the code official immediately may cause the necessary
work to be done to render such structure or premises or parts thereof temporarily safe or accessible to the general public.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 251/524
C. Closing Of Streets And Buildings: When necessary for public safety, the code official may close sidewalks, streets, buildings, and structures temporarily
and prohibit them from being used.
D. Emergency Work: For the purposes of this section, the code official may employ the necessary labor, whether village staff or outside services, and
materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
E. Costs Of Emergency Work: Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work will be paid by the village on certification of the code official. The
village will bill the owner of the premises for all costs incurred by the village. If the owner of the premises does not, or cannot, promptly pay said bill,
then the village may cause a lien to be filed against the property or may institute other appropriate legal action against the owner for the recovery of
such costs. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-16: MOVING BUILDINGS:
A. Additional Application Requirements: Every application for a permit to move a building must include, in addition to all other requirements, the following
information and items:
1. A statement and map of the proposed route;
2. The number of days required to complete the move, including a separate statement of the numbers of days on which the building will occupy public
property or rights of way;
3. The address of the site to which the building is being moved;
4. Copies of all required permits for work at the new site;
5. The fees required by chapter 2 of this title;
6. The bond required by chapter 2 of this title;
7. A traffic control plan; and
8. Certificates of insurance naming the village as an additional insured, providing at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of comprehensive general
liability coverage and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) motor vehicle liability coverage per person and per occurrence, or other statutory
required amount as may be deemed necessary, whichever is higher.
B. Lights And Warnings: Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a structure being moved, the permittee must place signage to that effect to warn vehicles
and persons from entering that portion of the street so blocked. The permittee must keep warning signs and lanterns or lights at night on the structure
to guard against any person or vehicle colliding with it.
C. Wire Cutting: Whenever it is necessary to interfere with wires, cables, or a public utility in moving a building, the terms of any franchise ordinance or
agreement governing will apply and the bond therein specified must be given. If no such terms apply, then the code official will estimate the expenses
of fixing the wires, cables or other interference and will require the permittee to post a bond in the amount of such estimate to cover such expenses.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-17: DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES:
A. Insurance: No structure within fifty feet (50') of a public right of way may be demolished except after filing with the village certificates of insurance
naming the village as an additional insured on policies providing at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) comprehensive general liability coverage
and at least two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) public liability coverage.
B. General Standards: All premises on which a structure is to be demolished must be enclosed with safety fencing placed at a location acceptable to the
code official. The premises must be maintained securely, and such warning and safety signage and lighting must be provided as necessary to warn
vehicles and persons of the activities being undertaken on the premises. The code official may require any such safety measures to be taken as the
code official determines are necessary and appropriate to protect the public health, and safety. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-18: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, replace, remove, demolish, move, use, or occupy any building,
structure, equipment, device, or system regulated by this title, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this title
or any other applicable code or ordinance of the village or other agencies of jurisdiction. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-19: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
The code official will serve a written notice of violation, or order to comply, on the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the erection, construction,
alteration, extension, repair, replacement, removal, demolition, move, use, or occupancy of any building or structure performed: a) in violation of the
provisions of this title, or b) in violation of any approved document or plan filed with the Village to secure a building permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this title, or c) in violation of any applicable ordinance, statute, or law of the Village or any other agency having legal jurisdiction over the
performance of the work being done. The notice of violation, or order to comply, will direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the
abatement of the violations, and will provide a time period for discontinuance or abatement which is appropriate for the condition. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-
2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 252/524
8-1-20: PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION:
If a notice of violation or order to comply is not complied with promptly, then the Code official may issue a stop work order as provided in section 8-1-12 of
this chapter. The stop work order may not be removed until all violations complained of have been corrected and the fee as provided in chapter 2 of this
title has been paid. If the permit holder or his or her agents refuse or are unable to correct any violation, then the Village may cause to be instituted, before
the Village's administrative hearing system or before the Illinois Circuit Court for the 19th Judicial Circuit (Lake County), the appropriate proceedings at law
or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate such violations or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful act complained of in the violation notice.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-21: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation, or entity which violates any of the provisions of this title or other applicable codes or ordinances of the Village, or who
disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this title, applicable Village codes and
ordinances, the approved plans and documents of the building permit, or any certificate or other permit issued under the provisions of this title, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and on conviction will be punished by a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each offense plus the cost of
prosecution. Each day on which such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-
2018)
8-1-22: SPECIAL PENALTY IF NO PERMIT:
In addition to every other penalty provided by law, any person, firm, corporation, or entity that undertakes any work for which a permit is required by this
title without first having secured a permit authorizing such work will be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. Such fine is in
addition to the required fee. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
8-1-23: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS:
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed does not preclude the Village from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction, or to
restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business, or use
of a building or structure on or about any premises. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-1-24: INTERPRETATIONS; APPEALS:
A. Authority Of The Code Official: The Code official may render interpretations of the provisions of this title and of any rule, regulation, or condition issued
or imposed pursuant to it.
B. Purpose Of Interpretations: The interpretation authority established by this section is intended to recognize that the provisions of this title cannot
possibly address every specific situation to which they may have to be applied. Many such situations, however, can be readily addressed by an
interpretation of the specific provisions of this title in light of the general and specific purposes for which those provisions have been enacted. Because
the interpretation authority herein established is an administrative rather than a legislative authority, it is not intended to add to or to change the
essential content of this title, but rather is intended only to allow authoritative application of that content to specific cases.
C. Procedure: Any person who seeks an interpretation must file a written application therefor with the Building Department stating specifically the title
provisions at issue and the facts and circumstances related to such person's request for an interpretation. The Code official will make a decision in
writing on such interpretation and provide that written decision to the applicant within thirty (30) days after the application is filed. Any failure of the
Code official to act within thirty (30) days, or within such further time to which the applicant may agree, will be deemed to be a decision denying the
application rendered on the day immediately after that thirty (30) day period.
D. Appeal: A decision by the Code official on an interpretation under this section, or on the application of a provision of this title, may be appealed to the
Lake Zurich building regulations board of appeals by the filing of a written application for an appeal within ten (10) days after notice was served in the
office of the village manager as specified below.
E. Lake Zurich Building Regulations Board Of Appeals:
1. Board Created: There is hereby created the Lake Zurich building regulations board of appeals.
2. Membership: The building regulations board of appeals is composed of three (3) members appointed by the Lake Zurich village manager. In
addition, the code official serves as an advisory member of the building regulations board of appeals. The members appointed by the village
manager must have at least ten (10) years of experience working in one of the following fields:
a. A builder or a superintendent of building construction.
b. A registered architect, structural engineer, mechanical engineer, or electrical engineer.
c. A registered design professional in the field of plumbing engineering.
d. A mechanical contractor.
e. A fire protection contractor or a registered design professional in the field of fire protection engineering.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 253/524
3. Appointed Terms: The three (3) members of the building regulations board of appeals appointed by the village manager will have a term of two (2)
years or until their replacements have been appointed. The village manager may replace a member of the building regulations board of appeals at
any time.
4. Notices of Meetings: Within ten (10) days after an appeal has been filed pursuant to this section, the code official must set a date and time for a
meeting. The meeting must take place within thirty (30) days after the appeal has been filed.
5. Meeting Postponement: The appellant has the right to request one postponement of the meeting. If a request is made, then the code official must set
the meeting for a date no more than thirty (30) days after the first established date.
6. Meeting Procedures: The building regulations board of appeals may adopt procedures governing the procedure for its meetings. Those procedures
must be consistent with the following standards:
a. The procedures need not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but must mandate that only relevant information be received.
b. Meetings must be open to the public. There is no requirement that members of the public be allowed to speak at a meeting.
c. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the village, and any person whose interests are directly affected must be given an opportunity to be
heard and may submit documents in support of their position.
d. At a meeting, the building regulations board of appeals may receive testimony and review documents and other relevant materials.
e. The code official may participate fully in all proceedings, but has no vote on any decision.
7. Decisions: The building regulations board of appeals must issue a written decision within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the meeting on
appeal. That decision must be transmitted promptly to the appellant. A failure of the board to issue a written decision within fifteen (15) days will be
deemed a denial of the appeal. All decisions by the board of appeals are final. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 2
FEES
8-2-1: GENERAL:
No permit to begin work for new construction, alterations, replacement, removal, demolition, relocation, or other building construction operations will be
issued until after the fees required for that permit, as prescribed in this chapter, have been paid in full to the Village. In addition, no amendment to a permit
for which an additional fee must be paid as prescribed in this chapter will be approved until after the additional fee has been paid in full to the Village.
The official identified herein as the "Code official" shall be that person(s) designated and appointed by the Village Manager to oversee, implement,
interpret and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-2-2: BASIS OF FEES; PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE:
A. General Basis Of Fee: Building permit fees are based, as provided in this chapter, on the size of the project. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
B. Permit Administration Fee: In addition to all other fees required by this chapter, every permit application that lists one or more contractors must pay a
permit administration fee in the amount pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-12-
279, 12-3-2018)
8-2-3: SPECIAL FEES:
The payment of the fees for the construction, alteration, replacement, removal, demolition, relocation or other building construction operations and for all
other work done in connection with or concurrently with the work contemplated by a building permit does not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit
from the obligation to pay all other fees prescribed by law or ordinance. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-2-4: PLAN REVIEW FEES:
At the time of filing an application for a building permit, or in conjunction with paying the building permit fee, the applicant must pay a plan review fee
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
A. Extraordinary Staff Review, And Inspections: In addition to the review fees, the applicant must pay, prior to the issuance of any permit, the actual costs
and expenses incurred by the Village for extraordinary Village staff review of plans, specifications, and inspections beyond the review customarily
performed in the usual course of such plan reviews. Such costs and expenses shall include time spent by the Village Manager, the Village Engineer,
the Code Official, the Manager of Public Works, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief, and any authorized members of the Administrative, Engineering,
Building, Fire, Police, and Public Works Departments of the Village or consultants at actual cost per position or service.
B. Administrative Fee: The administrative fees are based on twenty percent (20%) of the consultant or outside contractor fee, or as determined by the
Code official. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
8-2-5: SCHEDULE OF BASIC BUILDING FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 254/524
In addition to the plan review fees established in section 8-2-4 of this chapter, all applicants must pay a permit fee as provided pursuant to title 13, chapter
1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2016-4-124, 4-4-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
8-2-6: SITE/PERFORMANCE CASH DEPOSIT:
A. Deposit Requirement: Every applicant must post with the Village, at the time of issuance of a permit, a site/performance cash deposit in the amounts
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
B. Village Right To Draw On Bond: The Village has the right at all times, at its option, to draw on the site/performance cash deposit to reimburse the Village
for the costs, including, without limitation, legal fees and administrative expenses, actually incurred and reasonably estimated to be incurred by the
Village in exercising any of its rights under this title in the event: 1) the applicant undertakes any work in violation of any provision of this title or of any
permit issued or plan approved pursuant to this title, or 2) the applicant fails or refuses to complete the work authorized by any permit issued under this
title in accordance with all plans approved in connection with said permit.
C. Replacement Of Deposit: If the Village draws on the site/performance cash deposit, then the applicant must replenish the deposit to the full amount
required by this section within five (5) days after demand therefor is made to the applicant in writing by the Village. Any failure of the applicant to fully
replenish the deposit will result in cancellation of the related permit, which permit will not be reissued thereafter except after the filing of a new
application and paying the required fees therefor.
D. Return Of Unused Deposit: The Village will promptly return any unused portion of the site/performance cash deposit to the applicant, without interest, as
follows:
1. For all work other than a temporary sign, after proper completion of all work.
E. Forfeiture Of Deposit: A site/performance cash deposit posted pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be forfeited to the Village in full: 1) if the
permittee does not request a final inspection prior to the expiration of the permit for which the deposit was made; or 2) if the permittee does not cure all
defects in the performance of the work pursuant to the permit for which the deposit was posted within thirty (30) days after the specified date for
completion; or 3) if the permittee occupies the building or any portion of the building without written permission or certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 2015-
3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 3
BUILDING CODE
8-3-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the Village the 2012 International Building Code, as hereinafter amended. At least one copy of the 2012 International Building
Code has been on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for a period of at least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of these provisions and now remains in
the Office of the Village Clerk, and is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
The official identified herein as the "Code official" shall be that person(s) designated and appointed by the Village Manager to oversee, implement,
interpret and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-3-2: APPLICATION:
The 2012 International Building Code shall apply to all buildings and structures within the Village, except single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings
and all buildings and structures accessory thereto to the extent that such dwellings are expressly regulated by the 2012 International Residential Code for
One- and Two-Family Dwellings. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-3-3: AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS, AND CHANGES:
The following sections of the 2012 International Building Code are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
Chapter 1
Administration
Section 101
Title, Scope And Purpose
Amend this section as follows:
[A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code Of The Village Of Lake Zurich hereinafter referred to as "this code".
Amend this section as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 255/524
[A] 101.4.1 Gas. The provisions of the international fuel gas code shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas
appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to
the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation or residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories.
Amend this section as follows:
[A] 101.4.2 Mechanical. The provisions of the international mechanical code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of
mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning
and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems.
Amend this section as follows:
[A] 101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the international plumbing code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of all
aspects of a medical gas system and interior storm drainage systems.
Amend this section as follows:
[A] 101.4.4 Property Maintenance. The provisions of the international property maintenance code shall apply to existing structures and premises;
equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators, and occupants;
and occupancy of existing premises and structures.
Amend this section as follows:
[A] 101.4.5 Fire Prevention. The provisions of the international fire code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and
premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from the construction,
extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression, automatic sprinkler systems and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the
premises from occupancy or operation.
Amend this section as follows:
[A] 101.4.6 Energy. The provisions of the international energy conservation code, as adopted by the state of Illinois shall apply to all matters
governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.
Section 104
Duties And Powers Of Building Official
Delete this section in its entirety:
[A] 104.10.1 Flood Hazard Areas.
Section 105
Permits
Amend this section as follows:
[A] 105.2 Work Exempt From A Permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work
to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required
for the following:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 18 square feet.
2. Retaining walls that are not over 2 feet in height measured from grade, from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, and are used for
landscaping purposes only.
3. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, and similar work. Providing no electrical, mechanical or plumbing work is performed.
4. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
5. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy that are capable of containing less than 24 inches in height of water.
6. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings.
7. Nonfixed and moveable fixture, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches in height.
Section 110
Inspections
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 256/524
Add the following section:
[A] 110.1.1 Job Site Clean For Inspection. It shall be the responsibility of the general contractor or their duly authorized agent to insure the job site
is clean, including from the road to the structure,
Amend this section as follows:
[A] 110.5 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the owner, registered contractor performing the work or their duly authorized agent to notify
the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting the inspection to verify the work is completed prior
to the arrival of the inspector and to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code. Work not completed or
ready for inspection prior to the inspectors arrival shall be subject to a re-inspection fee.
Amend this section as follows:
[A] 110.6 Approval Required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval
of the building official or his/her designee. The building official or his/her designee upon notification, shall make the required inspections and shall
either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder
wherein the same fails to comply with the code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected within a specific time as determined by the
building official or his/her designee and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official or his designee. If any
work is covered prior to proper inspection of it, then the code official may require that such work be uncovered at the permittee's expense so that a
proper inspection can be made.
Section R112
Board Of Appeals
Delete this section in its entirety.
Chapter 2
Definitions
Section 202
Definitions
Amend this definition as follows:
Swimming Pools. Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that is capable of containing water 24 inches deep or more.
This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools: hot tubs and fixed-in-place wading pools. Inflatable swimming pools shall not be
permitted for public use.
Chapter 4
General Building Heights And Areas
Section 406
Motor-Vehicle-Related Occupancies
Amend this section as follows:
406.3.4 Separation. Separation shall comply with the following:
1. The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its attic area by a means of gypsum board not less than 5/8 inch in thickness,
applied to the garage side. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable rooms above by not less than 5/8 inch type X
gypsum board or equivalent and 5/8 inch gypsum board applied to structures supporting the separation from habitable rooms above the garage.
Door openings between the private garage and the dwelling unit shall be equipped with either solid wood doors or solid or honeycomb core steel
doors not less than 13/4 inches in thickness, or doors in compliance with 716.5.3 with a fire protection rating of not less than 20 minutes. Openings
from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Doors shall be self-closing and self-latching.
Chapter 7
Fire And Smoke Protection Features
Section 718
Concealed Spaces
Amend this section as follows:
718.2.1 Fireblocking Materials. Fireblocking shall consist of the following materials:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 257/524
1. Two-inch nominal lumber.
2. Two thicknesses of 1-inch nominal lumber with broken lap joints.
3. One thickness of 3/4-inch wood structural panels with joints backed by 3/4-inch wood structural panels.
4. One thickness of 0.75 (3/4) inch particle board with joints backed by 0.75 (3/4)-inch particleboard.
5. One-half (1/2) inch gypsum board.
6. One fourth-inch cement base millboard.
7. Balls or blankets of mineral wool or mineral fiber or other approved nonrigid materials installed in such a manner as to be securely retained in
place.
Amend this section as follows:
718.3.2 Groups R-1, R-2, R-3 And R-4. Draftstopping shall be provided in floor/ceiling spaces in group R-1 buildings, in group R-2 buildings with
three or more dwelling units, in group R-3 buildings with two dwelling units and in group R-4 buildings. Draftstopping shall be located above and in
line with the dwelling unit and sleeping unit separations.
Delete the exceptions in their entirety.
Amend this section as follows:
718.4.2 Groups R-1 And R-2. Draftstopping shall be provided in attics, mansards, overhangs and other concealed roof spaces of group R-2
buildings with three or more dwelling units and in all group R-1 buildings. Draftstopping shall be installed above, and in line with, sleeping unit and
dwelling unit separation walls that do not extend to the underside of the roof sheathing above.
Chapter 9
Fire Protection Systems
Section 903
Automatic Sprinkler System
Delete the following sections in their entirety:
903.2.1 through 903.2.12
Amend this section as follows: New
903.2 General Requirement. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in all use groups described in
this code. Automatic sprinkler systems must be installed in accordance with applicable NFPA standards, manufacturer's recommendations, UL
listings, and good fire safety procedures. Automatic sprinkler systems must be maintained in full operating condition at all times. Automatic sprinkler
systems shall be provided in all new residential use groups including townhomes/multi-family dwellings and one and two family dwellings which are
adopted by this code. All new single family dwellings shall have automatic fire sprinklers installed throughout per NFPA 13R or 13D. All new
townhomes shall have automatic fire sprinklers installed throughout per NFPA 13R or 13D. All new attached garages shall have automatic sprinklers
installed, where feasible. Dry sidewall or dry pendant sprinklers should be used.
Exceptions:
1. Detached structures which comply with all of the following do not require automatic fire sprinkler protection:
1. Less than one thousand (1000) square feet in floor area.
2. Single story.
3. Not used as a dwelling.
4. Not a high hazard use group.
5. Not used for high hazard products or hazardous materials storage.
6. No basement level.
7. Minimum 20 feet separation between buildings.
2. Real estate sales and construction trailers utilized during the development of property when approved by the code official.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 258/524
3. Agriculture storage buildings less than 8,000 square feet.
Delete this section in its entirety:
903.2.2 Warehouse And Storage Buildings.
Amend this section as follows:
903.2.3 Expansion Of Buildings Other Than Single Family Detached Dwelling. When a building, other than a single family detached dwelling,
having an interior of less than 3,000 square feet of gross floor area as of February 5, 2007, is expanded at any time to a size of 3,000 square feet of
gross floor area or more, then an automatic fire suppression system shall be provided for the entire building that meets the appropriate NFPA
standard indicated in the above sections. This requirement shall apply regardless of building separation, fire rated assemblies within the building, or
type of construction of the building.
Amend this section as follows:
903.2.4 Other Requirements For Existing Buildings To Install Sprinklers. Any existing building over 3,000 square feet of gross floor area shall
be required to install an automatic fire sprinkler system meeting the standards of NFPA 13 and all requirements of this chapter whenever one of the
following occur: a change in occupancy to a hazard classification that exceeds the class of hazard of the prior occupancy or the entire gross floor
area of the building is included in a permit.
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt Locations. Delete item numbers 3 and 4 from this section.
903.3.7 Fire Department Connections. Add the following to the paragraph: The sprinkler system demand may require a 5 inch storz connection
with a removable 21/2" Siamese connection.
Delete the following sections in their entirety:
903.4 through 903.4.3
Amend this section as follows:
903.4 Control Valves And Monitoring. All new and existing system fire suppression control valves shall be electronically monitored with the alarm
transmitted to the village of Lake Zurich dispatch center in accordance with NFPA 72C for remote stations. All new multi-occupant structures without
common areas shall have the automatic fire suppression system designed to provide separate zone control valves and flow switches for each
occupancy as well as main flow alarm initiation devices and control valves. All new multi-story structures shall have the automatic fire suppression
system designed to provide separate zone control valves and flow switches for each story as well as main flow alarm initiation devices and control
valves.
Amend this section as follows:
903.4.1 System Monitoring. All new and existing system fire suppression, diction and alarm systems shall be monitored with the alarm being
transmitted to the Lake Zurich dispatch center in accordance with NFPA 72C for remote stations. All such new connections shall be made by
wireless transmission compatible with the village's wireless alarm network.
Amend this section as follows:
903.4.2 Evacuation Alarms. All fire suppression systems shall be equipped so that, upon activation, an evacuation alarm shall sound that is heard
throughout the structure. In multi-occupancy structures with a common suppression system each unit shall be equipped so that, upon activation, an
evacuation signal shall sound that is heard throughout each unit.
Amend this section as follows:
903.4.3 Flow Alarm Signals. A horn/white strobe light unit in an approved weatherproof housing shall be installed above each fire department
connection for each automatic fire sprinkler system. In new multi-occupancy structures without common areas a single common fire alarm system
shall serve the entire structure with an amber strobe that shall be installed at an approved exterior location for each tenant space. These devices
shall be designed to activate only when waterflow device is activated. All other initiating devices installed for each unit in multi-occupancy structure
without common areas shall not activate the exterior signals and shall be compatible with the common system.
Add the following sections: New
903.6 Sprinkler Control Rooms. In all new construction, and in all existing buildings where in the opinion of the deputy fire marshal states it may be
installed, a sprinkler control room with an exterior entrance shall be installed. The control room shall contain the fire sprinkler risers, and the fire
alarm control panel. The room shall face either the main parking lot or shall face the front street and shall have a hard surface to the entrance door.
The knox key box shall also be located at the door to the fire sprinkler control room. If the location of the riser and alarm panel shall be in a different
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 259/524
location due to a remodel, then this shall be approved by the deputy fire marshal. This room shall have separate address. The door should be
labeled with 4 inch reflective lettering, stating "Sprinkler Room/FACP".
903.6.1 Room Size And Construction. The interior dimension of the room shall be minimally 30 square feet with any dimension not being less than
four feet for any residential structure and minimally 50 square feet with any dimension not being less than five feet in any commercial structure. All
interior walls within a sprinkler room shall use water resistant gypsum backing.
903.6.2 Lighting. The interior shall be provided with adequate illumination and emergency lighting. The exterior area adjacent to the sprinkler room
door shall be provided with adequate illumination.
903.6.3 Other Equipment Or Storage Prohibited. Every sprinkler room shall contain only approved fire protection equipment or mechanical
equipment specified in this section. No other mechanical equipment or storage will be allowed.
903.6.4 Protection From Climate. Every residential sprinkler room shall be insulated according to the prescriptive requirements of the international
energy conservation code for residential occupancies and provided with a heater that is designed to maintain the temperature of the entire room
above 60 degrees Fahrenheit. Every commercial sprinkler room shall be insulated according to the building code and provided with a heater that is
designed to maintain the temperature of the entire room above 60 degrees Fahrenheit. A low temperature alarm device shall be connected to the fire
alarm system that initiates a supervisory signal when the temperature reaches forty degrees Fahrenheit.
903.6.5 System Drains And Drain Valves. All portions of the sprinkler system shall drain into the drain located in the sprinkler room or directly
outside. Any drain that terminates outside shall not cause water to collect within five feet of the electrical equipment, discharge within five feet of
electrical equipment, or cause other hazardous conditions to mechanical equipment or public or private areas. All drain valves for common systems
including the dry system drain for the common attic area shall be located in the sprinkler room.
903.6.6 Floor Drain Required. A sanitary floor drain shall be installed in the room sufficiently sized to meet the flow rate of any device, including the
backflow device. Floor drains serving backflow devices, shall be sized in accordance with the discharge rates of the manufacturer's flow charts of
such devices. The following table shall be used to determine the floor drain size:
Drain Size Flow Rate GPM
4" 88
6" 264
8" 575
10" 1050
12" 1700
Section 905
Standpipe Systems
Amend this section as follows:
905.3 Required Installations. Standpipe systems shall be installed where required by sections 905.3.1 through 905.3.8. Standpipe systems are
allowed to be combined with automatic sprinkler systems. All required standpipe systems shall be supplied by a separate riser. The supply riser shall
be hydraulically designed to supply 21/2 inch hose drops. The riser system shall be equipped with a separate control valve and flow switch. The
standpipe shall be a 21/2 inch gated connection with a 11/2 inch reducer and all locations shall be approved by the fire code official. All standpipe and
sprinkler risers shall have separate control valves and flow switches per floor.
Delete the exception in its entirety.
Amend this section as follows:
905.3.1 Height. Change class III to class I, and change more than 30 to 30 feet or more.
905.3.1 Height. Class I standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located 30 feet or more
above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, or where the floor level of the lowest story is located 30 feet or more below the highest level
of fire department vehicle access. Class I standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings or structures: 1. in all newly constructed buildings
so that all areas in excess of 150 feet from the nearest point of entry to the building shall be covered by a standpipe: 2. in all areas of existing
structures which have been remodeled or added to in such a manner that those areas are located in excess of 150 feet from the nearest point of
entry to the building: 3. in all newly constructed buildings or structures two or more stories in height or more than one story below the highest level of
fire department vehicle access so that all areas on those floors are within 150 feet of a standpipe: and 4. in all buildings or structures more than two
stories in height or more than one story below the highest level of fire department vehicle access which have been remodeled or added to in such a
manner so that those areas are located in excess of 150 feet from the nearest standpipe. The standpipes shall be provided with a 21/2 inch to 11/2
inch reducer and cap with no fire hose. There shall be an approved fire department connection at grade and hose connections located at each floor
level.
Chapter 10
Means Of Egress
Section 1006
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 260/524
Means Of Egress Illumination
Amend this section as follows:
1006.1 Illumination Required. The means of egress, including the exit discharge and toilet rooms, shall be illuminated at all times the building
space served by the means of egress is occupied.
Section 1009
Stairways
Amend this section as follows:
1009.9 Stairway Construction. All stairways in type I, II and III construction shall be built of non-combustible materials.
Chapter 27
Electrical
Delete this chapter in its entirety.
Chapter 29
Plumbing Systems
Delete this chapter in its entirety.
Chapter 31
Special Construction
Section 3109
Swimming Pool Enclosures And Safety Devices
Amend this definition as follows:
Swimming Pools.
3109.2 Definition. The following term is defined and amended in chapter 2:
Amend this section as follows:
3109.3 Public Swimming Pools. Public swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than 5 feet in height or a screen
enclosure. Openings in the fence shall not permit passage of a 4-inch diameter sphere. The fence or screen enclosure shall be equipped with selfclosing
and self-latching gates. Inflatable swimming pools shall not be permitted for public use.
Amend this section as follows:
3109.4 Residential Swimming Pools. Residential swimming pools shall comply with the requirements set forth in the 2012 international residential
code, as amended.
Amend this section as follows:
3109.4.1 Barrier Height And Clearances. The top of the barrier shall be not less than 60 inches above the grade measured on the side of the
barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall not be greater than 2
inches measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the barrier is
authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure, and the vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the
bottom of the barrier shall not be greater than 4 inches.
Chapter 33
Safeguards During Construction
Section 3301
General
Add this section as follows:
3301.3 Construction Fences. A fence shall be installed in an approved manner around construction sites for all new commercial buildings,
commercial additions and all demolitions. Such fence shall be of chain link, a minimum of 6 feet in height above the finished grade measured on the
side away from the construction or demolition site. Gates opening into the construction site shall be locked when workers are not on the site.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-3-4: EXTERIOR WALL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 261/524
A. Exterior Wall Construction Materials: Except as provided in subsection C of this section or elsewhere in the Lake Zurich Building Code, all exterior walls
in new construction for all buildings other than single-family detached dwellings may be constructed using only decorative masonry or architecturally
designed aggregate materials. Subsections A1 and A2 of this section contain additional detail regarding exterior wall construction material
requirements:
1. Single-family attached and two-family dwellings: Decorative masonry or architecturally designed aggregate materials, on the exterior of the first floor,
with use of wood for accents and select architectural contrasts.
2. Multiple-family dwellings and all other: Decorative masonry or architecturally designed aggregate materials only.
B. Prohibited Exterior Wall Construction Materials: Adhered masonry veneer and block exterior walls are prohibited, except approved decorative masonry
or architecturally designed aggregate materials.
C. Exception For B-2 District: The requirements stated in subsection A of this section apply in the B-2 Central Business District, except that the Board of
Trustees may modify or waive those requirements when the Board of Trustees determines that a modification or waiver will promote useful new
development in the B-2 District, will enhance the economic vitality of the B-2 District, will allow development to be consistent with the exterior
appearance standards established for the B-2 District, will help assure consistency of new development or redevelopment with existing or proposed
development in the B-2 District, and will not increase any hazard to the public health or welfare. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 4
RESIDENTIAL CODE
8-4-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the Village the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as hereinafter amended (hereinafter
the "Residential Code"). At least one copy of the 2012 International Residential Code has been on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for a period of at
least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of these provisions and now remains in the Office of the Village Clerk, and is hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein.
The official identified herein as the "Code official" shall be that person(s) designated and appointed by the Village Manager to oversee, implement,
interpret and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-4-2: APPLICATION:
The 2012 International Residential Code shall apply to all single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings and all buildings and structures accessory
thereto to the extent that such dwellings are expressly regulated by the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. (Ord.
2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-4-3: AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS, AND CHANGES:
The following sections of the 2012 International Residential Code are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
Chapter 1
Administration
Section R101
Title, Scope And Purpose
Amend this section as follows:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code For One And Two Family Dwellings of Lake Zurich and shall be cited as such
and will be referred to herein as this "code".
Section R105
Permits
Amend this section as follows:
R105.2 Work Exempt From A Permit. Permits shall not be required for the following: Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 18 square feet.
2. Retaining walls that are not over 2 feet in height measured from grade from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, and are used for
landscaping purposes only.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 262/524
3. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, and similar work. Providing no electrical, mechanical or plumbing work is performed.
4. Prefabricated swimming pools that are 24" or less in height and capable of containing less than 24 inches of water.
5. Swings and other playground equipment.
6. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional
support.
Section R109
Inspections
Amend this section as follows:
R109.4 Approval Required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of
the code official or his/her designee. The building official or his/her designee upon notification shall make the required inspections and shall either
indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the
same fails to comply with the code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected within a specific time as determined by the building official or
his/her designee and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official or his/her designee. If any work is
covered prior to proper inspection of it, then the code official may require that such work be uncovered at the permittee's expense so that a proper
inspection can be made.
Section R112
Board Of Appeals
Delete this section in its entirety.
Chapter 2
Definitions
Section R202
Definitions
Add the following definition as follows:
Bedroom. Any room or space used for or intended to be used for sleeping purposes with a door that leads directly to a hallway or common area, i.e.
living room, dining room, etc. of the structure.
Section R301
Design Criteria
Amend this table as follows:
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind Design
Seismic
Design
Category
Subject To Damage From
Winter
Design
Temp
Ice
Barrier
Underlayment
Required
Flood
Hazards
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp
Speed
(mph)
Topographic
Effects
Weathering
Frost
Line
Depth
Termite
30 90 No A Severe 42" Moderate -
heavy
-5°F Yes See flood
maps
1500-
2000
45°F -
50°F
Section R302
Fire-Resistant Construction
Amend this section as follows:
R302.1 Exterior Walls. Construction, projections, openings and penetrations of exterior walls of dwellings and accessory buildings shall comply with
table R302.1(1); or dwellings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section P2904 shall comply with
table R302.1(2).
Exceptions:
1. Walls, projections, openings or penetrations in walls perpendicular to the line used to determine the separation distance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 263/524
2. Walls of dwellings and accessory structures located on the same lot.
3. Playhouses and similar structures, exempted from permits are not required to provide wall protection based on the location on the lot.
Projections beyond the exterior wall shall not extend over the lot line.
4. Foundation vents installed in compliance with this code are permitted.
Section R309
Garages And Carports
Amend this section as follows:
R309.1 Floor Surface. Garage floor surfaces shall be of approved noncombustible material.
The area of floor used for parking automobiles or other vehicles shall be separated from the residence by a minimum 4 inch high gas curb and shall
be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry door.
Add the following sections:
R309.6 Opening Protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings
between the garage and the residence shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching solid wood doors not less than 13/4 inches in thickness,
solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/4 inches in thickness or 20 minute fire rated doors.
R309.7 Separation Required. The garage shall be separated from the residence and its attic area by not less than 5/8 inch type X gypsum board
applied to the garage side. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable spaces above by not less than 5/8 inch type X
gypsum board or equivalent. Where the separation is a floor-ceiling assembly, the structure supporting the separation shall also be protected by not
less than 5/8 inch type X gypsum board or equivalent.
Section R310
Emergency Escape And Rescue Openings
Amend this section as follows:
R310.1 Emergency Escape And Rescue Required. Basements, habitable attics and every sleeping room shall have at least one operable
emergency escape and rescue opening. Where basements contain one or more sleeping rooms, emergency escape and rescue openings shall be
required in each sleeping room as well as the adjoining area of the basement. Where emergency escape and rescue openings are provided they
shall have a sill height of not more than 44 inches measured from the finished floor to the bottom of the clear opening. Where a door opening having
a threshold below the adjacent ground elevation serves as an emergency escape and rescue opening and is provided with a bulkhead enclosure, the
bulkhead enclosure shall comply with section: R310.3. The net clear opening dimensions required by this section shall be obtained by the normal
operation of the emergency escape and rescue opening from the inside. Emergency escape and rescue openings with a finished sill height below the
adjacent ground elevation shall be provided with a window well in accordance with section: R310.2. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall
open directly into a public way, or to a yard or court that opens to a public way.
R310.1.4 Operational Constraints. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of
keys, tools or special knowledge. The opening area shall be achieved without removing the sash.
Section R311
Means Of Egress
Add the following sections:
R311.2.1 Bedrooms. Every bedroom shall have access to the common areas without having to pass through another bedroom or bathroom.
Amend this section as follows:
R311.5.2 Under Stair Protection. Enclosed accessible space under stairs shall have walls, under stair surface and any soffits protected on the
enclosed side with 5/8 inch type X gypsum board.
Amend this section as follows:
R311.7.8 Handrails. Handrails shall be provided on at least one side of each continuous run of treads or flight of stairs with 3 or more risers.
Section R312
Guards And Window Fall Protection
Delete this section in its entirety:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 264/524
R312.2 Window Fall Protection.
Delete this section in its entirety:
R312.2.1 Window Sills.
Amend this section as follows:
R312.1.3 Opening Limitations. Required guards shall not have openings from walking surfaces to the required guard height which allow passage of
a sphere 4 inches in diameter.
Exceptions:
2. Guards on open sides of stairs shall not have openings which allow passage of a sphere 4 inches in diameter.
Section R313
Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems
Amend this section as follows:
R313.2.1 Design And Installation. Delete in its entirety.
Amend this section as follows: New
Automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in all new residential use groups including townhomes/multi-family dwellings and one and two family
dwellings which are adopted by this code. All new single family dwellings shall have automatic fire sprinklers installed throughout per NFPA 13R or
13D. All new townhomes shall have automatic fire sprinklers installed throughout per NFPA 13R or 13D. All new attached garages shall have
automatic sprinklers installed, where feasible. Dry sidewall or dry pendant sprinklers should be used.
Section R314
Smoke Alarms
Amend this section as follows:
R314.3 Location. Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following locations:
2. Outside each separate sleeping area within 15 feet of the bedrooms.
3. On each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and finished attics but not including crawl spaces and uninhabited attics.
4. In offices, dens, work-out rooms, etc. that have a door that leads directly to a hallway or common area, i.e. living room, dining room, etc. of the
structure.
Amend this section as follows:
R314.4 Power Source. Smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring when such wiring is served from a commercial
source, and when power is interrupted, shall receive power from a battery or a back up generator if one exists. Wiring shall be permanent and
without a disconnecting switch other than those required for overcurrent protection. Smoke detectors shall be connected to the hallway lighting
circuit.
Chapter 4
Foundations
Section R402
Materials
Delete the following section in its entirety:
R402.1 Wood Foundations.
Section R403
Footings
Amend this section as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 265/524
R403.1 General. All exterior walls shall be supported on continuous solid concrete footings which shall be of sufficient design to accommodate all
loads according to section R301 and to transmit the resulting loads to the soil within the limitations as determined from the character of the soil.
Footings shall be supported on undisturbed natural soils or engineered fill. Concrete footings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the provisions of section R403 or in accordance with ACI 332. Every room addition, sunroom, screen porch or any deck or other structure with a roof
that is attached to a house or other frost protected structure shall be supported on a continuous frost protected footing.
Amend this section as follows:
R403.1.1 Minimum Size. Minimum sizes for concrete footings shall be as set forth in table R403.1 and figure R403.1(1). The footing width, W, shall
be based on the load-bearing value of the soil in accordance with table R401.4.1. Spread footings shall be at least 6 inches in thickness, T. Footing
projections, P, shall be at least 2 inches and shall not exceed the thickness of the footing. The size of the footings supporting piers and columns shall
be based on the tributary load and allowable soil pressure in accordance with table R401.4.1.
Amend this table as follows:
Table R403.1 Minimum Width Of Concrete, Precast Or Masonry Footings.
Delete all references to masonry footings
Section R404
Foundations And Retaining Walls
Amend this section as follows:
R404.1 Concrete And Masonry Foundation Walls. Concrete foundation walls shall be selected and constructed in accordance with the provisions
of section R404.1.2.
Delete the following section in its entirety:
R404.1.1 Design Of Masonry Walls.
Delete the following section in its entirety:
R404.1.8 Rubble Stone Masonry.
Delete the following section in its entirety:
R404.1.9 Isolated Masonry Piers.
Delete the following section in its entirety:
R404.2 Wood Foundation Walls.
Amend this section as follows:
R404.3 Wood Sill Plates. Wood sill plates shall be a minimum of 2 inch by 6 inch pressure treated lumber. Sill plate anchorage shall be in
accordance with sections R403.1.63 and R602.11.
Amend this section as follows:
R404.4 Retaining Walls. Retaining walls that are not laterally supported at the top and retain in excess of 24 inches of unbalanced fill shall be
designed by a licensed Illinois structural engineer to ensure stability against overturning, sliding, excessive foundation pressure and water uplift.
Section R405
Foundation Drainage
Amend this section as follows:
R405.1 Concrete Or Masonry Foundations. Drains shall be provided around all concrete and masonry foundations that retain earth and enclose
habitable or usable spaces located below grade. Perforated pipe or other approved systems or materials shall be installed at or below the area to be
protected and shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system. Perforated drains shall be surrounded with an
approved filter membrane or the filter membrane shall cover the washed gravel or crushed rock covering the drain. Perforated pipe shall be placed
on a minimum of 2 inches of washed gravel or crushed rock at least one sieve size larger than the perforation and covered with not less than 6
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 266/524
inches of the same material.
Delete the following section in its entirety:
R405.2 Wood Foundations.
Section R405
Foundation Waterproofing And Dampproofing
Delete the following section in its entirety:
R406.3 Dampproofing For Wood Foundations.
Chapter 5
Floors
Section R503
Floor Sheathing
R503.1 Lumber Sheathing. Maximum allowable spans for lumber used as floor sheathing shall conform to tables R503.1, R503.2.1.1(1) and
R503.2.1.1(2).
Amend this table as follows:
TABLE R503.1
MINIMUM THICKNESS OF LUMBER FLOOR SHEATHING
Joist Or Beam
Spacing (Inches)
Minimum Net Thickness
Perpendicular
To Joist Diagonal To Joist
24 3/4 3/4
16 3/4 3/4
48
54 11/2 T & G n/a
60
R503.2 Wood Structural Panel Sheathing.
Amend this table as follows:
TABLE R503.2.1.1(1)
ALLOWABLE SPANS AND LOADS FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS
FOR ROOF AND SUBFLOOR SHEATHING AND COMBINATION SUBFLOOR UNDERLAYMENT
Span Rating
Minimal
Nominal Panel
Thickness
(Inch)
Allowable Live Load
(psf)
Maximum Span
(Inches)
Load
(Pounds Per Square
Foot, At Maximum Span)
Maximum
Span
(Inches)
Span @
16" o.c.
Span @
24" o.c.
With Edge
Support
Without
Edge Support
Total
Load Live Load
Sheathing Roof Subfloor
16/0 7/16 30 16 16 40 30 0
20/0 7/16 50 20 20 40 30 0
24/0 7/16 100 30 24 20 40 30 0
24/16 7/16 100 40 24 24 50 40 16
32/16 15/32 1/2 180 70 32 28 40 30 16
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 267/524
40/20 19/32 5/8 305 130 40 32 40 30 20
48/24 23/32 3/4 175 48 36 45 35 24
60/32 7/8 305 60 48 45 35 32
Underlayment,
C-C Plugged, Single Floor Roof
Combination
Subfloor
Underlayment
16 o.c. 19/32 5/8 100 40 24 24 50 40 16
20 o.c. 19/32 5/8 150 60 32 32 40 30 20
24 o.c. 23/32 3/4 240 100 48 36 35 25 24
32 o.c. 7/8 185 48 40 50 40 32
48 o.c. 13/32 11/8 290 60 48 50 40 48
Amend this table as follows:
TABLE R503.2.1.1(2)
ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR SANDED
PLYWOOD COMBINATION SUBFLOOR UNDERLAYMENT
Identification Spacing Of Joists (Inches)
Species group - - -
1 3/4 3/4 3/4
2, 3 3/4 3/4 7/8
4 3/4 7/8 1
Delete the following sections in their entirety:
Section R504
Pressure Preservatively
Treated-Wood Floors (On Ground)
R504.1 General.
R504.1.1 Unbalanced Soil Loads.
R504.1.2 Construction.
R504.1.3 Uplift And Buckling.
R504.2 Site Preparation.
R504.2.1 Base.
R504.2.2 Moisture Barrier.
R504.3 Materials.
Section R506
Concrete Floors (On Ground)
Amend this section as follows:
R506.2.3 Vapor Retarder. A 6-mil polyethylene vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than 6 inches shall be placed between the concrete floor
slab and the base course.
Exception: The vapor retarder may be omitted:
1. From detached garages, utility buildings and other unheated accessory structures.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 268/524
2. For carports.
Section R507
Decks
Amend this section as follows:
R507.1 Decks. Where supported by attachment to an exterior wall, decks shall be positively anchored to the primary structure and designed for both
vertical and lateral loads. Such attachment shall not be accomplished by the use of toenails or nails subject to withdrawal. Where positive connection
to the primary building structure cannot be verified during inspection, decks shall be self-supporting. For decks with cantilevered framing members,
connections to exterior walls or other framing members, shall be designed and constructed to resist uplift resulting from the full live load specified in
table R301.5 acting on the cantilevered portion of the deck. Cantilevered portions of decks shall not extend more than 2 feet.
Chapter 6
Wall Construction
Section R602
Wood Wall Framing
Amend this section as follows:
R602.3.2 Top Plate. Wood stud walls shall be capped with a double top plate installed to provide overlapping at corners and intersections with
bearing partitions. End joints in top plates shall be offset at least 24 inches. Joints in the lower plates shall occur over studs. Plates shall not be less
than 2-inches nominal thickness and shall have a width at least equal to the width of the studs.
Chapter 10
Chimneys And Fireplaces
Section R1004
Factory-Built Fireplaces
Amend this section as follows:
R1004.1 General. Factory built fireplaces shall be listed and labeled and shall be installed in accordance with the conditions of the listing. All
combustible framing within the fireplace chase shall be covered with a minimum 1/2 inch cement board or 5/8 inch type X drywall to a minimum height
of 6 feet and all joints and seams shall be sealed with an approved firestopping material. Factory built fireplaces shall be tested in accordance with
UL127.
Chapter 16
Duct Systems
Section M1601
Duct Construction
Amend this section as follows:
M1601.1.1 Above-Ground Duct Systems. Above-ground duct systems shall conform to the following:
2. Factory-made air ducts shall be constructed of metal or plastic.
Section M1602
Return Air
Add the following section:
M1602.1.1 Return Air Required. Every habitable room shall be equipped with a return air duct except those areas listed as prohibited sources in
section: M1602.2.
Chapter 24
Fuel Gas
Section G2420
Gas Shutoff Valves
Amend this section as follows:
G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located Within The Same Room. Each appliance shall be provided with a shutoff valve separate from the appliance. The
shutoff valve shall be located in the same room as the appliance. The shutoff valve shall be within 6 feet of the appliance, and shall be installed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 269/524
upstream of the union, connector or quick disconnect it serves.
Delete the following sections in their entirety:
G2420.5.2 (409.35.2) Vented Decorative Appliances And Room Heaters.
G2420.5.3 (409.5.3) Located At The Manifold.
Part VII
Plumbing
Delete part VII (Plumbing) in its entirety and replace with the following:
Title 8, chapter 7, Lake Zurich municipal code (2014 Illinois plumbing code).
Part VIII
Electrical
Delete part VIII (Electrical) in its entirety and replace with the following:
Title 8, chapter 8, Lake Zurich municipal code (2011 national electrical code).
Appendix G
Swimming Pools, Spas And Hot Tubs
Section AG102
Definitions
Amend this definition as follows:
Swimming Pool. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that is capable of containing 24 inches of water or more. This includes
permanent or temporary hard wall, soft wall or inflatable in-ground, above-ground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
Section AG105
Barrier Requirements
Amend this section as follows:
AG105.2 Outdoor Swimming Pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa, shall be
surrounded by a barrier which shall comply with the following:
1. The top of the barrier shall be at least 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The
maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches measured on the side of the barrier which faces away
from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such
as the pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical
clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches.
Appendix J
Existing Buildings And Structures
Amend this section as follows:
AJ401.2 Door And Window Dimensions. Minor reductions in the clear opening dimensions of replacement windows that result from the use of
different materials shall be allowed, except that the required emergency egress window per section 310 is installed to the full rough framed opening
of the original construction. (New construction grade window.)
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-4-4: ANTIMONOTONY STANDARDS:
The following standards apply to all construction of new single-family detached dwellings in the Village:
A. Abutting Lots: No single-family detached dwelling shall be erected on any lot abutting, or directly across the street from, a lot with a single-family
detached dwelling of the same exterior design or appearance or with identical front elevations.
B. Spacing: Not more than two (2) single-family detached dwellings of the same exterior design or appearance, or with identical front elevations, shall be
erected within four hundred feet (400') of each other on the same side of the street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 270/524
C. Criteria: The Village shall apply the criteria from all of the following three (3) subsections to determine whether the exterior design and appearance and
front elevations of two (2) single-family detached dwellings are the same or, instead, are sufficiently dissimilar:
1. Rooflines: To be considered dissimilar, the rooflines of two (2) single-family detached dwellings as seen from the front of the dwelling shall be
changed in at least one of the following ways:
a. Changing a gable roof to hip roof or changing hip roof to a gable roof.
b. Providing an intersecting gable roof on the main roof, provided that the height of the intersecting roof is at least fifty percent (50%) of the height of
the main roof.
c. Providing an intersecting hip roof on the main hip roof, provided that the height of the intersecting hip roof is at least fifty percent (50%) of the
height of the main roof.
2. Windows: To be considered dissimilar, the windows of two (2) single-family detached dwellings shall be changed in at least one of the following
ways:
a. Changing from single windows to a multiple window arrangement ganged units or changing from a multiple window arrangement to single
windows.
b. Providing a bay or bow window in the area of the predominant window.
3. Construction Materials: To be considered dissimilar, the construction materials of two (2) single-family detached dwellings shall be changed in at
least one of the following ways. When materials are changed, the change must occur throughout the front facade or elevation for a minimum of one
story in height.
a. Changing the siding from horizontal to vertical or vertical to horizontal.
b. Changing the facing material (wood, brick, stone, stucco/staccato board and trim).
D. Administration: The provisions of this section shall be administered by the Code official. To aid the Code official and applicants in their interpretation of
the provisions of this section, the Director may prepare illustrative drawings and written descriptions of the manner in which the provisions have been or
will be administered.
E. Appeals: If a building permit is denied to an applicant by reason of this section, then the applicant may appeal that decision to the Board of Trustees. On
such appeal, the Board of Trustees may:
1. Order the permit to be issued; or
2. Order the permit to be issued if modifications are made in the design of the building to bring it into conformity with the provisions of this section; or
3. Deny the appeal. The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be final. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 5
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
8-5-1: ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the Village the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code, as hereinafter amended (hereinafter the "Property
Maintenance Code"). At least one copy of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code has been on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for a period
of at least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of these provisions and remains on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, and is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
The official identified herein as the "Code official" shall be that person(s) designated and appointed by the Village Manager to oversee, implement,
interpret and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-5-2: AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS, AND CHANGES:
The following sections of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code are hereby amended, revised, and changed as follows:
Chapter 1
Administration
Section 101
General
Amend section 101.1 to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Lake Zurich Property Maintenance Code, hereinafter referred to as this "code."
Section 102
Applicability
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 271/524
Amend section 102.3 to read as follows:
102.3 Application Of Other Codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations to a structure, or change of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the 2012 international building code, 2012 international fuel gas code, 2012 international mechanical code, 2012
international energy conservation code, 2011 national electrical code and the 2014 Illinois state plumbing code.
Section 103
Department Of Property Maintenance Inspection
Amend section 103.5 to read as follows:
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated
in title 8, chapter 2 of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
Section 107
Notices And Orders
Amend section 107.2 as follows:
107.2 Form.
Delete paragraph 6.
Amend section 107.3 as follows:
107.3 Method Of Service.
Add new paragraph
4. Alternate method including email.
Section 109
Emergency Measures
Amend section 109.5 to read as follows:
109.5 Costs Of Emergency Repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work may be paid the jurisdiction. The jurisdiction shall
institute appropriate action to recover costs including charging against the real estate, placing a lien, or other necessary action.
Delete section 109.6 in its entirety.
Section 111
Means Of Appeal
Delete section 111 in its entirety.
Section 112
Stop Work Order
Delete section 112.4 in its entirety and amend to read as follows:
112.4 Failure To Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform or remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code.
Chapter 3
General Requirements
Section 302
Exterior Property Areas
Delete section 302.1 in its entirety and amend to read as follows:
302.1 Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The owner and occupant shall keep
that part of the exterior property in a clean and sanitary condition.
Add the following subsections:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 272/524
302.1.1 Stored Material. No accumulation of any materials, including without limitation, lumber, metal, rubbish, garbage, building materials, litter,
junk, vehicle parts, landscape equipment and materials, and similar materials may be stored outdoors at any time.
302.3.1 Parking Lot Maintenance. All driveways and parking lots and spaces for multi-family dwellings, commercial properties, and lots containing
two or more parking spaces shall be kept free of snow, ice, mud, and other debris.
302.3.2 Parking Lot Striping. The striping of all parking lots shall be maintained regularly so that the striping is visible and not faded.
302.3.3 Parking Lot Handicapped Space Signage. The handicapped parking space signs shall be maintained with the current state of Illinois
signs, or as amended by the village of Lake Zurich.
Delete section 302.4 in its entirety and amend to read as follows:
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 8 inches in height. All noxious
weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this
term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Section 303
Swimming Pools, Spas And Hot Tubs
Amend section 303.2 to read as follows:
303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, capable of containing water 24 inches or more in depth shall be completely
surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 60 inches in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool.
Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches above the bottom of the
gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate
will positively close and latch when released from an open position of 6 inches from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed,
replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
Section 304
Exterior Structure
Amend section 304.13 to read as follows:
Add:
304.13.3 Board-Up Openings Restricted. Exterior building openings, including without limitation windows, skylights, doors, and frames, shall not be
boarded up except in the event of a fire or other emergency, and then only for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Add:
304.13.4 Window Treatments And Coverings. All window treatments, curtains, drapes, blinds, shades and plastic shall be interior mounted, and
installed and maintained in a neat manner.
Delete section 304.14 in its entirety and amend to read as follows:
304.14 Insect Screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas or any areas where product to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored
shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens not less than 16 mesh per inch and every screen door used for insect control shall have a selfclosing
device in good working condition.
Amend subsection 304.18.1 to read as follows:
304.18.1 Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to readily
open from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a lock throw of not less
than 1 inch. Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. For the
purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.
Add subsection 304.20:
304.20 Matching Exterior Repairs Or Installation. Whenever the repair, replacement, maintenance or installation of exterior walls or roofs is
performed, the completed work shall match in color and material, and be consistent with the remainder of the exterior structure. Exception: materials
that are designed to contrast including siding walls with partial masonry.
Section 305
Interior Structure
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 273/524
Amend section 305.5 to read as follows:
305.5 Handrails And Guards. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having three or more risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stairs
and every open portion of the stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches above the floor or
grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches high or more than 42 inches high measured vertically above the nosing of
the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches high above the floor of the landing,
balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface.
Chapter 5
Plumbing Facilities And Fixture Requirements
Delete the text of this chapter in its entirety and replace with the following:
Refer to title 8, chapter 7 of the Lake Zurich municipal code (2014 Illinois state plumbing code).
Chapter 6
Mechanical And Electrical Requirements
Section 602
Heating Facilities
Amend section 602.2 to read as follows:
602.2 Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in table 301.2(1) of the
international residential code. Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall portable unvented fuel-burning space heaters be used as a means to
provide required heating.
Amend section 602.3 to read as follows and delete exception (2) but do not delete exception (1):
602.3 Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat at all times to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Amend section 602.4 to read as follows:
602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat at all times to maintain a temperature of not less than
65°F during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activity.
Chapter 7
Fire Safety Requirements
Section 704
Fire Protection Systems
Amend section 704.2 to read as follows:
704.2 Smoke Alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not
regulated in group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area within 15 feet of bedrooms.
2. In each room used for sleeping purposes.
3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwelling units with
split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent
lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.
Add the following additional subsection 704.2.1:
704.2.1 Carbon Monoxide Detectors. Single or multiple-station carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed and maintained in groups R-1 - R-4
and in dwellings not regulated in group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 274/524
1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area within 15 feet of bedrooms.
Exceptions: As allowed by the state of Illinois carbon monoxide act.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 6
MECHANICAL CODE
8-6-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the Village the 2012 International Mechanical Code, as hereinafter amended (hereinafter the "Mechanical Code"). At least one
copy of the 2012 International Mechanical Code has been on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for a period of at least thirty (30) days prior to the
adoption of these provisions and now remains in the Office of the Village Clerk, and is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein.
The official identified herein as the "Code official" shall be that person(s) designated and appointed by the Village Manager to oversee, implement,
interpret and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-6-2: AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS, AND CHANGES:
The following sections of the 2012 International Mechanical Code are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
Chapter 1
Administration
Section 101
Title, Scope And Purpose
Amend section 101.1 as follows:
101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Lake Zurich Mechanical Code, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this
code".
Section 106
Permits
Amend section 106.4 to read as follows:
106.4 Permit Issuance. The application, construction documents and other data filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the code
official. If the code official finds that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and
that the fees specified in title 8, chapter 2 of the Lake Zurich municipal code, have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant.
Amend section 106.5 to read as follows:
106.5 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in title 8, chapter 2 of the Lake Zurich municipal code have been paid, nor shall an
amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase of the mechanical system, has been paid.
Amend subsection 106.5.2 to read as follows:
106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated in title 8, chapter 2 of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
Delete subsection 106.5.3 in its entirety.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Section 108
Violations
Amend section 108.5 as follows:
108.5 Stop Work Orders. Upon notice from the code official that mechanical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a
dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to
the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an
emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue to work on
the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable for a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of the Village of Lake Zurich Municipal Code.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 275/524
Section 109
Means Of Appeal
Delete section 109 in its entirety.
Section 303
Equipment And Appliance Location
Amend section 303.3 as follows:
303.3 Prohibited Locations. Fuel-fired appliances shall not be located in, on or obtain air from any of the following rooms or spaces:
1. Sleeping rooms.
2. Bathrooms.
3. Toilet rooms.
4. Storage and clothes closets.
5. Surgical rooms.
Section 304
Installation
Amend section 304.5 as follows: Delete the exception.
Amend section 304.6 as follows: Delete the exception.
Section 501
General
Amend section 501.3.1.1 as follows:
503.3.1.1 Exhaust Discharge. Exhaust discharge shall not be directed onto walkways. Bathroom exhaust shall not terminate within 12" above
or below a deck or porch.
Section 603
Duct Construction And Installation
Delete the text of subsection 603.5.1 in its entirety.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 7
PLUMBING CODE
8-7-1: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE:
There is hereby adopted by Lake Zurich the Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014 edition, (hereinafter the "Plumbing Code") as the Illinois Plumbing Code is
amended from time to time by the Illinois Department of Public Health, pursuant to section 35 of the Illinois Plumbing Licensing Law. At least one copy of
the Illinois Plumbing Code has been on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for a period of at least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of these provisions
and now remains in the Office of the Village Clerk, and is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
The official identified herein as the "Code official" shall be that person(s) designated and appointed by the Village Manager to oversee, implement,
interpret and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-7-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. A plumbing permit shall be required under the following conditions:
1. When there is a change of occupancy of a building or structure. If the change is from one use to another as provided in the Illinois Plumbing Code, it
shall be treated as a new building and shall comply with the requirements of this section for its new use or occupancy.
2. For all new construction and any remodeling or renovation that alters, renovates or replaces existing plumbing systems. Plumbing systems shall
include the water service, water supply and distribution pipes; plumbing fixtures and traps; soil, waste and vent pipes; building drains; including their
respective connections, devices and appurtenances.
3. The installation of lawn sprinkler systems and backflow prevention devices.
4. The adding or altering of plumbing appliances including toilets, bidets, urinals, lavatories and hand sinks, tubs/showers, whirlpools, kitchen sinks,
water heaters, dishwashing machines, hot water dispensers, garbage disposals, water treatment equipment, separators/interceptors, commercial
icemakers, service sinks and drinking fountains.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 276/524
5. Exclusions from permit: Any minor repairs that do not require changes in piping to or from plumbing fixtures or involve the removal, replacement,
installation, of any pipe to a plumbing fixture; drain cleaning and rodding; repair and replacement of sink faucets, removal and reinstallation of toilets;
repairing leaks in valves or fixtures; replacing sump/ejector pumps. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every plumbing contractor must file with the Village a copy of his or her State license. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-7-4: LETTER OF INTENT:
The plumber of record must submit a letter of intent at the time of permit application, written on the plumber of record's business stationery and including
the plumber of record's notarized signature and, if applicable, corporate seal.
Any owner of a single-family house under construction who is installing his or her own plumbing system must sign an affidavit of intent stating that he or
she will live in the house as his or her primary residence for not less than twelve (12) months after the completion of the plumbing work. (Ord. 2015-3-053,
3-16-2015)
8-7-5: OWNER OCCUPIED HOUSE:
The owner-occupant or lessee-occupant of a single-family house, or the owner of a single-family house under construction for the owner's occupancy, may
plan, install, alter, or repair the plumbing system of that house if: a) the plumbing work complies with the minimum standards for plumbing in this chapter,
which work will be subject to inspection by the Illinois Department of Public Health or the Village and b) the owner, owner-occupant, or lessee-occupant
may not employ anyone other than a plumber licensed pursuant to the Illinois Plumbing License Law, to assist him or her.
A person is an "occupant" if and only if he or she has taken possession of and is living in the premises as his or her primary residence; or, in the case of an
owner of a single-family house under construction for his or her occupancy, he or she expects to take possession of and live in the premises as his or her
primary residence and he or she has a current intention to live in the house as his or her primary residence for a period of not less than twelve (12) months
after the completion of the plumbing work; or, in the case of an owner of a single-family house under construction for his or her occupancy, for a period of
not less than twelve (12) months after the completion of construction of the residence. The failure of the owner to live in the house as his or her primary
residence for the twelve (12) month period creates the rebuttable presumption of a lack of such intention. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-7-6: AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS, AND CHANGES:
The Plumbing Code is hereby added, amended, revised and changed as follows. In the event of any inconsistency between the Plumbing Code and the
provisions of this section, the provisions of this section shall apply and control.
A. Supplements To The Illinois Plumbing Code:
1. Chapter 11 of the 2012 edition of the International Plumbing Code shall govern the design, construction and installation of building storm drainage.
The pipe materials and fittings in section 1102 shall be substituted by 890 appendix A, table A of the Plumbing Code.
2. In the construction or alteration of all public facilities and multi-story housing units, the 1997 Illinois Accessibility Code and the 2010 ADA Standard
for Accessible Design shall govern all plumbing applications and required fixtures.
The following proposed amendments are pending State of Illinois Department of Public Health Plumbing Division approval.
3. Amend subsection 890.180(d) to read as follows:
d) Sleeves. Where a plumbing pipe passes through a foundation wall or footing, the pipe shall be protected by a sleeve with a diameter two inches
larger than the pipe. The annular space between the pipe and the sleeve shall be tightly caulked. Caulking material to be used shall be oakum and
lead wool on each end, oakum and cold tar on each end or a neoprene mechanical expansion type seal (example 'Link-Seal Modular Seal' or
'Wrap-it-Link').
4. Amend subsection 890.420(a)(4) to read as follows:
4) In addition to the full sized clean-out located inside and in-line with the building drain an additional full size, same as the building sewer, clean-out
shall be located within 5 feet outside the building foundation, at the juncture of the building drain and building sewer, in direct line with the building
drain and building sewer.
5. Add to subsection 890.1190(e) as follows:
e) In single family residences where more than one riser set is present individual line valves shall be required to be installed on each riser to enable
isolation of each riser or riser set.
6. Amend subsection 890.1370(b) to read as follows:
b) Size. Each floor drain and hub drain shall be sized for its intended use and the surface area that it drains. Any floor drain or drain trap installed
below a basement floor or underground shall be no less than 2 inches in diameter. At least one minimum three-inch floor drain shall be located in
every public or employee restroom. Floor drains or hub drains serving backflow devices and other indirect waste lines shall be sized in accordance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 277/524
with the discharge rates of the manufacturer's flow charts of such devices. The following table, based on Manning's formula for schedule 40 PVC
pipe at 75% full flow and a minimum slope of 1/8 inch/ft, shall be used to determine the minimum floor drain or hub drain size and associated drain
line size.
Drain Size Flow Rate GPM
4" 86
5" 159
6" 260
8" 536
10" 983
12" 1,569
7. Amend subsection 890.1370(d) to read as follows:
d) Provision For Evaporation. Emergency floor drains and floor drain seals subject to evaporation shall be fed by means of a priming device designed
for that purpose complying with ASSE 1018 or ASSE 1044. Vegetable oil is not an approved provision.
8. Amend section 890.1380 to read as follows:
Any piping installed within a building for the purpose of carrying storm water from a roof shall not be connected to a sanitary building drain or
building sewer. The pipe material shall conform to the requirements of appendix A, table A ("Approved Building Drainage/Vent Pipe"), and sections
890.910 through 890.930. The design, construction and installation of storm drainage shall be governed by the provisions in chapter 11 of the 2012
international plumbing code.
9. Add the following additional section 890.1390:
Section 890.1390 Gray Water Recycling Systems.
a) Car wash installations shall be equipped with a water recycling system. The water recycling system shall only receive waste discharge from the
car washing operation. The recycled gray water shall only be utilized for the operation of the washers.
b) Installation: All drain, waste and vent piping associated with gray water recycling shall be installed in full compliance with the plumbing code.
c) Makeup Water: Potable water shall be supplied as a source of makeup water for the gray water system. The potable water shall be protected
against backflow through a fixed air gap in accordance with section 890.1130 of the plumbing code.
d) Identification: All gray water distribution piping and reservoirs shall be identified as containing non-potable water. Piping identification shall be in
accordance with section 890.1120 of the plumbing code.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 8
ELECTRICITY; ELECTRICAL CODE
8-8-1: ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village the National Fire Protection Association's national electrical code, 2011 edition, as hereinafter amended (hereinafter
the "electrical code" or the "NEC"). At least one copy of the national electrical code, 2011 edition, has been on file in the office of the village clerk for a
period of thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of these provisions and remains on file in the office of the village clerk, and is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
The official identified herein as the "code official" shall be that person(s) designated and appointed by the village manager to oversee, implement, interpret
and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-8-2: AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS, AND CHANGES:
Section 210.12 of the national electrical code, 2011, is deleted in its entirety. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-8-3: APPLICABILITY:
The electrical code shall apply to all electrical work in the village; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to all such work
and, in the event of any inconsistency between the electrical code and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply and control.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 278/524
8-8-4: DEFINITION OF ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR:
The term "electrical contractor" as used in this chapter means any person engaged in the business of installing or altering by contract electrical equipment
for the utilization of electricity for light, heat, or power. Said term shall not include, however, the installing or altering of: a) radio apparatus or equipment for
wireless reception of sounds and signals, or b) apparatus, conductors, or other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers,
which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission, for use in their operation as public utilities. Nor shall said term include the employees
employed by an electrical contractor to do or supervise his work. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-8-5: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of electrical contractor unless such person is currently registered as an electrician or an electrical contractor in a
municipality in Illinois. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-8-6: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install any electrical appliances, wiring, or fixtures without strict compliance with the codes of the village relating to
such fixtures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to do any work without having obtained such permits as may be required. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-
2015)
8-8-7: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No electrical wiring for light, heat, or power shall be installed hereafter in a building or structure, nor shall an alteration, extension, or removal of an existing
electrical wiring system be made, unless a permit therefor shall have first been issued and the fee paid as provided in chapter 2 of this title.
Electrical permits shall be issued only to bonded electrical contractors who are currently licensed by a municipality within the state of Illinois; provided,
however, that such permits may be issued for electrical work for single-family residences, except service modifications or revisions, to the resident owner
of the residence. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-8-8: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
When construction or alteration work is to be done in any building, the applicant shall submit with his or her application for a permit a complete wiring plan
for approval. Such plan shall indicate the type and location of all outlets; the size of all motors and power consuming equipment, i.e., all current consuming
devices that shall make up the connected load; conduit runs; size of conductors for branch circuits; and feeders to be installed. The location of all panel
boards and cabinets and the number and rating of the circuits shall be indicated. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-8-9: SERVICE CAPACITY AND EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
A. Single-Family Residential Service Capacity: The minimum service capacity approved for each dwelling unit shall be a 3-wire, grounded neutral, two
hundred twenty (220) volt, one hundred (100) ampere service with a twenty (20) circuit distribution panel.
B. Commercial Or Multiple Occupancy Buildings Service Capacity: The minimum rating of service conductors and equipment shall be two hundred twenty
(220) volts, one hundred (100) amperes, 3-wire system; provided, however, that in a multiple-family dwelling building for units eight hundred fifty (850)
square feet or smaller, the minimum service size shall be two hundred twenty (220) volt, sixty (60) ampere, with a twelve (12) circuit distribution panel,
and in such a building with units greater than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet the minimum service shall be two hundred twenty (220) volt, one
hundred (100) ampere, with a twenty (20) circuit distribution panel.
C. Heavy Wall Conduit: Heavy wall galvanized or heavy wall aluminum conduit or intermediate metal conduit shall be used on all services to the first
disconnecting means. Revision of service shall conform with new service requirements.
D. Service Equipment Marking: Every building or individual tenant space with more than one service shall have every service labeled with the address of
each space and the individual electrical service number. The label shall be two and one-half inches (21/2") high exterior grade red plastic laminate with
white letters five-eighths inch (5/8") tall in an arial font.
Every commercial, industrial or multi-family electrical service shall be labeled with the address of the property. The label shall be one and three-fourths
inches (13/4") high exterior grade red plastic laminate with white letters one inch (1") tall in an arial font. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-8-10: CONDUCTORS:
Aluminum conductors shall not be permitted on the service entrance or internal wiring. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-8-11: RACEWAYS OR CONDUITS:
A. New Work: For all new work, wiring shall be installed in heavy wall conduit, electric metallic tubing, or surface metal raceways except that it shall be
permissible to use as an extension of flexible metal conduit, greenfield or equal, not more than six feet (6') in length where flexible connectors are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 279/524
necessary. Conduits shall be securely supported, independent of outlet boxes and cabinets. Armored cable, such as BX, shall not be used. All raceway
joints shall be made tight and shall provide a continuous electrical circuit for grounding purposes. Greenfield may be used for extensions to existing
wiring only where existing walls are finished and not accessible to conduit and, when exposed, a maximum of six feet (6') in length is allowed.
PVC is allowed for underground wiring exterior to the building perimeter at depths required in NEC; provided vertical extensions are heavy wall metal
material.
B. Conduit In Concrete: Heavy wall galvanized conduit, intermediate metal conduit, or PVC conduit shall be used when concealed within all concrete
construction.
C. Fittings: All fittings shall be either slip ring, compression nut type, or set screw type connectors. Crimp type fittings are prohibited.
D. Weather Exposure: All raceways exposed to the weather shall be rigid heavy wall aluminum or galvanized and IMC, or, if specific permissions granted,
PVC.
E. Water Meter Reader: One-half inch (1/2") thin wall electrical metallic tubing shall be installed from the water meter location to the approved location of
the outside water meter reader. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 9
FIRE CODE
8-9-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the Village the 2012 International Fire Code, as hereinafter amended (hereinafter the "Fire Code"). At least one copy of the
2012 International Fire Code has been on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for a period of at least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of these
provisions and remains on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, and is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
The official identified herein as the "Code official" shall be that person(s) designated and appointed by the Village Manager to oversee, implement,
interpret and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-9-2: AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS, AND CHANGES:
The following sections of the 2012 International Fire Code are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows. In the event of any inconsistency
between the Fire Code and the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section shall apply and control.
Chapter 1
Administration
Section 101
General
Amend section 101.1 to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code Of The Village Of Lake Zurich, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Section 105
Permits
Amend section 105.6 to read as follows:
105.6 Required Operational Permits. The fire code official is authorized to issue, up to a maximum of three per any single occupancy, operational
permits for the operations set forth in sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.46. The fees for an operational permit, defined in title 8 chapter 2 of the Lake
Zurich municipal code, shall be required annually as long as the operation continues.
Section 108
Board Of Appeals
Delete the text of section 108 in its entirety.
Section 109
Violations
Delete section 109.3 and replace with the following:
109.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, or entity which violates any of the provisions of this fire code, other than that penalty for
possession listed in chapter 56, Fireworks And Explosives, in subsection 5601.1.3.1 of this code, or who disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this code, applicable village codes and ordinances, the approved plans and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 280/524
documents of any permit, or any certificate or other permit issued under the provisions of this fire code or a lawful directive of the code official, shall
be prosecuted under the general penalty provisions listed in 8-1-21 of the village of Lake Zurich municipal code.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
109.4.1 Re-Inspection Fees. If a third re-inspection is required to determine that violations of fire codes or the amendments listed above have been
corrected, then the owner shall be charged a fee pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of the Village of Lake Zurich Municipal Code for that
third inspection and each subsequent re-inspection. Any required fee that has not been paid in full within 30 days after notice will be subject to
collection proceedings.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Chapter 3
General Precautions Against Fire
Section 307
Open Burning And Recreational Fires
Delete the text of section 307.1 and replace with the following:
307.1 Prohibited Open Burning. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted
and approved in accordance with 4-2-1-5 of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
Chapter 4
Emergency Planning And Preparedness
Section 404
Fire Safety And Evacuation Plans
Add additional subsection 404.5.1 as follows:
404.5.1 Pre-Plan Drawings. To assist the fire department develop pre-plans for fire emergencies, all new development, except single-family
detached dwelling, is required to present as-built drawings prior to occupancy certification. Drawings shall indicate a full site plan and a complete
interior floor plan. Where practical the drawings shall be in an electronic computer aided drawing format, but in all cases in an approved format.
Chapter 5
Fire Service Features
Section 503
Fire Apparatus Access Roads
Adopt appendix "D" in the 2012 IFC.
Add the following sections:
503.7 Fire Lanes. Approved fire lanes shall be provided for every new development for fire apparatus access to all facilities, buildings, or portions of
buildings except single-family detached dwellings hereafter constructed or occupied within the jurisdiction.
503.7.1 Existing Fire Lanes. Fire lanes for all existing facilities, buildings, or portions of buildings except single-family detached dwellings shall be
maintained as originally approved and shall be considered compliant with this code. Exception: At any time that the surface area of an existing fire
lane or parking area is removed or replaced the fire lanes within the parking area only shall be designed to meet this code. Any required change
made to the design of an existing parking area to meet this code shall not require any increase or alteration of the boundaries or limits of the existing
area as defined by curbs, buildings, portions of buildings, and edge of pavement, but shall be applicable only to marking and signage as may be
required by this code.
503.7.2 Number Of Fire Lanes. Fire lanes shall be provided on at least one side of any facility or building and on as many sides of the facility or
building as necessary to reach every portion of the first floor of the building that extends further than one hundred and fifty feet (150') from the
exterior wall adjacent to any fire lane. All multi-occupancy structures, other than residential structures less than three stories in height, shall provide
fire lanes along the two longest sides of the structure.
503.7.5.3 Multi-Occupancy Structures. All multi-occupancy structures, other than residential structures less than three stories in height, shall
provide fire lanes along the two longest sides of the structure that are a minimum width of thirty feet (30').
503.7.4 Vertical Clearance. All fire lanes shall have a vertical clearance of not less than fifteen feet (15').
503.7.5 Construction Standard. Fire lanes shall be constructed to a structural index of IBR 3.0 or greater and shall be provided with an all-weather
surface (example concrete or asphalt). All fire lanes shall be pitched in such a manner as to allow the runoff of water and eliminate the potential of
standing water. The Lake Zurich fire chief may allow for the construction standard of fire lanes to be varied where an approved alternate means is
provided or where conditions do not allow compliance. All fire lanes shall be a level driving surface. No fire lane shall be allowed to have speed
bumps, gates, ramps or other obstructions to a smooth continuous path of travel without permission from the Lake Zurich fire chief.
503.7.6 Curbs. All associated curbs, on top and side of curbs, or pavement areas shall be painted bright yellow or in an approved manner that
defines the limits of the fire lane.
503.7.7 Gates And Barricades. Any secured gates or barricades allowed, whether required or not, shall allow for fire apparatus passage through a
gate with a clear opening of not less than fourteen feet (14'). All secured gates shall allow access to fire apparatus by means of an approved knox
product or traffic pre-emption device.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 281/524
Section 506
Key Boxes
Delete section 506.1 and subsection 506.1.1 and replace with the following:
506.1 Where Required. Every structure equipped with any fire detection, suppression, or alarm system shall have a supervised entry system (knox
box 4400 series) installed at a height of five feet (5') above grade level in a location approved by the Lake Zurich fire prevention bureau. Additional
knox boxes may be required for any structure that exceeds 300 feet of travel distance around the exterior of the structure. Key boxes shall contain
two sets of keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the interior or the exterior of the structure, and to locked mechanical, electrical, and elevator
control rooms, and other areas as directed by the fire chief. All exterior doors that access areas common to the overall structure for each structure
are required to have hardware that will allow exterior access into the building with use of a single master key whenever possible. The exterior doors
that access an individual retail or commercial occupant are required to have hardware that will allow exterior access into the occupancy with use of a
single master key whenever possible that is different than the common key.
506.2 Key Lock Box Maintenance. The operator of the building or occupancy shall immediately notify the fire code official and provide the new key
when a lock is changed or re-keyed. The key to such lock shall be secured in the key lock box. The users shall be responsible for the proper
installation and maintenance of such key lock boxes, at their expense, and shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the district and Lake Zurich
fire/rescue department and their officers, employees and agents from any liability with respect to such key lock boxes.
Chapter 6
Building Services And Systems
Add the following additional section 609:
Commercial Kitchen Hoods
609.2.1 General. Each existing required commercial or other occupancy kitchen exhaust hood and duct system shall be protected with an approved
wet chemical fire suppression system installed and maintained per NFPA 17 and U.L. 300. Every required automatic fire suppression system, when
activated, shall transmit a fire alarm signal to the Lake Zurich dispatch center via an approved fire alarm system and the approved radio system.
Delete the additional section 610
Section 611
Parking Structures
Add the following additional section 611:
611.1 General. All parking structures, whether above or below grade, or whether attached or separated from any other structure, shall meet the
following standards:
611.1.1 Suppression System. All open-parking and below-grade parking structures shall be provided with a dry automatic fire suppression system
meeting the standards of NFPA 13.
611.1.2 Area Limitation And Construction Type. Any underground parking structure shall be limited in area to 40,000 square feet per level without
4-hour firewall separation. Any underground parking structure shall require type I construction.
611.1.3 Standpipes. A dry class I standpipe system shall be provided in any parking structure. All piping shall be corrosion resistant. Each standpipe
connection shall be placed in an approved standardized location with each connection being no greater than 250 feet from another connection.
611.1.4 Ventilation Fans. An approved PPV fan shall be provided in a clearly labeled cabinet or closet.
611.1.5 Corrosion Resistant Piping. All piping (sprinkler, standpipe, drainage, electrical conduit) shall be corrosion-resistant.
611.1.6 Mechanical Above-Grade. No sprinkler, alarm, mechanical, electrical rooms or equipment shall be located below-grade.
611.1.7 Elevators. All elevator cars should be sized to allow access by a cot 24 inches by 82 inches. All other requirements of Lake Zurich municipal
code for elevators (3-2-5 of the village code) shall be followed. Additional ingress/egress doors or stairs or elevators may be required beyond what
the minimum standards of the code require.
611.1.8 Emergency Call System. An approved emergency assistance call system shall be required.
611.1.9 Signs. Reflective "street signs" shall be provided near each ingress/egress point in the structure to indicate which street or streets the
ingress/egress point is adjacent.
611.1.10 Haz-Mat Equipment. Spill kit cabinets and approved supplies shall be provided to mitigate fuel leaks.
611.1.11 Storage Closets. All below-grade parking structures shall provide a closet on each level for each fire area of 40,000 square feet at one
approved ingress/egress point with an interior dimension of 50 square feet with any dimension not less than five feet that shall be used to store
equipment and supplies essential to fire protection or emergency management.
Chapter 8
Interior Finish, Decorative Materials and Furnishings
Section 806 and 806.1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 282/524
Delete the following sections in their entirety: Section 806.1 through section 806.1.3 and replace with the following:
806.1 Natural Cut Trees. Natural cut trees shall not be allowed in any occupancy, except single family homes.
Chapter 9
Fire Protection Systems
Add the following section:
901.4.7 Fire Protection Control Rooms. The fire prevention bureau shall approve the location of the sprinkler riser room and the fire alarm control
panel. The fire protection equipment shall be located on a street or parking lot and shall have a separate exterior entrance door to the room. All
related fire protection equipment shall be located within this room, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
Section 903
Automatic Sprinkler Systems
Amend section 901.6 to read as follows:
901.6 Inspection, Testing And Maintenance. The owner of a building having fire detection, alarm, and one or more extinguishing systems shall
have each such fire protection system maintained in an operative condition at all times, shall have each system tested by an approved licensed
contractor at least once each calendar year and shall submit to the fire official a copy of the test results, and shall be replaced or repaired where
defective. Non-required fire protection systems and equipment shall be inspected, tested and maintained or removed.
Delete section 903.2 and replace with the following:
903.2 General Requirement. Every building or structure, including open parking structures, constructed on or after March 1, 2009, other than single
family detached dwellings and two family dwellings, shall be protected by an approved automatic fire suppression system that meets the standards of
NFPA 13 or other NFPA standard specified by the fire prevention bureau. Compliance with this requirement shall mean all building areas within the
exterior walls including basements, crawl spaces, bathrooms and attics including the framing members and roof sheathing. Not included in the above
requirements are reach-in closets of 24 square feet or less. No portion of a water-based fire protection system that has water or a water-based
solution within may be closer than one foot to the interior surface of any exterior wall or wall that is adjacent to an unheated area. Any enclosure built
around any portion of a water-based fire protection system to allow any portion of that system to be closer than one foot from an exterior wall or wall
adjacent to an unheated area shall be designed in a manner that meets the approval of both the fire chief and the director of building. In addition, all
other requirements in the 2012 international building code chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems, not in conflict with the above, shall be required. See
section 9-24-2 of the Lake Zurich zoning code for definitions of "single family detached dwelling" and "two family dwelling."
Exception 1: Detached structures which comply with all of the following do not require automatic fire sprinkler protection.
1. Less than one thousand (1000) square feet in floor area
2. Single story
3. Not used as a dwelling
4. Not a high hazard use group
5. Not used for high hazard products or hazardous materials storage
6. No basement level
7. Minimum 20 feet separation between buildings
Exception 2: Real estate sales and construction trailers utilized during the development of property when approved by the code official.
Exception 3: Agriculture storage buildings less than 8,000 square feet.
903.2.1 Two Family Dwelling. Every two family dwelling constructed on or after February 1, 2007 shall be protected by an approved automatic fire
suppression system that meets the standards of NFPA 13D that is hereby modified to allow approved CPVC plastic piping meeting the standards of
NFPA 13-6.3.1 (2007 edition) in basement installations irregardless of the construction of the basement ceiling assemblies. Compliance with this
requirement shall mean all habitable building areas including basements, crawl spaces having mechanical equipment, bathrooms of any size, and
attics having a finished mechanical equipment area. Not included in the above requirements are reach-in closets of 24 square feet or less. No portion
of a water-based fire protection system that has water or a water-based solution within may be closer than one foot to the interior surface of any
exterior wall or wall that is adjacent to an unheated area. Any enclosure built around any portion of a water-based fire protection system to allow any
portion of that system to be closer than one foot from an exterior wall or wall adjacent to an unheated area shall be designed in a manner that meets
the approval of both the fire chief and the code official. Every NFPA 13D system shall include an interior and exterior horn/strobe device to insure
audibility at a level of 15dbA over ambient noise levels.
903.2.2 Expansion Of Buildings Other Than Single Family Detached Dwelling. When a building, other than a single family detached dwelling,
having an interior of less than 3,000 square feet of gross floor area as of February 5, 2007, is expanded at any time to a size of 3,000 square feet of
gross floor area or more, then an automatic fire suppression system shall be provided for the entire building that meets the appropriate NFPA
standard indicated in the above sections. This requirement shall apply regardless of building separation, fire rated assemblies within the building, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 283/524
type of construction of the building.
903.2.3 Other Requirements For Existing Building To Install Sprinklers. Any existing building over 3,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be
required to install an approved automatic fire sprinkler system meeting the standards of NFPA 13 and all requirements of this chapter whenever one
of the following occurs: a change of occupancy to a hazard classification that exceeds the class of hazard of the prior occupancy or the entire gross
floor area of the building is included in a permit.
903.2.3.1 Converted Structure. Whenever a residential structure is converted to a retail or commercial use it shall be protected by an approved
automatic fire suppression system that meets the standards of NFPA 13D that is hereby modified to allow approved CPVC plastic piping in basement
installations. That system shall include protection within any attached garage. The sprinkler system shall be monitored with a fire alarm system that
meets all the provisions of this fire code.
Delete section 903.4 and subsections 903.4.1 through 903.4.3 and replace with the following:
903.4 Control Valves And Monitoring. All new and existing system fire suppression control valves shall be electronically monitored with the alarm
transmitted to the Lake Zurich dispatch center in accordance with NFPA 72C for remote stations. All new multi-occupant structures without common
areas shall have the automatic fire suppression system designed to provide separate zone control valves and flow switches for each occupancy as
well as main flow alarm initiation devices and control valves. All new multi-story structures shall have the automatic fire suppression system designed
to provide separate zone control valves and flow switches for each story as well as main flow alarm initiation devices and control valves.
903.4.1 System Monitoring. All new and existing fire suppression, detection, and alarm systems shall be monitored with the alarm being transmitted
to the Lake Zurich dispatch center in accordance with NFPA 72C for remote stations. All such new connections shall be made by wireless
transmission compatible with the village's wireless alarm network.
903.4.2 Flow Alarm Signals. A horn/white strobe light unit in an approved weatherproof housing shall be installed above each fire department
connection for each automatic sprinkler system. In new multi-occupancy structures without common areas a single common fire alarm system shall
serve the entire structure with an amber strobe that shall be installed at an approved exterior location for each tenant space. These devices shall be
designed to activate only when the water flow device is activated. All other initiating devices installed for each unit in a multi-occupancy structure
without common areas shall not activate the exterior signals and shall be compatible with the common system.
Amend section 903.3.5 to read as follows: Adopt appendix B.
903.3.5 Water Supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in section
903.3.1 and the provisions of appendix B of this code. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the
requirements of this section and the 2014 Illinois plumbing code.
Add the following additional section 903.7 and subsections 903.7.1 through 903.7.6:
Amend the following sections: Add new section 903.7.
903.7 Sprinkler Control Rooms. In all new construction, and in all existing buildings where in the opinion of the deputy fire marshal states it may be
installed, a sprinkler control room with an exterior entrance shall be installed. The control room shall contain the fire sprinkler risers, and the fire
alarm control panel. The room shall face either the main parking lot or shall face the front street and shall have a hard surface to the entrance door.
The knox key box shall also be located at the door to the fire sprinkler control room. If the location of the riser and alarm panel shall be in a different
location due to a remodel, then this shall be approved by the deputy fire marshal. This room shall have separate address. The door should be
labeled with 4 inch reflective lettering, stating "SPRINKLER ROOM/FACP".
903.7.1 Room Size And Construction. The interior dimension of the room shall be minimally 30 square feet with any dimension not being less than
four feet for any residential structure and minimally 50 square feet with any dimension not being less than five feet in any commercial structure. All
interior walls within a sprinkler room shall use water resistant gypsum backing.
903.7.2 Lighting. The interior shall be provided with adequate illumination and emergency lighting. The exterior area adjacent to the sprinkler room
door shall be provided with adequate illumination.
903.7.3 Other Equipment Or Storage Prohibited. Every sprinkler room shall contain only approved fire protection equipment or mechanical
equipment specified in this section. No other mechanical equipment or storage will be allowed.
903.7.4 Protection From Climate. Every residential sprinkler room shall be insulated according to the prescriptive requirements of the international
energy conservation code for residential occupancies and provided with a heater that is designed to maintain the temperature of the entire room
above 60 degrees Fahrenheit. Every commercial sprinkler room shall be insulated according to the building code and provided with a heater that is
designed to maintain the temperature of the entire room above 60 degrees Fahrenheit. A low temperature alarm device shall be connected to the fire
alarm system that initiates a supervisory signal when the temperature reaches forty degrees Fahrenheit.
903.7.5 System Drains And Drain Valves. All portions of the sprinkler system shall drain into the drain located in the sprinkler room or directly
outside. Any drain that terminates outside shall not cause water to collect within five feet of the electrical equipment, discharge within five feet of
electrical equipment, or cause other hazardous conditions to mechanical equipment or public or private areas. All drain valves for common systems
including the dry system drain for the common attic area shall be located in the sprinkler room.
903.7.6 Floor Drain Required. A sanitary floor drain shall be installed in the room sufficiently sized to meet the flow rate of any device, including the
backflow device. Floor drains serving backflow devices, shall be sized in accordance with the discharge rates of the manufacturer's flow charts of
such devices. The following table shall be used to determine the floor drain size:
Drain Size Flow Rate GPM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 284/524
4" 86
6" 264
8" 575
10" 1050
12" 1700
Section 905
Standpipe Systems
Add the following to section 905.3:
905.3 Required Installations. All required standpipe systems shall be supplied by a separate riser. The supply riser shall be hydraulically designed
to supply 21/2" hose drops. The riser system shall be equipped with a separate control valve and flow switch. The standpipe shall be a 21/2" gated
connection with a 11/2" reducer and all locations shall be approved by the fire code official. All standpipe and sprinkler risers shall have separate
control valves and flow switches per floor.
Delete subsection 905.3.1 and exceptions and replace with the following:
905.3.1 Height, change class III to class I and change more than 30 feet to 30 feet or more.
905.3.1 Height. Class I standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located 30 feet or more
above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, or where the floor level of the lowest story is located 30 feet or more below the highest level
of fire department vehicle access. Class I standpipe systems shall be installed throughout the buildings or structures (1) in all newly constructed
buildings so that all areas in excess of 150 feet from the nearest point of entry to the building shall be covered by a standpipe; (2) in all areas of
existing structures which have been remodeled or added to in such a manner that those areas are located in excess of 150 feet from the nearest
point of entry to the building; (3) in all new constructed buildings or structures two or more stories in height or more than one story below the highest
level of fire department vehicle access so that all areas on those floors are within 150 feet of a standpipe; and (4) in all buildings or structures more
than two stores in height or more than one story below the highest level of fire department vehicle access which have been remodeled or added to in
such a manner so that those areas are located in excess of 150 feet from the nearest standpipe. The standpipes shall be provided with a 21/2" to
11/2" reducer and cap with no fire hose. There shall be an approved fire department connection at grade and hose connections located at each floor
level.
Section 906
Portable Fire Extinguishers
906.1 Where Required.
Delete the exception in number 1.
Add the following paragraph:
Exception: Where deemed necessary by the fire code official based on plan review, inspections of occupancies, or protection of processes and/or
activities, portable fire extinguishers shall be provided. Fire extinguishers shall be a minimum 10 pound (4A:40-B:C) ABC dry chemical type unless
approved otherwise by the fire code.
Delete the following sections of chapter 10.
Chapter 10
Means Of Egress
Section 1006
General Means Of Egress
Delete the following sections of chapter 33.
Chapter 33
Explosives And Fireworks
Section 3301
General
Section 3302
Definitions
Section 3308
Fireworks Display
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 285/524
Add new chapter:
Chapter 53
Compressed Gases
Section 5307
Compressed Gases Not Otherwise Regulated
Amend section 5307.3 to read as follows:
5307.3 Compressed Gases That Are Used In Soda-Dispensing Systems. All new and existing stationary carbon dioxide gas tanks of any size
that are inside a structure and are part of a soda-dispensing system shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of section 5307.3.1
through 5307.3.4.
Exception: Portable tanks regulated under DOT standards having an internal volume of 30 cubic feet (0.855 cubic meters) or less and are
removed off-site for refill.
5307.3.1 Pressure Relief Devices. Pressure relief devices shall be arranged to discharge upward and unobstructed to the open air in such a
manner as to prevent any impingement of escaping gas upon the container, adjacent structures or personnel.
5307.3.2 Leak Detection. An approved leak detection device shall be installed following manufacturers recommendation that is monitored by a fire
alarm system as a supervisory signal. This device shall be maintained and or replaced as recommended by the manufacturer.
5307.3.3 Leak Alarms. The fire alarm system shall provide an approved interior audible signal that is unique from a fire evacuation signal and
interior and exterior blue strobes that shall signal upon detection of a leak. The interior visual device shall be mounted near the tank or directly above
a door leading to an enclosed space containing a tank. The exterior strobe shall be in an approved weather-proof housing and mounted directly
above the fill valve.
Add new chapter:
Chapter 56
Explosives And Fireworks
Section 5601
General
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, advertisement, handling, and use of fireworks are prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. The use of fireworks for display as permitted in section 5608.
2. The retail sale of approved consumer novelties shall be permitted, but only to persons 18 years of age or older. Such sales shall be permitted
only in buildings equipped with approved automatic sprinkler systems. The display of consumer novelties in a building shall be separated from all
exit doors by a minimum distance of 20 feet or as approved in advance in writing by the fire code official. The sale of consumer novelties shall not
be permitted at any building or on any property where flammable or combustible liquids or gases are sold or dispensed.
Section 5602
Definitions
5602.1 Consumer Novelties. Consumer novelties shall mean: (i) snakes, glow worm pellets, smoke devices, trick noisemakers (known as party
poppers), toy booby traps, snappers, trick matches, cigarette loads, auto burglar alarms, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, and other devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are constructed so that the hand cannot come in
contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and (ii) toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than 0.25 grains of explosive mixture.
Delete the definition of "Fireworks, 1.4G" and replace with the following:
Fireworks, 1.4G. (Formerly Known As Class C, Common Fireworks.) Small fireworks devices, including handheld wire sparklers, containing
restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion. Such 1.4G fireworks that
comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the DOT for fireworks, UN 0336, and the U.S. consumer product
safety commission as set forth in CPSC 16 CFR: parts 1500 and 1507 are not explosive materials for the purpose of this code.
Section 5608
Fireworks Display
5608.1 Indoor Displays Prohibited. The use of any type of fireworks, novelties, or display or pyrotechnic special effects in theatrical or group
entertainment shall be prohibited within a structure of any use group.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 286/524
Amend subsection 5608.2.1 to read as follows:
5608.2.1 Outdoor Displays. In addition to the requirements of section 403, permit applications for outdoor fireworks displays using division 1.3G
fireworks shall include a diagram of the location at which the display will be conducted, including the site from which fireworks will be discharged; the
location of buildings, highways, overhead obstructions, and utilities; and the lines behind which the audience will be restrained. All outdoor fireworks
displays shall be electronically fired from an approved electronic firing unit.
Add the following additional subsection 5608.8.1:
5608.8.1 Display Site Restricted. No spectators or spectator parking areas shall be located within the display site. No vehicles shall be parked
within the discharge area following the start of connection of the first circuit to the electronic firing unit.
Add the following additional subsection 5608.8.1.1:
5608.8.1.1 Display And Sale Forbidden. It shall be unlawful to display, sell, store, or advertise for sale any division 1.4G or 1.3G fireworks within
the village.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 10
SIGNS1
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
Chapter 11
FENCES, SHEDS, ANTENNAS, SWIMMING POOLS
8-11-1: FENCES:
A. Permit Required: No fence shall be erected or altered until a permit has been secured from the village by the owner of the property on which such fence
is located or proposed, or his agent, and payment of the fee required in chapter 2 of this title.
B. Application Requirements: Every application for a fence permit shall include a plat of survey of the property on which such fence is located or proposed;
specifications detailing the type of fence, the precise location on the property where such fence is located or proposed, the materials to be used for the
fence, the anticipated dates of commencement and completion of construction; such other information as may be required by the code official; and the
required fees.
C. Prohibited Fences:
1. Barbed wire and razor wire and similar materials are prohibited except only after written approval of the code official to protect the public health,
safety, or welfare. No such fences shall be allowed under any circumstances in any residential district or along any property line abutting a lot used
for residential purposes, regardless of the zoning of such lots.
2. Electrically charged fences are prohibited.
3. Chainlink and wire fabric fences are prohibited in any required front yard or corner side yard.
4. Chainlink fence requirements in a residential district, a fence of 11-gauge is permitted. In all other districts, a vinyl coated fence of not smaller than 9-
gauge shall be permitted. All such fences shall be entirely of corrosion resistant material unless otherwise specifically approved in writing by the code
official.
D. Construction Standards: Every fence shall be constructed to resist a horizontal wind pressure of not less than thirty five (35) pounds per square foot in
addition to all other forces to which such fence may be subjected under normal circumstances. All support posts shall be set in concrete or compacted
gravel.
E. Finished Side Faces Out: Every fence shall be erected so that the posts and all other supporting members are on the side of the fence facing inward to
the property on which the fence is located. No fence shall be erected with supporting members on the outside of such fence.
F. Maximum Fence Heights:
1. Front and corner side yards: Three feet (3').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 287/524
2. Interior side and rear yards: Five feet (5').
The village manager may grant a modification from this subsection F2 to permit the installation of a six foot (6') fence along an interior side or rear
yard that will adjoin and connect to existing six foot (6') fences located on adjacent lots, provided that the village manager determines that the
installation of such fence will not result in any undue adverse effect on neighboring property.
3. Solid fence or open fence: a) along railroad rights of way, b) along residential property line abutting business or industrial district or property used for
business or industrial purposes, c) along residential property line abutting Route 12 or Route 22, or d) along lot lines in the business or industrial
districts other than lot lines abutting rights of way if determined by the code official to be required to protect the public health, safety, or welfare:
Seven feet (7').
4. Opaque fence to enclose an otherwise permitted outdoor storage area in the I district, but not in any required yard: Ten feet (10').
5. Privacy screening, but not in any required yard unless otherwise authorized above: Six feet (6').
6. Fences regulated by subsection G of this section: Six feet (6').
7. The height of a fence shall be measured from existing average grade on both sides of the fence to the top of the tallest element of the fence.
G. Fences Along Certain Rights Of Way: Every fence constructed along, and within ten feet (10') of, any rear lot line in any residential zoning district, which
rear lot line abuts any one of the following rights of way, shall conform to the standards set forth in this subsection: U.S. Route 12 (Rand Road), Illinois
Route 22, Cuba Road, Buesching Road, Old Rand Road, Miller Road, Midlothian Road, Ela Road, and Quentin Road. Every such fence shall meet all
of the following standards:
1. Height: No such fence shall exceed six feet (6') in height except as specifically provided otherwise in subsection F3 of this section.
2. Materials: Every such fence shall be constructed of wood, masonry, wrought iron, new composite materials simulating wood or wrought iron, or any
combinations thereof. Chainlink is prohibited.
3. Finishing: Every wood or composite material fence shall be maintained in a natural wood color. Fences may be sealed, varnished, or otherwise
finished with natural wood finishing and preserving materials.
H. Vision Clearances: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section or of this title, no fence shall be erected or maintained in any residential district
or in any district used for residential purposes that would create a vision impairment for vehicular traffic.
I. Limitation On Privacy Screening: Privacy screening that is more than five feet (5') tall shall be limited to a maximum length of fifty feet (50') per lot.
J. Swimming Pools: See section 8-11-4 of this chapter.
K. Domestic Animal Enclosures: Domestic animal enclosures such as dog runs shall not be constructed or maintained in front of the rear building wall line
of the principal structure on the lot. All such enclosures shall comply with yard requirements established in the Lake Zurich zoning code, with the
requirements of this section, and with all other applicable village codes and regulations. Such enclosures shall maintain a minimum setback of ten feet
(10') from all interior side and rear property lines, and shall not be located within any required front, corner side, or interior side yard. Domestic animal
enclosures shall be limited up to ten percent (10%) of the rear yard.
L. Trash Enclosures: Trash enclosures shall comply with the requirements of the Lake Zurich zoning code.
M. Dangerous Fences: Whenever the code official determines that a fence for any reason poses a threat to the public health or safety, then the code
official shall cause notice to be issued to the owner or resident of the property on which such fence is located advising such person of the dangerous
conditions of such fence and requiring elimination of such conditions. The owner or resident shall make all alterations or repairs required to eliminate all
dangerous conditions of such fence within the time period stated in the notice. If such person fails to make such alterations or repairs within the stated
time period, then the code official may cause such alterations or repairs to be made and may charge all costs and expenses for the making of such
alterations or repairs, including, without limitation, administrative costs and attorney fees, to the owner of the property on which such fence is located.
The failure of such person to make such alterations and repairs shall be a violation of this title.
N. Nuisance Declared: Every fence erected or maintained in violation of any standard of this section, of the Lake Zurich zoning code, or of any other
applicable village code or ordinance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
O. Nonconforming Fences: Repair of an existing fence of nonconforming material or in a nonconforming location may be allowed except for barbed wire or
razor wire. Removal of an existing fence and subsequent replacement shall require compliance with all regulations contained in this chapter.
P. Definitions: For purposes of this title, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
DOMESTIC ANIMAL ENCLOSURE: Fenced area used principally for the confinement or exercise of a domestic animal.
FENCE: Any barrier structure or natural screening which is used as a boundary or as a means of protection, confinement, or screening. A fence may
include vegetation or manufactured materials such as, but not limited to, chainlink, wood, masonry, or stone.
NATURAL FENCE: A fence made of vegetation.
OPEN FENCE: A fence that is constructed so that less than sixty percent (60%) of the superficial area consists of regularly distributed apertures.
PRIVACY SCREENING: A fence made of manufactured materials of limited length for a specific portion of the lot on which it is located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 288/524
SOLID FENCE: A fence, including gates, which conceals the activities behind it from the view of adjoining properties, streets, and alleys. (Ord. 2015-3-
053, 3-16-2015)
8-11-2: STORAGE SHEDS:
A. General Standards: All storage sheds shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the standards of this title and of the Lake Zurich Zoning
Code. For purposes of this section, a storage unit shall not be regulated as a storage shed under this section if no single dimension of such unit
exceeds six feet (6') in length and the total square footage of such unit does not exceed eighteen (18) square feet. However, sheds of all sizes shall
comply with subsection B of this section.
B. Prohibited Areas: No storage shed shall be constructed or maintained in any required front yard or corner side yard.
C. Limitation On Number: No more than one storage shed shall be constructed on a lot, which shed shall not exceed ten feet by twelve feet (10' x 12') (or
120 square feet) in size or twelve feet (12') in height to the highest point of the shed.
D. Construction Standards: Every storage shed shall have adequate support and shall be secured to prevent lateral movement and uplift.
E. Materials: Every storage shed shall be made of wood frame, masonry (or plastic PVC) construction. No storage shed shall be constructed with metal
walls, or other lightweight exterior materials. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-11-3: ANTENNAS:
Every antenna and its support structure shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the standards established in title 7, chapter 8 and
subsections 9-9-1C6, 9-9-1C7, and 9-9-1C8 of this Code. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-11-4: SWIMMING POOLS:
A. Permit Required: The installation of a swimming pool, whether permanent or portable, shall be deemed construction work within the meaning of this
title. Accordingly, no such work shall be undertaken unless a permit has been issued and the proper fee has been paid. Notwithstanding the provisions
of this subsection and section 8-4-3 of this title, as amended, no permit or fee shall be required for a portable pool used in connection with any singlefamily
detached dwelling in any residential district when such pool is designed to hold less than twenty four inches (24") of water and constructed for
the use of children only, when such pool is clearly designed for filling and emptying on a daily basis.
B. Construction Standards: The water supply and its treatment control for any swimming pool shall conform with accepted standards, as provided in the
design and operation of swimming pools and bathing beaches, circular no. 4.102, Illinois Department of Health. Construction shall be in compliance
with all applicable sections of the appendix G of the 2012 International Residential Code, the 2014 Illinois Plumbing Code (see chapter 7 of this title),
and the 2011 National Electrical Code (see chapter 8 of this title).
C. Location: Every swimming pool shall be located only in compliance with the provisions of the Lake Zurich Zoning Code.
D. Fencing: Every pool located on a lot used for residential purposes shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least five feet (5') in height above grade,
with suitable gates and self-closing mechanisms and self-latching devices designed to prevent access to such pool by children requiring adult
supervision. The code official shall have the duty to require immediate compliance of any pool discovered to be not in compliance with this section.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 12
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
8-12-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village the 2012 international energy conservation code as hereinafter amended (hereinafter the "energy code"). At least
one copy of the 2012 international energy conservation code has been on file in the office of the village clerk for a period of at least thirty (30) days prior to
the adoption of these provisions and remains on file in the office of the village clerk, and is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein.
The official identified herein as the "code official" shall be that person(s) designated and appointed by the village manager to oversee, implement, interpret
and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-12-2: AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS, AND CHANGES:
The following sections of the 2012 international energy conservation code are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
Chapter 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 289/524
Administration
Section CE101 And R101
Scope And General Requirements
Amend section 101.1 as follows:
101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the International Energy Conservation Code Of The Village Of Lake Zurich, and shall be cited
as such and will be referred to herein as this "code."
Amend subsection CE101.4.3 and R101.4.3, exception paragraph 3 as follows:
3. Existing ceiling, wall or floor cavities exposed during construction provided these cavities are filled with insulation of the highest R-value rating
for the cavity or space.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Chapter 13
FUEL GAS CODE
8-13-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the Village the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code as hereinafter amended (hereinafter the "Fuel Gas Code"). At least one copy
of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code has been on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for a period of at least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of
these provisions and remains on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, and is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
The official identified herein as the "Code official" shall be that person(s) designated and appointed by the Village Manager to oversee, implement,
interpret and otherwise administer the provisions as set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
8-13-2: AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS AND CHANGES:
The following sections of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code are hereby added, amended, revised:
Chapter 1
Administration
Section 101
General
Amend section 101.1 as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code For Lake Zurich, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
Section 106
Permits
Amend section 106.4 to read as follows:
106.4 Permit Issuance. The application, construction documents and other data filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the code
official. If the code official finds that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and
that the fees specified in title 8, chapter 2 of the Lake Zurich municipal code, have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant.
Amend section 106.5 to read as follows:
106.5 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in title 8, chapter 2 of the Lake Zurich municipal code have been paid, nor shall an
amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase of the mechanical system, has been paid.
Amend subsection 106.5.2 to read as follows:
106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated in title 8, chapter 2 of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
Delete subsection 106.5.3 in its entirety.
Section 107
Inspections & Testing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 290/524
Amend section 107.2.3 as follows:
107.2.3 Reinspection And Testing. Where any work or installation does not pass the initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be
made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The inspector failing the work or installation shall list a specific date by which the violations found
shall be corrected. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for inspection and testing.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Section 108
Violations
Amend section 108.5 as follows:
108.5 Stop Work Orders. Upon notice from the code official that mechanical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a
dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to
the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an
emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue to work on
the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable for a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of the Village of Lake Zurich Municipal Code.
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Section 109
Means Of Appeal
Delete section 109 in its entirety.
Chapter 3
General Regulations
Section 303
Appliance Location
Amend section 303.3 as follows:
303.3 Prohibited Locations. Appliances shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms, clothes or storage closets or surgical
rooms, or in a space that opens only into such rooms or spaces.
Section 403 (IFGC)
Piping Materials
Amend section 403.4 to read as follows:
403.4 Metallic Pipe. Metallic pipe shall comply with sections 403.4.1 through 403.4.2.
Amend subsection 403.4.2 to read as follows:
403.4.2 Steel. Steel and wrought iron pipe shall be at least of standard weight (schedule 40) and shall comply with one of the following standards:
1. ASME B 36.10, 10M;
2. ASTM A 53 (except galvanized steel pipe); or
3. ASTM A 106.
Delete subsection 403.4.3.
Delete subsection 403.4.4.
Delete subsection 403.5.2.
Delete subsection 403.5.3.
Amend subsection 403.10.4 as follows:
403.10.4 Metallic Fittings. Delete paragraphs 3, 4, 6 and 7 of subsection 403.10.4.
Section 406 (IFGC)
Inspection, Testing And Purging
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 291/524
Delete section 406.4 in its entirety and amend as follows:
406.4 Test Pressure Measurement. "The natural gas supply system shall be tested with compressed air, nitrogen, or an inert gas to a minimum two
times the proposed operating pressure but no less than 10psi gauge pressure, irrespective of design pressure. The test shall be monitored with a
pressure gauge with a maximum 30psi range with maximum 1 psi increments. The test shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) minutes in duration in the
presence of the plumbing inspector with no reduction or loss in pressure."
(Ord. 2015-3-053, 3-16-2015)
Title 9
ZONING
Chapter 1
TITLE AND PURPOSES
9-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, and may be referred to, as the LAKE ZURICH ZONING CODE. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-1-2: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSES:
This zoning code is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the village of Lake Zurich by the Illinois municipal code for the following purposes:
A. Overall Purpose: The overall purpose of this zoning code is to maintain Lake Zurich as a community comprised principally of well maintained singlefamily
residential neighborhoods and separately located, thriving business areas.
B. Land Use Patterns: The purposes of this zoning code related to land use patterns are to:
1. Implement and foster the goals and policies of the village's official comprehensive plan; and
2. Establish a rational pattern of land uses and encourage the most appropriate use of individual parcels of land in the village; and
3. Encourage compatibility between different land uses and protect the scale and character of existing development from the encroachment of
incompatible uses; and
4. Encourage and promote detached single-family homes as the principal land use in the village; and
5. Provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses that adversely affect the character and value of permitted development; and
6. Protect the public from harm from the loss of natural resources by encouraging and enhancing the preservation of natural resources, aesthetic
amenities, and natural features, including, among other things, the preservation of lowland and upland soils, wetlands, and natural existing views of
the lake of Lake Zurich; and
7. Secure adequate natural light, clean air, privacy, a safe environment, and convenience of access to property; and
8. Promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the village.
C. Public Infrastructure: The purposes of this zoning code related to public infrastructure are to:
1. Facilitate the most efficient use of existing and planned public facilities and utilities; and
2. Protect existing public facilities and utilities from being overloaded due to excess development or development incompatible with the capabilities of
the village's utility systems; and
3. Protect and enhance a pattern of interconnected streets and highways that is unified, integrated, safe, effective, and efficient; and
4. Reduce congestion and promote safety on streets and highways by limiting traffic generation through the control of land use intensity; and
5. Avoid or lessen the hazards of flooding and stormwater accumulation and runoff; and
6. Establish and regulate setback and yard lines along streets and highways and property lines.
D. Justifiable Expectations And Taxable Value: The purposes of this zoning code related to justifiable expectations and taxable value are to:
1. Protect and respect the justifiable reliance of existing residents, businesspeople, and taxpayers on the continuation of existing, established land use
patterns; and
2. Protect and enhance the taxable value of land and buildings, including, among other things, the value and use of publicly owned land and buildings.
E. Administration: The purposes of this zoning code related to administration are to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 292/524
1. Define the powers and duties of administrative officers and bodies necessary to administer this zoning code; and
2. Establish procedures for the efficient and effective use of the provisions of this zoning code; and
3. Establish standards for the review of applications filed pursuant to this zoning code; and
4. Prescribe penalties for the violation of the provisions of this zoning code. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 2
ZONING DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS
9-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
To carry out the purposes of this zoning code, the village of Lake Zurich is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
A. Residential Districts (Chapter 3 Of This Title):
R-1/2 Single-family residential district
R-3 Single-family residential district
R-4 Single-family residential district
R-5 Single-family residential district
R-6 Multiple-family residential district
B. Business Districts (Chapter 4 Of This Title):
B-1 Local and community business district
B-2 Central business district
B-3 Regional shopping district
C. Office Districts (Chapter 5 Of This Title):
O-1 Office/residential district
O-2 Limited office district
O-3 Office campus district
D. Industrial District (Chapter 6 Of This Title):
I Industrial district
E. Special Districts And Overlay Districts (Chapter 7 Of This Title):
OS Open space district
IB Institutional buildings district
LP Lake protection district
DR Downtown redevelopment overlay district
(Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-2-2: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT SEQUENCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 293/524
A. General Rule: This zoning code rejects as outdated and inappropriate the concept of hierarchical and cumulative zoning districts and, except as noted
below, is based on the concept that each district should be designed to accomplish a specific purpose, to encourage a particular type of development,
and to protect that development from being encroached upon by incompatible types of development.
B. Special Rule: Within the foregoing philosophy, however, it is recognized that when different districts are juxtaposed, their differing characters may
require special treatment to ameliorate incompatibilities that might otherwise result. For this limited purpose, this zoning code recognizes the concept of
"more restrictive" and "less restrictive" districts. And for this limited purpose, the districts established by this zoning code shall be considered "more
restrictive" or "less restrictive" in accordance with the following rules:
1. The open space district shall be deemed to be more restrictive than any other district.
2. The residential districts shall be deemed to be more restrictive than any nonresidential district except the open space district.
3. The R-1/2 district shall be deemed to be the most restrictive residential district and the R-6 district shall be deemed to be the least restrictive
residential district, and the residential districts shall be deemed to become less restrictive as the district number increases.
4. The institutional buildings district shall be deemed to be more restrictive than the business and office districts but less restrictive than any residential
district.
5. The business and office districts shall be deemed to be more restrictive than the industrial districts, and all of them shall be deemed to become less
restrictive as the district number increases.
6. Except in the DR downtown redevelopment overlay district, overlay districts shall not be considered in determining the restrictiveness of the
underlying district. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-2-3: ANNEXED LAND:
A. Annexation Of Land: All land annexed to the village after the effective date of this zoning code shall be classified automatically after such annexation in
the R-1/2 single-family residential district. The owner of any land proposed to be annexed to the village shall file, with the petition for annexation, an
application for a certificate of zoning compliance pursuant to chapter 13 of this title. In the case of an involuntary annexation, the village manager shall
complete the required application.
B. Application For Different Classification: When any land is classified pursuant to this section, it shall remain so classified unless and until an application
to amend such classification is filed and granted pursuant to section 9-14-1 and chapter 18 of this title. Such application may be filed prior to or
contemporaneously with the annexation of the land in question. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-2-4: ZONING MAP:
A. Map Incorporated: The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this zoning code are as shown on a map titled "zoning map of the
village of Lake Zurich, Illinois", hereafter referred to as the zoning map, which is by this reference incorporated as part of this zoning code. All
notations, references, and other information shown on the zoning map, and all amendments to it, shall be as much a part of this zoning code as if
specifically set forth and literally described herein.
B. Omitted Land: It is the intent of this zoning code that the entire area of the village, including all land and water areas, be included in the districts
established by this zoning code. Any area lying within the village but not shown on the zoning map as being included in such a district shall be deemed
to be, and it is hereby, classified in the R-1/2 single-family residential district.
C. District Boundaries: In the event that any uncertainty exists with respect to the intended boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map,
the following rules shall apply:
1. The district boundaries are the centerlines of expressways, highways, streets, alleys, waterways, railroads, and other rights of way unless otherwise
indicated. When the designation of a boundary line on the zoning map coincides with the location of any such right of way, then the centerline of that
right of way shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
2. When a district boundary does not coincide with the location of the centerline of any right of way but does coincide with a lot line, then that lot line
shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
3. When a district boundary does not coincide with the location of the centerline of any right of way or with a lot line, then the district boundary shall be
determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map.
D. Maintenance And Availability Of Zoning Map: The official copy of the zoning map shall be maintained by the village manager and shall be available for
public inspection during village business hours at the village hall. Any amendment to zoning district boundaries or any change in any other information
shown on the zoning map made by amendment to this zoning code shall be indicated on the official copy of the zoning map.
E. Mapping Of Parcels Affected By Court Decrees: Parcels of land affected by court decrees shall be shown on the zoning map in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 9-23A-6B of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-2-5: OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
A. Definition: The "official comprehensive plan" of the village shall be defined as a compilation of policy statements; goals; standards; maps; recommended
planning, regulatory, fiscal, and public works programs; pertinent data relative to the past, present, and future trends of the village with respect to its
population, housing, economic, social, and environmental development patterns and its land, water, and natural resources and use and its
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 294/524
transportation facilities, public facilities, and utilities; and any other matter relative to the present and future patterns of life within the village or within the
unincorporated areas lying within one and one-half (11/2) miles of its boundaries as they may from time to time exist, prepared and recommended by
the plan commission with the advice and assistance of the village manager and the village manager's staff and adopted by the board of trustees by
ordinance duly enacted, together with such amendments thereto as may be adopted from time to time. The term "official comprehensive plan" also
shall refer to any internally consistent and complete portion of such a compilation relating to any one or more of the aforesaid subjects or to any specific
portion of the aforesaid geographical area. As of the effective date of this zoning code, the term "official comprehensive plan" shall be understood to
refer to the following documents:
1. The Lake Zurich 2003 comprehensive land use plan.
2. This zoning code.
3. The Lake Zurich land development code, as amended, set forth in title 10 of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
4. Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the "Transportation Plan And Redevelopment Strategy For The Village Center", prepared by Trkla, Pettigrew, Allen & Payne,
Inc., related to potential redevelopment of downtown Lake Zurich.
B. Purpose: The official comprehensive plan shall be considered an official statement of the policy of the village with respect to the existing and developing
character of the various areas of the village and its vicinity; the proper objectives, standards, and direction for future maintenance, growth,
development, and redevelopment of the village; the means to be employed to protect existing character or development and to encourage future
development that will be in the best interests of the village; and the actions and programs to be undertaken by the village with respect to its future
maintenance and development.
C. Effect: After the adoption of the official comprehensive plan or a part thereof, no ordinance, regulation, or official map relating to the physical
maintenance, development, or redevelopment of the village or any land within it shall be enacted, established, amended, or varied and no right of way,
street, utility, or public structure or land shall be authorized, established, developed, redeveloped, or modified in location or extent except in accordance
with the policies, goals, objectives, principles, and standards of the official comprehensive plan or relevant part thereof unless the board of trustees
shall first make a specific finding that the facts and circumstances affecting the particular matter justify a departure from the official comprehensive
plan.
D. Procedures:
1. Plan Development: The plan commission, with the assistance of the village manager and the village manager's staff, shall oversee the continuing
development and revision of the official comprehensive plan. The plan commission and the village manager, in developing a plan, shall make all
reasonable efforts to obtain the views, comments, and criticisms of interested persons. In addition, the plan commission, prior to making any
recommendation for the adoption or amendment of a plan or part thereof to the board of trustees, shall set, notice, and conduct a public hearing
thereon in accordance with the provisions of section 9-14-3 of this title.
The board of trustees, at any time, may refer a plan to the plan commission for consideration and recommendation. In the case of such referral, the
plan commission shall return its recommendation to the board of trustees not later than ninety (90) days after the receipt of the referral. If such
recommendation is not so delivered, then the board of trustees may proceed to consider the amendment without such recommendation.
When satisfied that a plan or a part thereof is adequate for adoption as, or as an amendment of, the official comprehensive plan of the village or a
part thereof, the plan commission shall transmit such plan or part thereof to the board of trustees together with its recommendations for adoption of
such plan as well as any reports or statements deemed necessary to a full consideration of such plan or part thereof. Such reports or statements
may include majority and minority positions. Such transmittal shall be made not later than fifteen (15) days after the close of the public hearing
concerning such plan.
2. Plan Adoption: After receiving any recommendation of the plan commission with respect to the adoption or amendment of any plan or a part thereof,
the board of trustees, by ordinance duly enacted, may adopt such plan in whole or in part, with or without amendments; or may refer such plan or
any part thereof back to the plan commission for further consideration; or may reject such plan. The board of trustees shall take such action not later
than ninety (90) days after the close of the plan commission public hearing on such plan. The failure of the board of trustees to act within such period
shall be deemed to be a rejection of the plan. Upon the adoption of any such plan or part thereof, it shall be designated as the "official
comprehensive plan of the village of Lake Zurich" and, if less than a total comprehensive plan, shall carry a subheading designating its specific
contents.
3. Plan Amendment: The official comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, may be amended at any time in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection D3. Such an amendment may be initiated by the board of trustees, the plan commission, the village manager, or by any owner of property
affected by the provisions of such plan sought to be amended. Amendments initiated by the board of trustees, the plan commission, or the village
manager shall require no formal application and shall be processed as provided in subsections D1 and D2 of this section. Amendments initiated by
the owner of affected property shall be initiated by an application filed pursuant to section 9-14-1 of this title, except that the time limits specified in
subsections D1 and D2 of this section shall apply.
4. Plan Filing And Notice Of Adoption: The ordinance adopting the official comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, shall provide that the village
manager shall cause a certified copy thereof to be placed on file in the office of the village clerk and shall cause a notice evidencing the adoption of
such plan, or part thereof, to be filed with all municipalities adjacent to the village and with the Lake County recorder of deeds. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 3
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
9-3-1: PURPOSES:
Five (5) zoning districts are provided for all types of residential development.
Four (4) zoning districts are provided for single-family residential development. The single-family districts provide for a limited range of single-family
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 295/524
detached housing densities consistent with the village's established single-family residential neighborhoods. The R-1/2 and R-3 districts allow for lower
density residential use and larger lot sizes. The R-4 and R-5 districts allow for somewhat higher density residential use and smaller lot sizes.
One zoning district is provided for townhouse, two-family, and multiple-family residential development. The R-6 district is intended to function principally as
a transition between single-family detached houses and other zoning districts and to provide for lower density townhouse and two-family building types,
which may result in higher densities than in single-family developments. The existing multiple-family development in the village is mapped in the R-6
district.
Taken as a whole, the residential district regulations are intended to preserve established neighborhoods and encourage new residential development, but
only in a manner consistent with the overall character of the village. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-3-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and no others are permitted as of right in the residential districts:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Townhouse (single-family attached) dwellings, but only in the R-6 district.
C. Two-family dwellings, but only in the R-6 district.
D. Multiple-family dwellings, but only in the R-6 district in areas shown on the zoning map adopted on the effective date of this zoning code. (Ord., 10-
2004)
9-3-3: SPECIAL USES:
A. Senior housing in the R-6 district, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Community Need: No special use permit for senior housing shall be granted except on evidence satisfactory to the board of trustees that there is,
and will for the foreseeable future continue to be, a ready market demand among current area residents for all of the dwelling units in the senior
housing development.
2. Location: Every senior housing development shall be located in an area of the village that is conducive to the special needs of senior citizens. This
typically will require a location with convenient access to public transportation, retail stores, and medical services.
3. Facilities And Staff: Every senior housing development shall provide such on site facilities and staff as may be necessary and appropriate to satisfy
the social, cultural, recreational, and, when appropriate, medical needs of its residents, including walkways, ramps, benches, special lighting, and the
like. The name and telephone number of at least one person having direct responsibility for the operation of the development shall be kept on file
with the village manager and shall be listed in the Lake Zurich telephone directory under the name of the development.
4. Required Approvals: No senior housing development shall be established without the prior licensing, certification, or other approval of every public
agency charged with the regulation or supervision of any facet of the activity of the proposed facility. Every application for a special use permit for a
senior housing development shall set forth each agency that must approve the establishment or operation of the facility and shall be accompanied by
a formal acknowledgement of approval from each such agency; provided, however, that in the event any such approval has been delayed, the
application shall set forth the status of each such application and shall state any facts known to the applicant that might have contributed to the delay
of any required approval that has not been obtained as of the time of the filing of the application for a special use permit.
5. Financial Stability: No special use permit for a senior housing development shall be granted unless the applicant therefor shall establish, to the
satisfaction of the board of trustees, that there exists a reasonably certain source of continuous and sufficient funds to provide for the operation and
maintenance of such facility in accordance with the representations of the application and the various standards applicable to such facility by reason
of this zoning code and other laws and regulations.
6. Fire Protection: Every senior housing development shall be equipped with a fire suppression system, a fire protection signaling system, and an
automatic fire detection system in accordance with the requirements of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
B. Nursing and personal care facilities in the R-6 district, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Supervision: Every nursing or personal care facility shall provide qualified and experienced supervisory personnel in sufficient numbers, and during
sufficient and appropriate hours of the day, to meet all standards of any agency responsible for the licensing or regulation of the nursing or personal
care facility and such additional services as may be required by the board of trustees. The special use permit shall specifically establish minimum
standards for supervision. The name and telephone number of at least one person having direct responsibility for the operation of the facility shall be
kept on file with the village manager and shall be listed in the Lake Zurich telephone directory under the name of the facility.
2. Availability Of Facilities: Every nursing and personal care facility shall be provided with, or have ready access to, facilities and services necessary
and appropriate to the needs of its residents for active and passive recreation; medical care; educational, cultural, and religious activities; consumer
goods and services; and public transportation.
3. Required Approvals: No nursing or personal care facility shall be established without the prior licensing, certification, or other approval of every
public agency charged with the regulation or supervision of any facet of the activity of the proposed facility. Every application for a special use permit
for a nursing or personal care facility shall set forth each agency that must approve the establishment or operation of the facility and shall be
accompanied by a formal acknowledgement of approval from each such agency; provided, however, that in the event any such approval has been
delayed, the application shall set forth the status of each such application and shall state any facts known to the applicant that might have
contributed to the delay of any required approval that has not been obtained as of the time of the filing of the application for a special use permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 296/524
4. Financial Stability: No special use permit for a nursing or personal care facility shall be granted unless the applicant therefor shall establish, to the
satisfaction of the board of trustees, that there exists a reasonably certain source of continuous and sufficient funds to provide for the operation and
maintenance of such facility in accordance with the representations of the application and the various standards applicable to such facility by reason
of this zoning code and other laws and regulations.
5. Fire Protection: Every nursing or personal care facility shall be equipped with a fire suppression system, a fire protection signaling system, and an
automatic fire detection system in accordance with the requirements of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
C. Transitional service facilities for up to six (6) transitional service facility residents in the R-6 district, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Supervision: Every transitional service facility shall provide qualified and experienced supervisory personnel, in sufficient numbers and during
sufficient and appropriate hours of the day and night, to meet all standards of any agency responsible for the licensing or regulation of the transitional
service facility and such additional services as may be required by the board of trustees. The special use permit shall specifically establish minimum
standards for supervision. The name and telephone number of at least one person having direct responsibility for the operation of the facility shall be
kept on file with the village manager.
2. Concentration: No transitional service facility shall be located within one-fourth (1/4) mile of any other existing transitional service facility, whether or
not such existing facility is located within the village.
3. Structure Type: Every transitional service facility shall be located in a dwelling of the type permitted in the district where the facility is located. No
alteration of any dwelling that would prevent its future use as a dwelling shall be permitted.
4. Availability Of Facilities: Every transitional service facility shall be provided with, or have ready access to, facilities and services necessary and
appropriate to the needs of its residents for active and passive recreation; medical care; educational, cultural, and religious activities; consumer
goods and services; and public transportation.
5. Required Approvals: No transitional service facility shall be established without the prior licensing, certification, or other approval of every public
agency charged with the regulation or supervision of any facet of the activity of the proposed facility. Every application for a special use permit for a
transitional service facility shall set forth each agency that must approve the establishment or operation of the facility and shall be accompanied by a
formal acknowledgement of approval from each such agency; provided, however, that in the event any such approval has been delayed, the
application shall set forth the status of each such application and shall state any facts known to the applicant that might have contributed to the delay
of any required approval that has not been obtained as of the time of the filing of the application for a special use permit.
6. Financial Stability: No special use permit for a transitional service facility shall be granted unless the applicant therefor shall establish, to the
satisfaction of the board of trustees, that there exists a reasonably certain source of continuous and sufficient funds to provide for the operation and
maintenance of such facility in accordance with the representations of the application and the various standards applicable to such facility by reason
of this zoning code and other laws and regulations.
D. Public utility stations in any district, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Structure Appearance And Screening: All buildings and structures shall have exteriors which give the appearance of a structure permitted in the
district where located.
2. Safety Fencing: All such uses shall be fenced where any hazard to the safety of human or animal life is present.
3. Service And Storage Prohibited: No service or storage yard or building shall be permitted except as permitted for other uses in the district.
E. Planned unit developments in any district.
F. Bed and breakfast establishments in the R-5 district, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Location Restricted: A special use permit for a bed and breakfast establishment may be granted only for property that abuts property classified in the
B-2 central business district.
2. Standards: In addition to satisfying all of the standards set forth in section 9-19-3 of this title applicable to special use permits, every bed and
breakfast establishment also shall meet all of the following standards:
a. Every bed and breakfast establishment shall comply with the standards set forth in sections 4, 5, and 6 of the Illinois bed and breakfast act, 50
Illinois Compiled Statutes 820/4, 820/5, and 820/6.
b. Every bed and breakfast establishment shall comply with the regulations of the Lake County health department.
c. Every bed and breakfast establishment shall maintain certification and membership in good standing with the Illinois Bed And Breakfast
Association or a similar association approved by the village manager.
3. Owner Operated And Occupied Only: Every bed and breakfast establishment shall be managed and operated by its owner, which owner also shall
be the owner of the property on which the establishment is located and which owner shall occupy the establishment as the owner's principal place of
residence.
4. Maximum Number Of Guestrooms: The maximum number of guestrooms for rent in any bed and breakfast establishment shall be five (5).
5. Meals: No meals may be served at a bed and breakfast establishment except only breakfast, which may be served only to registered guests of the
establishment.
6. Maximum Length Of Stay: The maximum continuous length of stay for any guest in a bed and breakfast establishment shall be limited to thirty (30)
days.
7. Minimum Annual Days In Operation: An approved bed and breakfast establishment shall be open to the public for business and in operation not
fewer than one hundred eighty (180) days in any twelve (12) month time period.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 297/524
8. Signage: Notwithstanding any other code, ordinance, or regulation of the village, no signage of any kind shall be allowed for a bed and breakfast
establishment except only one ground sign. The ground sign may consist of two (2) sign faces, with each sign face not exceeding six (6) square feet
in area. The ground sign message shall be restricted to the name and address of the establishment and no other message. The ground sign shall be
made with materials, style, and lettering appropriate to the architecture of the establishment and in compliance with applicable village sign
regulations.
9. Lighting: Except as may be specifically approved by the board of trustees at the time of approval of the special use permit for the bed and breakfast
establishment, no exterior lighting shall be permitted at any bed and breakfast establishment except only small accent lighting of the type and
quantity that may be typically found accessory to a single-family detached dwelling. All exterior lighting shall be depicted on the site plans approved
by the village.
10. Exterior Statuary, Decorations: No exterior statuary, fountains, or similar attention getting devices shall be permitted except only of the type and
quantity that may be typically found accessory to a single-family detached dwelling. All such statuary, fountains, and other attention getting devices
shall be depicted on the site plans approved by the village.
11. Trash Containers: Trash containers shall be located only within a fully enclosed area. All trash containers shall be depicted on the site plan
approved by the village.
12. Special Events Prohibited: No special events of any kind, including, without limitation, receptions, weddings, and the like, and no meetings of
religious, political, business, fraternal, governmental, civic, or social organizations, and no events for which a fee is charged or remuneration is
received, shall be permitted at a bed and breakfast establishment at any time, except only events conducted for registered guests of the
establishment and to which only those registered guests are invited and permitted to attend.
13. Exterior Appearance Review Required: No construction or development of a bed and breakfast establishment shall be permitted except after
approval of the building permit application therefor pursuant to chapter 21 of this title.
14. Compliance With Lakefront Corridor Development Guidelines: Every bed and breakfast establishment shall comply with the Lakefront corridor
development guidelines, including, without limitation, compliance with regulations pertaining to architectural design, parking, and signage.
15. Landscape And Tree Preservation Plans: No construction or development of a bed and breakfast establishment shall be permitted except after
approval of a landscape plan and a tree preservation plan, which plans shall include, without limitation, depictions of the proposed screening of
vehicular and pedestrian areas and of adjacent properties.
16. Compliance With Village Codes And Ordinances: Except only as specifically provided otherwise in this subsection F, every bed and breakfast
establishment shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Lake Zurich municipal code and the provisions of this zoning code, including, without
limitation, the provisions of section 9-9-1 of this title related to accessory uses and structures, section 9-9-2 of this title related to temporary uses,
sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of this title related to parking and loading. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-3-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all residential districts subject to the provisions of section 9-9-1 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-3-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses are permitted in all residential districts subject to the provisions of section 9-9-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-3-6: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Home occupations are permitted in all residential districts subject to the provisions of section 9-9-3 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-3-7: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
The parking and loading requirements applicable in all residential districts are set forth in sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-3-8: SIGN REGULATIONS:
The sign regulations applicable in all residential districts are set forth in title 8 of the Lake Zurich municipal code. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-3-9: LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING:
Landscaping and lighting standards for uses and structures in the residential districts are set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2016-
6-137, 6-6-2016)
9-3-10: EXTERIOR APPEARANCE REVIEW IN R-6 DISTRICT:
A. Exterior Appearance Review In R-6 District: No construction or development requiring a building permit and affecting the exterior appearance of any
structure shall be permitted in the R-6 district except after approval of the building permit application pursuant to chapter 21 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 298/524
B. Compliance With DR Downtown Redevelopment Overlay District: All construction and development on property within the DR downtown redevelopment
overlay district (see section 9-7D-1 of this title) shall comply with all standards and requirements set forth in that overlay district. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-3-11:BULK, SPACE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The building height, lot, yard, and landscaped surface requirements applicable in the residential districts are set forth in the following table:
R-1/2 R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6
A. Maximum Height:
1.
Principal structures (whichever is less):
a. Feet 35 35 35 30 30
b. Stories 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
2.
Accessory structures* (feet) 25 25 25 25 25
B. Minimum Lot Area And Dimensions: 1,2
1.
Minimum lot area (square feet):
a. Lots platted prior to 1991 3 n/a n/a n/a 8,700 n/a
b. All other lots 40,000
20,000
15,000
10,000 10,000
2.
Minimum lot area per unit (square feet) 9,10
40,000
20,000
15,000
10,000 5,000
3.
Minimum lot width (feet) 13 150 100 90 75 75
C.
Minimum Yards: 1,4,5,6,11,12
1.
Front and corner side (feet): 7
a. Lots developed prior to 1991 3 n/a n/a n/a As established by plat or 25', whichever is greater
n/a
b. All other lots 30 30 30 30 25
2.
Side (feet): 8
a. Lots platted prior to 1991 3 n/a n/a n/a As established by plat or 7', whichever is greater n/a
b. All other lots 15 10 10 10 7
3.
Rear (feet) 8 50 30 30 30 30
D.
Minimum Landscaped Surface Area (Percent): 2
75 70 60 60 60
*Accessory structures are also subject to the provisions of subsection 9-9-1C of this title and applicable provisions of title 8 of the Lake Zurich
municipal code.
E. Exceptions And Explanatory Notes:
1. Nonconforming Lots: See section 9-11-5 of this title for requirements with respect to legal nonconforming lots of record.
2. Minimum Lot Area: Water areas and land areas with natural resource restrictions including floodplains, wetlands, and lowland conservancy soils
are not included as part of the calculation of the required minimum lot area.
3. Lot Areas In R-5 District: Many lots in the R-5 district were platted and developed at times when applicable regulations permitted lot areas smaller
than 10,000 square feet. Subsections B1a, C1a, and C2a of this section establish such lots as permitted in the R-5 district. The regulations of
subsections B1a, C1a, and C2a of this section shall not be interpreted, construed, or applied in any way to authorize the creation of any lot, whether
by subdivision or any other means, provided, however that the minimum lot area shall be 5,400
square feet for lots that, as of January 1, 2006, abut South Shore Lane and are classified in the R-5 district. No alteration or addition of any kind shall
be allowed to encroach into any established required front, corner side, or side yard/setback lines.
4. Visibility Across Corners: Any other provision of this zoning code to the contrary notwithstanding, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted,
allowed to grow, or maintained on any corner lot in any residential district in violation of the provisions of subsection 4-2-1-3C of the Lake Zurich
municipal code.
5. Special Setbacks For Signs: Special setbacks established for some signs in the Lake Zurich municipal code shall control over the yard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 299/524
requirements established in the table.
6. Specified Structures And Uses In Required Yards: The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required
yard:
a. Statuary, arbors, trellises, and ornamental light standards having a height of 8 feet or less, but not in any side yard in the LP district; and
b. Eaves and gutters projecting not more than 2 feet from an exterior wall; and
c. Awnings, canopies, bay windows, and balconies projecting not more than 3 feet into a front or rear yard from an exterior wall for a distance not
more than 1/3 of the length of such wall, projecting not more than 2 feet into a side yard from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/4 of the
length of such wall; and
d. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, and the like projecting not more than 2 feet from an
exterior wall, but not in any side yard in the LP district; and
e. Outside stairways that extend from an exterior wall, but not more than 3 feet into the required yard, not greater than a height of 4 feet or less,
and not in any side yard in the LP district, and provided that such exterior wall shall be located outside of the required yard; and
f. Flagpoles, but not in any side yard in the LP district; and
g. Clotheslines, except in any front, side, or corner side yard; and
h. Terraces, but not within 20 feet of any front, corner side, or rear lot line, and not within 5 feet of any interior side lot line; and
i. Recreational devices, but only freestanding basketball standards and no other recreational devices in any front yard and not in any side yard in
the LP district; and
j. Fences, walls (except in corner side yards), and hedges, subject to the limitations of the Lake Zurich municipal code; and
k. Driveways, subject to the limitations of subsection 9-10-1C of this title, but not within 3 feet of any side lot line on the lot on which such driveway
is located, including, without limitation, any unimproved (dirt, gravel, or other) driveway that is paved and any driveway that is substantially rebuilt
or that is removed and replaced. However, an existing residential driveway that encroaches on the required 3 foot side lot line may be maintained,
repaired, and replaced at its current location if, but only if, the driveway complied at the time of its original installation with applicable provisions of
this zoning code; and
l. Decks, swimming pools, swimming pool equipment, and gazebos in any residential district, but not in any front, corner side, or interior side yard
and not within 23 feet of any rear lot line. Swimming pools shall not be located closer to the front lot line than any part of the principal building and
shall not be located in any required front yard or corner side yard.
7. Front And Corner Side Yard Adjustment Next To Existing Structures: When a lot abuts, on both sides, lots that have already been developed, the
front yard applicable to such lot shall be determined by taking the average of the setbacks of the buildings on the 2 abutting lots; provided, however,
that no such front yard shall be less than 20 feet. When a lot abuts a lot that has already been developed on 1 side and a vacant lot or street is on
the other side, the front or corner side yard applicable to such lot shall be determined by taking the average of the setback of the building on the
abutting developed lot and the required front or corner side yard in the zoning district; provided, however, that no such front or corner side yard shall
be less than 20 feet, except as provided in subsection E8 of this section.
8. Side And Rear Yard Regulations For Accessory Structures And Uses: Parking areas wherever located, and other detached accessory structures
and uses when located within the rear 25 percent of the depth of the lot, shall not be required to maintain an interior side or rear yard in excess of 5
feet; provided, however, that this exception shall not apply to residential recreational facilities, antennas, or antenna support structures. No accessory
structure or use, or combination of such structures or uses, located within an otherwise required side or rear yard pursuant to this subsection E8 shall
occupy more than 30 percent of such required yard.
9. Density Adjustment For Senior Housing:
a. Authority To Approve Increased Density: The plan commission may recommend and the board of trustees may authorize an increase in the
overall density of development when approving a special use permit for a senior housing development in the R-6 district, by reducing the required
minimum lot area per unit.
b. Maximum Permissible Adjustment; Maximum FAR: No such adjustment shall reduce the lot area per dwelling unit requirement to less than
2,000 square feet. The maximum floor area ratio for senior housing and all related support service areas shall be 0.40 excluding all areas devoted
to enclosed parking areas or lots, and 0.45 including all such areas.
c. Standard For Adjustment: No such adjustment shall be recommended or authorized except on the basis of a finding that the adjustment will not
result in any undue congestion in or adverse impact on the surrounding area. In determining the amount of any such adjustment to be
recommended or authorized, consideration shall be given to:
(1) The development's excellence in satisfying the standards set forth in subsection 9-3-3A of this chapter; and
(2) The extent to which public or private subsidies are provided to allow some or all of the proposed dwelling units to be occupied by individuals
of low or moderate income within the meaning of section 103(b)(4)(A) of the internal revenue code of 1954, as amended.
10. Calculation Of Nursing Or Personal Care Facility Density: Every patient room in a nursing or personal care facility, whether private or
semiprivate, shall be counted as 1 dwelling unit. For patient rooms able to accommodate more than 2 patient beds, each patient bed more than 2
shall be counted as a separate dwelling unit. In addition, any dwelling unit occupied or available for occupancy by staff of the nursing or personal
care facility shall be counted as a dwelling unit. The maximum floor area ratio for a nursing or personal care facility including all related support
service areas shall be 0.45.
11. Special Yard From Ela Road And Cuba Road: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Ela Road
or Cuba Road shall be not less than 40 feet.
12. Special Yard From Route 12 And Route 22: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Route 12
or abutting Route 22 between Ela Road and the westernmost village limits shall be not less than 50 feet.
13. Minimum Lot Width In Grand Avenue Neighborhood: Notwithstanding the lot width requirements contained in subsection B3 of this section, the
minimum lot width for any lot that: a) was located in that portion of the Grand Avenue neighborhood that was rezoned to the R-4 single-family
residential district pursuant to ordinance 2002-01-147, and b) consists of at least 15,000 square feet in lot area, shall be not less than 75 feet.
(Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2006-06-423, 6-19-2006; Ord. 2016-4-122, 4-4-2016)
Chapter 4
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 300/524
9-4-1: PURPOSES:
Three (3) zoning districts are provided for business and commercial uses. When taken together, these districts are intended to permit development of
property for the full range of business and commercial uses needed to serve the citizens of Lake Zurich and the surrounding suburban area.
The B-1 local and community business district is intended to serve the everyday shopping needs of village residents as well as to provide opportunities for
specialty shops attractive to the wider suburban residential community around the village. It permits uses that are necessary to satisfy most basic,
frequently occurring shopping needs. It also permits compatible uses that, although not used as frequently, would be desirably located in close proximity to
potential users. The district is located principally on primary or secondary thoroughfares, is relatively small in size, and has bulk standards that provide for
compatibility with nearby residential uses.
The B-2 central business district is located in the center of the village. It is intended to serve the entire Lake Zurich suburban community with a wide
variety of retail and service uses. The bulk standards in this district are intended to reflect the generally more intense development of property existing in
this area.
The B-3 regional shopping district is intended to provide locations for major retail centers. The regulations are designed to encourage a broad range of
attractive retail and compatible service uses in those centers. (Ord., 10-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01-291 - ACCESSORY TO A SPECIAL USE. Go to new ordinance.
9-4-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and no others are permitted as of right in the business districts indicated in the following table. In interpreting the use designations,
reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the North American industry classification system, and chapter 15 of this title.
SIC codes and NAICS codes, where applicable, are given in parentheses following each use listing.
B-
1
B-
2
B-
3
A.
Agricultural services:
1. Landscape counseling and planning (0781) P
P
P
B.
Printing, publishing, and allied industries:
1. Commercial printing (275) P
P
-
C.
Retail trade:
1. Paint, glass, and wallpaper stores (523) P
P
P
2. Hardware stores (525) P
P
P
3. Department stores (531) - - P
4. Variety stores (533) P
P
P
5. Miscellaneous general merchandise stores (539) P
P
P
6. Grocery stores (541) P
P
P
7. Meat and fish markets (542) P
P
P
8. Fruit and vegetable markets (543) P
P
P
9. Candy, nut, and confectionery stores (544) P
P
P
10.
Dairy products stores (545) P
P
P
11.
Retail bakeries (546) P
P
P
12.
Miscellaneous food stores (549), except poultry dealers P
P
P
13. Men's and boys' clothing and accessory stores (561) P P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 301/524
14.
Women's clothing stores (562) P
P
P
15.
Women's accessory and specialty stores (563) P
P
P
16.
Children's and infants' wear stores (564) P
P
P
17.
Family clothing stores (565) P
P
P
18.
Shoe stores (566) P
P
P
19.
Miscellaneous apparel and accessory stores (569) P
P
P
20.
Home furniture and furnishing stores (571) P
P
P
21.
Household appliance stores (572) P
P
P
22.
Radio, television, consumer electronics, and music stores (573) P
P
P
23.
Eating places (5812), but not including live entertainment or drive-in establishments P
P
P
24.
Drinking places (5813) accessory to permitted eating places P
P
P
25.
Drugstores and proprietary stores (591) P
P
P
26.
Sporting good stores and bicycle shops (5941) P
P
P
27.
Bookstores (5942) P
P
P
28.
Stationery stores (5943) P
P
P
29.
Jewelry stores (5944) P
P
P
30.
Hobby, toy, and game shops (5945) P
P
P
31.
Camera and photographic supply stores (5946) P
P
P
32.
Gift, novelty, and souvenir shops (5947) P
P
P
33.
Luggage and leather goods stores (5948) P
P
P
34.
Sewing, needlework, and piece goods stores (5949) P
P
P
35.
Florists (5992) P
P
P
36.
Tobacco stores and stands (5993) P
P
P
37.
News dealers and newsstands (5994) P
P
P
38.
Optical goods stores (5995) P
P
P
39.
Miscellaneous retail stores (5999), but not including auction rooms, firework sales, gravestone sales, sales barns, or
tombstone sales
P
P
P
40.
Miscellaneous retail trade uses, not otherwise classified, if approved by the village manager; provided, however, that any
such use shall be: a) compatible with and consistent with existing retail uses in the vicinity of the proposed use, b) consumer
oriented, and c) retail sales tax generating if located in the B-3 district. If the village manager approves such a use, then the
manager shall report such approval to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of trustees, which may, by majority
vote of those present, overrule such approval. No such use shall be finally approved until after such meeting of the board of
trustees
P
P
P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 302/524
41.
Computer and software stores (NAICS 443120) P
P
P
D.
Finance, insurance, and real estate:
1. Depository and nondepository credit institutions (60-61), but not including drive-in establishments, currency exchanges, or
automatic teller machines, except automatic teller machines attached to the principal structure on the lot
P
P
P
2. Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, and services (62) P
P
P
3. Insurance carriers, agents, brokers, and service (63-64) P
P
P
4. Real estate offices (65) P
P
P
5. Holding and other investment offices (67) P
P
P
E.
Services:
1. Garment pressing, and agents for laundries and dry cleaners (7212) P
- -
2. Photographic studios, portrait (722) P
P
P
3. Beauty shops (723) P
P
P
4. Barbershops (724) P
P
P
5. Shoe repair shops and shoeshine parlors (725) P
P
P
6. Tax preparation services (7291) P
P
P
7. Advertising services (731) P
P
P
8. Employment agencies (7361) P
P
P
9. Computer programming, data processing, and other computer related services (737) P
P
P
10.
Photofinishing laboratories (7384) - P
P
11.
Packaging and labeling service (not packing and crating), parcel packing service (packaging), and mailing service (7389) - P
P
12.
Electrical repair shops (762), but not including refrigeration and air conditioning service and repair shops (7623) - P
-
13.
Watch, clock, and jewelry repair (763) P
P
P
14.
Picture framing to individual order, not connected with retail art stores, and picture framing, custom (7699) P
P
P
15.
Videotape rental (784) P
P
P
16.
Offices and clinics of doctors of medicine, dentists, osteopaths, chiropractors, optometrists, podiatrists, and other health
practitioners (801-804)
P
P
P
17.
Legal services (81) P
P
P
18.
Engineering, architectural, and surveying services (871) P
P
P
19.
Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services (872) P
P
P
20.
Management and public relations services (874) P
P
P
21.
Miscellaneous services (89) - P
P
22. The following general office services: clerical services such as telephone, fax, copier, computer, scheduling, billing, - P -
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 303/524
administration, and other clerical work in support of a retail use or other permitted service use that is performed off site. Such
general office services shall not include any use that is listed as a permitted or special use in the B-2 district and shall not
include any delivery, distribution, or storage of materials
23.
The following miscellaneous personal services, not elsewhere classified (7299): baby sitting bureaus, birth certificate
agencies, buyers' clubs, car title and tag service, checkroom concessions or services, clothing rental (except industrial
launderers and linen supply), college clearinghouses, computer photography or portraits, consumer buying service, costume
rental, debt counseling or adjustment service to individuals, depilatory salons, diet workshops, dress suit rental, electrolysis,
genealogical investigation service, hair weaving or replacement service, marriage bureaus, massage therapy, porter service,
quilting for individuals, scalp treatment service, shopping service for individuals, tanning salons, tuxedo rental, valet parking
wardrobe service (except theatrical)
P
P
P
Massage therapy shall be subjected to the following conditions:
a. Such use shall be ancillary to a full service hairdressing and beauty salon (729), ancillary to a full service nail salon in the
B-3 district only, or such use shall be ancillary to an office or clinic of doctors of medicine, osteopaths, chiropractors,
podiatrists, and other health practitioners (801-804)
b. Such use shall be offered during normal business hours, and only when all other services of business are offered, and
never before 8:00 A.M. or after 9:00 P.M. on any day
c. Massage therapy services shall be restricted to 2 rooms, not to exceed a total of 200 square feet. "Tune up" services shall
be restricted to the reception area
d. Massage therapy services shall be performed only by trained and professionally certified massage therapists
24.
Physical fitness facilities (7991) including aerobic dance and exercise classes, health clubs, exercise salons, fitness salons,
gymnasiums, physical fitness centers, reducing facilities-physical fitness (without lodging), slenderizing salons, spaceshealth
fitness (except resort lodges)
P
P
P
25.
Computer programming (NAICS 541511) P
P
P
26.
Computer software analysis and design (NAICS 541512) P
P
P
27.
Personnel supply services (7360) P
P
P
28.
Photocopying and duplicating service (7334) P
P
P
29.
Party stores (454390) P
P
P
30.
Travel agencies (4724) P
P
P
F.
Transportation and utility services:
1. Office of local and suburban transit and interurban highway passenger transportation companies (41), but not including
terminals, stations, vehicles yards, or garages and not on the first floor of any structure in the B-3 District
- P
P
(Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
9-4-3: SPECIAL USES:
Except as specifically limited, the uses listed in the following table may be permitted in the business districts indicated subject to the issuance of a special
use permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title. In interpreting the use designations, reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual", the North American industry classification system, and chapter 15 of this title. SIC codes and NAICS codes, where applicable, are given in
parentheses following each use listing.
B-
1
B-
2
B-
3
A.
Agricultural services:
1. Veterinary services for animal specialties (0742) S
- S
2. Grooming services for pets (0752) S
S
S
3. Lawn and garden services (0782) - S
S
4. Ornamental shrub and tree services (0783) - S
S
B.
Construction, special trade contractors:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 304/524
1. Plumbing, heating, and air conditioning contractors (171), but not including outdoor storage of equipment or materials S
S
-
2. Painting and paper hanging contractors (172), but not including outdoor storage of equipment or materials S
S
-
3. Electrical work contractors (173), but not including outdoor storage of equipment or materials and not highway lighting and
electrical signal construction
S
S
-
4. Masonry, stone setting, and other stone work contractors (1741), but not including outdoor storage of equipment or
materials
S
S
-
5. Plastering, drywall, acoustical, and insulation work contractors (1742), but not including outdoor storage of equipment or
materials
S
S
-
6. Terrazzo, tile, marble, and mosaic work contractors (1743), but not including outdoor storage of equipment or materials S
S
-
7. Carpentry and floor work contractors (175), but not including outdoor storage of equipment or materials S
S
-
8. Roofing, siding, and sheet metal work contractors (176), but not including outdoor storage of equipment or materials S
S
-
9. Glass and glazing work contractors (1793), but not including outdoor storage of equipment or materials S
S
-
10.
Special trade contractors not elsewhere classified (1799), but not including outdoor storage of equipment or materials S
S
-
C.
Retail trade:
1. Lumber and other building materials dealers (521) S
- S
2. Retail nurseries, lawn, and garden supply stores (526) - - S
3. New and used motor vehicle dealers (551) - - S
4. Auto and home supply stores (553) S
- S
5. Gasoline service stations (554) S
S
S
6. Boat dealers (44122) S
- S
7. Drive-in eating places (5812) - S
S
8. Live entertainment accessory to permitted eating places or accessory to a special use granted at subsection J1 of this
section
S
S
S
9. Outdoor seating accessory to permitted eating places or accessory to a special use granted at subsection J1 of this section
S
S
S
10.
Liquor stores (592) - S
S
11.
Used merchandise stores (593), including used clothing stores S
S
S
12.
Antique stores (5932) S
S
S
13.
Pet shops (5999) - S
S
14.
Drive-through facilities accessory to permitted eating places, grocery stores, and drugstores and proprietary stores S
- S
D.
Finance, insurance, and real estate:
1. Drive-in depository and nondepository credit institutions (60-61) S
S
S
2. Automatic teller machines when not attached to the principal structure on the lot S
S
S
E.
Services:
1. Laundry, cleaning, and garment services (721) - S
S
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 305/524
2. Funeral homes or parlors (726) S
- -
3. Massage therapy services (7299), but only subject to the following conditions: - S
S
a. Such use shall be permitted only during normal business hours and never before 8:00 A.M. or after 10:00 P.M. on any
day
b. Such services shall be performed only by trained therapists professionally certified by the Illinois Department of Financial
and Professional Regulation
4. Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography, and stenographic services (733) S
S
S
5. Services to dwellings and other buildings (734) S
S
S
6. Medical and miscellaneous equipment rental and leasing (7352/7359) S
S
S
7. Help supply services (7363) S
S
S
8. Passenger car rental and leasing (7514-7515) - - S
9. Sign printing and lettering shops (7389) - - S
10.
Automobile parking (752), but not tow-in parking lots - S
S
11.
Automotive repair shops (753), but not including top, body, and upholstery repair and painting (7532) or tire retreading
(7534)
S
S
S
12.
Car washes (7542) - - S
13.
Automobile lubricating service (7549) - - S
14.
Electrical repair shops (762), but not including refrigeration and air conditioning service and repair shops (7623) S
- -
15.
Reupholstery and furniture repair (764) - S
S
16.
Motion picture theaters, except drive-in establishments (7832) - - S
17.
Dance studios, schools, and halls (7911) S
S
S
18.
Bowling centers (793) - - S
19.
Coin operated amusement devices (7993) S
- S
20.
Membership sports and recreation clubs (7997) - S
S
21.
Miniature golf (799) S
- S
22.
Martial arts studios (7999) - - S
23.
Children's indoor recreational facilities (7999) - - S
24.
Medical and dental laboratories (807) - S
S
25.
Correspondence and vocational schools (824) - S
S
26.
Child daycare services (835) S
S
S
27.
Business associations (861) - S
S
28.
Professional membership organizations (862) S
S
S
29.
Labor organizations (863) S
S
S
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 306/524
30.
Civic, social, and fraternal associations (864) S
S
S
31.
Political organizations (865) S
S
S
32.
Membership organizations not elsewhere classified (869) S
S
S
33.
Miscellaneous services (89) S
- -
34.
Towing services including impoundment, but only as part of relocation of a towing service company in business in Lake
Zurich as of June 1, 2004 (7549)
S
- -
35.
Truck leasing, but only as part of relocation of a truck leasing company in business in Lake Zurich as of June 1, 2004 (7513)
S
- -
36.
Boarding, daycare, massage therapy and grooming services for pets (0752) - - S
37.
Motor vehicle licensing and inspection office - government (9621) - - S
F.
Transportation and utility services:
1. Local and suburban passenger transportation terminals and stations (41), but not including vehicle yards or garages - S
S
2. Marinas (4493), as specifically defined in section 9-24-2 of this title, and pursuant to the standards and provisions within
section 9-7C-3 of this title
S
S
-
G.
Miscellaneous:
1. Hotels (7011) S
S
S
2. Dwelling units, subject to the lot area per unit requirement applicable to the R-6 District; provided, however, that no dwelling
unit shall be located on the first floor of any structure
S
S
S
H.
Schools and educational services, not elsewhere classified:
1. Automobile drive instruction only (8299) - S
-
I.
Planned unit developments S
S
S
J.
Manufacturing:
1. Beverages (208), but not including malts (2083), bottled and canned soft drinks and carbonated waters (2086), and
flavoring extracts and flavoring syrups, not elsewhere classified (2087)
S
S
S
(Ord. 2018-09-269, 9-4-2018)
9-4-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all business districts subject to the provisions of section 9-9-1 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-4-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses are permitted in all business districts subject to the provisions of section 9-9-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-4-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
The parking and loading requirements applicable in all business districts are set forth in sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-4-7: SIGN REGULATIONS:
The sign regulations applicable in all business districts are set forth in the Lake Zurich Municipal Code. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-4-8: LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 307/524
Landscaping and lighting standards for uses and structures in the business districts are set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2016-
6-137, 6-6-2016)
9-4-9: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE REGULATIONS:
A. Exterior Appearance Review: No construction or development requiring a building permit and affecting the exterior appearance of any structure shall be
permitted in any business district except after approval of the building permit application pursuant to chapter 21 of this title.
B. Manufacturing Limited: No manufacturing, processing, or treatment of products shall be conducted on any premises in any business district, except
those that are incidental to a principal retail business use. At least seventy five percent (75%) of all products produced on the premises shall be sold at
retail on the premises.
C. Storage Limited: No storage or warehousing of any product shall be permitted in any business district except such as is incidental to a principal retail
use.
D. Compliance With Industrial Performance Standards: All uses in every business district shall comply with the standards established in subsections 9-6-
9B through H of this title.
E. Compliance With DR Downtown Redevelopment Overlay District: All construction and development on property within the DR downtown redevelopment
overlay district (see section 9-7D-1 of this title) shall comply with all standards and requirements set forth in that overlay district. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-4-10: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The building height, lot, yard, floor area ratio, and landscaped surface requirements applicable in the business districts are set forth in the following table:
B-1 B-2 B-3
A. Maximum Height:
1. Principal structures (whichever is less):
a. Feet 35 35 35
b. Stories 2 3 3
2. Accessory structures (feet) 25 25 25
B. Minimum Lot Area And Dimensions: 1,2
1. Minimum lot area (square feet) 20,000 n/a 43,560
2. Minimum lot width (feet) 100 n/a 150
C. Minimum Yards: 1,3,4,5,6,7,8
1. Front and corner side (feet) 25 n/a 50
2. Side (feet) 10 n/a 15
3. Rear (feet) 25 n/a 30
D. Maximum Floor Area Ratio:
1. Retail uses:
a. 1 story 0.18 1.0 0.22
b. More than 1 story 0.18 1.0 0.27
2. Office uses:
a. 1 story 0.25 1.0 0.27
b. More than 1 story 0.25 1.0 0.34
3. Combined retail and office uses:
a. 1 story 0.22 1.0 0.24
b. More than 1 story 0.27 1.8 0.35
4. All other uses:
a. 1 story 0.25 1.0 0.30
b. More than 1 story 0.27 1.5 0.38
E. Minimum Landscaped Surface Area (Percent):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 308/524
1. Retail uses 40 n/a 30
2. Office uses 45 n/a 35
3. Combined retail and office uses 40 n/a 40
4. All other uses 40 n/a 35
F. Exceptions And Explanatory Notes:
1. Nonconforming Lots: See section 9-11-5 of this title for lot requirements with respect to legal nonconforming lots of record.
2. Minimum Lot Area: Water areas and land areas with natural resource restrictions including floodplains, wetlands, and low land conservancy soils
are not included as part of the calculation of the required minimum lot area.
3. Visibility Across Corners: Any other provision of this zoning code to the contrary notwithstanding, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted,
allowed to grow, or maintained on any corner lot in any business district other than the B-2 district in violation of the provisions of subsection 4-2-1-
3C of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
4. Special Setbacks For Signs: Special setbacks established for some signs in the Lake Zurich municipal code shall control over the yards
established in the table.
5. Specified Structures And Uses In Required Yards: The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required
yard:
a. Statuary, arbors, trellises, and ornamental light standards having a height of 8 feet or less; and
b. Awnings, canopies, eaves, and gutters projecting not more than 3 feet into the required yard; and
c. Fire escapes when required pursuant to applicable codes and ordinances; and
d. Bay windows and balconies projecting not more than 3 feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the length of such wall; and
e. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, and the like projecting not more than 2 feet from an
exterior wall; and
f. Outside stairways projecting from an exterior wall not more than 3 feet and having a height of 4 feet or less; and
g. Flagpoles; and
h. Terraces; and
i. Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the limitations of the Lake Zurich municipal code; and
j. Driveways, subject to the limitations of subsection 9-10-1C of this title.
6. Rear Yard Regulation For Accessory Structures And Uses In The B-1 District: Accessory parking areas and lots shall not be required to maintain
a rear yard or setback in the B-1 district in excess of 10 feet if no part of such rear yard is contiguous to any property zoned in any residential district;
provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to antennas and antenna support structures.
7. Special Yards Abutting Ela Road And Cuba Road: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Ela
Road or Cuba Road shall be not less than 40 feet.
8. Special Yards Abutting Route 12 And Route 22: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Route
12 or abutting Route 22 between Ela Road and the westernmost village limits shall be not less than 50 feet.
(Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 5
OFFICE DISTRICTS
9-5-1: PURPOSES:
Three (3) zoning districts are provided for office development. The office districts accommodate a range of suburban office space alternatives in keeping
with the residential and local business atmosphere in the village.
The O-1 office/residential district is intended to provide for small offices in the older areas of the village adjacent to the central business areas where it is
possible to retain the residential character and appearance of the village and at the same time promote limited office and service activity. The uses
permitted are characterized by low traffic volume and limited outdoor advertising. The regulations of the O-1 district are designed to encourage the
retention and renovation of sound existing structures and to ensure that the office uses remain compatible with the residential uses while permitting the
area to maintain a distinctive residential character. Replacement structures in the O-1 district also must have a residential character and appearance. The
O-1 district normally is small in size and located to provide a transition between residential areas and less restricted districts.
The O-2 limited office district is designed to provide for the general needs of business and professional offices and related business uses on small sites in
scattered areas throughout the village. Bulk and height regulations encourage development that is architecturally consistent with smaller sites and
compatible with nearby residential uses.
The O-3 office campus district is provided to accommodate the needs of business and professional offices and related business uses in a campus setting.
These uses typically require a somewhat wider range of office space with a somewhat higher intensity of pedestrian and vehicular traffic movements. That
increased intensity often can be accommodated better in a campus setting. Bulk and height regulations are consistent with a moderate amount of
development. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and no others are permitted as of right in the office districts indicated in the following table. In interpreting the use designations,
reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the North American industry classification system, and chapter 15 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 309/524
SIC codes and NAICS codes, where applicable, are given in parentheses following each use listing.
O-
1
O-
2
O-
3
A.
Transportation services and retail trade, as follows, but only when located in a building in which at least 80 percent of the net floor
area is devoted to uses other than transportation services or retail trade, and only when so designed, located, and advertised so
as not to be visible or accessible except from the interior of such building:
1. Travel agencies (4724) - - P
2. Candy, nut and confectionery stores (544) - - P
3. Computer sales (5734) - - P
4. Eating places (5812), but not including live entertainment and drive-in establishments - - P
5. Drinking places (5813) accessory to permitted eating places - - P
6. Drugstores and proprietary stores (5912), but not more than 1,000 square feet - - P
7. Stationery stores (5943) - P
P
8. Gift, novelty, and souvenir shops (5947) - P
P
9. Florists (5992) - P
P
10.
Tobacco stores and stands (5993) - P
P
11.
News dealers and newsstands (5994) - P
P
12.
Optical goods stores (5995) - - P
13.
Beauty shops (723) - P
P
14.
Barbershops (724) - P
P
B.
Finance, insurance, and real estate:
1. Depository and nondepository credit institutions (60-61), but not including drive-in establishments or automatic teller
machines, except automatic teller machines attached to the principal structure on the lot
P
P
P
2. Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, and services (62) P
P
P
3. Insurance carriers, agents, brokers, and service (63-64) P
P
P
4. Real estate offices (65) P
P
P
5. Holding and other investment offices (67) P
P
P
C.
Printing, publishing, and allied industries:
1. Commercial printing (275) P
- P
D.
Retail trade:
1. Drugstores and proprietary stores (5912), but not more than 1,000 square feet P
P
-
2. Optical goods stores (5995) P
P
-
E.
Services:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 310/524
1. Landscape counseling and planning (0781) P
P
P
2. Advertising services (731) P
P
P
3. Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography, and stenographic services (733) P
P
P
4. Commercial art and graphic design (7336) P
P
P
5. Employment agencies (7361) P
P
P
6. Help supply stores (7363) P
P
P
7. Computer programming, data processing, and other computer related services (737) P
P
P
8. Computer programming services (7371), but not including training services or programs P
P
P
9. Offices of detective, guard, and armored car services (7381) P
P
P
10.
Offices of news syndicates (7383) P
P
P
11.
Interior design and decorating services (7389), but not including painters and paper hangers or showrooms or retail sales on
the premises
P
P
P
12.
Physical fitness facilities (7991), but not gymnasiums, reducing facilities, slenderizing salons, or spas - P
P
13.
Offices and clinics of doctors of medicine, dentists, osteopaths, chiropractors, optometrists, podiatrists, and other health
practitioners (801-804), but not emergency treatment as regular, advertised practice in the O-1 district
P
P
P
14.
Medical and dental laboratories (807) - P
P
15.
Home healthcare services (808) - P
P
16.
Miscellaneous health and allied services not elsewhere classified (809) - P
P
17.
Health and allied services not elsewhere classified (8099) - P
P
18.
Legal services (81) P
P
P
19.
Correspondence and vocational schools (824) P
P
P
20.
Individual and family social services (832) P
P
P
21.
Job training and vocational rehabilitation services (833) P
P
P
22.
Child daycare services (835) P
- -
23.
Social services not elsewhere classified (839) P
P
P
24.
Business associations (861) P
P
P
25.
Professional membership organizations (862) P
P
P
26.
Labor organizations (863) P
P
P
27.
Civic, social, and fraternal associations (864), but not including rental of meeting halls or banquet facilities P
P
P
28.
Political organizations (865) P
P
P
29.
Membership organizations not elsewhere classified (869) P
P
P
30. Engineering, architectural, and surveying services (871) P P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 311/524
31.
Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services (872) P
P
P
32.
Management and public relations services (874) P
P
P
33.
Miscellaneous services (899) P
P
P
34.
Miscellaneous business and professional office uses not listed above P
P
P
35.
The following miscellaneous personal services, not elsewhere classified (7299), baby sitting bureaus, birth certificate
agencies, buyers' clubs, car title and tag service, checkroom concessions or services, clothing rental (except industrial
launderers and linen supply), college clearinghouses, computer photography or portraits, consumer buying service, costume
rental, debt counseling or adjustment service to individuals, depilatory salons, diet workshops, dress suit rental, electrolysis,
genealogical investigation service, hair weaving or replacement service, marriage bureaus, massage therapy, porter service,
quilting for individuals, scalp treatment service, shopping service for individuals, tanning salons, tuxedo rental, valet parking,
wardrobe service (except theatrical)
P
P
P
Massage therapy shall be subjected to the following conditions:
a.
Such use shall be ancillary to a full service hairdressing and beauty salon (729), or such use shall be ancillary to an
office or clinic of doctors of medicine, osteopaths, chiropractors, podiatrists, and other health practitioners (801-804)
b.
Such use shall be offered during normal business hours, and only when all other services of business are offered, and
never before 8:00 A.M. or after 9:00 P.M. on any day
c.
Massage therapy services shall be restricted to 2 rooms, not to exceed a total of 200 square feet. "Tune up" services
shall be restricted to the reception area
d.
Massage therapy services shall be performed only by trained professionally certified massage therapists
F.
Transportation and utility services:
1. Travel agencies (4724) P
P
-
2. Offices of communications and utility companies (48-49), but not including antennas in excess of the district height limit P
P
P
(Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2009-07-640, 7-6-2009)
9-5-3: SPECIAL USES:
Except as specifically limited, the uses listed in the following table may be permitted in the office districts indicated subject to the issuance of a special use
permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title. In interpreting the use designations, reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual", the North American industry classification system, and chapter 15 of this title. SIC codes and NAICS codes, where applicable, are given in
parentheses following each use listing.
O-
1
O-
2
O-
3
A.
Finance, insurance, and real estate:
1.
Drive-in depository and nondepository credit institutions (60/61) - S S
2.
Automatic teller machines when not attached to the principal structure on the lot - S S
B.
Printing, publishing, and allied industries:
1.
Commercial printing (275) - S -
C.
Services:
1.
Funeral homes or parlors (726), but not including crematories S - S
2.
Massage therapy services (7299), but only subject to the following condition: - S -
a.
Such services shall be performed only by trained therapists professionally certified by the Illinois department of financial
and professional regulation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 312/524
3.
Passenger car rental and leasing (7514/7515) - - S
4.
Physical fitness facilities (7991) S S S
5.
Membership sports and recreation clubs (7997) - - S
6.
Child daycare services (835) - S S
7.
Rental of meeting halls and banquet facilities by fraternal associations and lodges (864) - S -
8.
Research, development, and testing services - S S
D.
Miscellaneous:
1.
Hotels (7011) - - S
2.
Administrative offices of religious organizations, but not including any nonadministrative functions such as worship services,
prayer groups, and similar religious activities and events
- S -
3.
Single-family detached, townhouse, and two-family dwelling units; provided, however, that there shall be no more than 2
dwelling units located on each zoning lot
S S -
E.
Planned unit developments S S S
(Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2009-07-640, 7-6-2009; Ord. 2013-09-907, 9-3-2013)
9-5-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all office districts subject to the provisions of section 9-9-1 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-5-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses are permitted in all office districts subject to the provisions of section 9-9-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-5-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
The parking and loading requirements applicable in all office districts are set forth in sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-5-7: SIGN REGULATIONS:
The sign regulations applicable in all office districts are set forth in the Lake Zurich municipal code. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-5-8: LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING:
Landscaping and lighting standards for uses and structures in the office districts are set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2016-6-
137, 6-6-2016)
9-5-9: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE REGULATIONS:
A. Exterior Appearance Review: No construction or development requiring a building permit and affecting the exterior appearance of any structure shall be
permitted in any office district except after approval of the building permit application pursuant to chapter 21 of this title.
B. O-1 Specialty Office District:
1. Conversion Of Existing Structures: No permitted or specially permitted use shall be established in the O-1 district by the conversion or rebuilding of
any structure originally designed for a residential use, unless the existing residential character of the structure is retained. The quality of exterior
design shall be equal on all facades of the structure, and the materials used shall be of the same or comparable quality on all facades of the
structure.
2. New Structures: Any new structure constructed in the O-1 district shall be designed to be compatible in appearance with adjacent single-family
residential structures. Flat roofs shall be prohibited. The quality of exterior design shall be equal on all facades of the structure, and the materials
used shall be of the same or comparable quality on all facades of the structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 313/524
3. Visual Compatibility: All conversions of existing structures or new construction shall be designed to be visually compatible in terms of the materials
used, shapes, textures, colors, projections, proportions, and scale with the buildings, public ways, and places to which they are visually related.
C. Compliance With DR Downtown Redevelopment Overlay District: All construction and development on property within the DR downtown redevelopment
overlay district (see section 9-7D-1 of this title) shall comply with all standards and requirements set forth in that overlay district. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-5-10: BULK, SPACE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The building height, lot, yard, floor area ratio, and landscaped surface requirements applicable in the office districts are set forth in the following table:
O-1 O-2 O-3
A. Maximum Height:
1. Principal structures (whichever is less):
a. Feet 35 35 35
b. Stories 2.5 3 3
2. Accessory structures (feet): 1 25 25 25
B. Minimum Lot Area And Dimensions: 2,3
1. Minimum lot area (square feet) n/a 10,000 43,560
2. Minimum lot width (feet) n/a 75 150
C. Minimum Yards: 2,4,5,6,7,8,9
1. Front and corner side (feet) 25 25 35
2. Side (feet) 10 10 15
3. Rear (feet) 25 25 30
D. Maximum Floor Area Ratio:
1. 1 story 0.25 0.25 0.30
2. More than 1 story 0.30 0.30 0.35
E. Minimum Landscaped Surface Area (Percent):
1. 1 story 35 40 45
2. More than 1 story 35 45 45
F. Exceptions And Explanatory Notes:
1. Height Exception For Flagpoles: Flagpoles may extend to a height of 10 feet above the highest point of the roof of the principal structure.
2. Nonconforming Lots: See section 9-11-5 of this title for lot requirements with respect to legal nonconforming lots of record.
3. Minimum Lot Area: Water areas and land areas with natural resource restrictions including floodplains, wetlands, and low land conservancy soils
are not included as part of the calculation of the required minimum lot area.
4. Visibility Across Corners: Any other provision of this zoning code to the contrary notwithstanding, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted,
allowed to grow, or maintained on any corner lot in any office district in violation of the provisions of subsection 4-2-1-3C of the Lake Zurich municipal
code.
5. Special Setbacks For Signs: Special setbacks established for some signs in the Lake Zurich municipal code shall control over the yards
established in the table.
6. Specified Structures And Uses In Required Yards: The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required
yard:
a. Statuary, arbors, trellises, and ornamental light standards having a height of 8 feet or less; and
b. Eaves and gutters projecting not more than 3 feet from an exterior wall; and
c. Awnings, canopies, bay windows, and balconies projecting not more than 3 feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the
length of such wall; provided, however, that in side yards in the O-1 district such projections shall not exceed 2 feet for a distance not more than 1/4
of the length of such wall; and
d. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, and the like projecting not more than 2 feet from an
exterior wall; and
e. Outside stairways projecting from an exterior wall not more than 3 feet and having a height of 4 feet or less; and
f. Flagpoles; and
g. Terraces; and
h. Recreational devices accessory to daycare services; and
i. Fitness trails; and
j. Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the limitations of the Lake Zurich municipal code; and
k. Driveways, subject to the limitations of subsection 9-10-1C of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 314/524
7. Side And Rear Yard Regulations For Accessory Structures And Uses In The O-1 District: Accessory parking areas and lots wherever located and
other detached accessory structures and uses when located within the rear 25 percent of the lot shall not be required to maintain an interior side or
rear yard or setback in the O-1 district in excess of 8 feet if such interior side or rear yard is contiguous to any property zoned in any residential
district or in excess of 5 feet if no part of such interior side or rear yard is contiguous to any property zoned in any residential district; provided,
however, that this regulation shall not apply to antennas and antenna support structures and provided further, however, that no accessory structure
or use, or combination of such structures or uses, located within an otherwise required side or rear yard pursuant to this subsection F7 shall occupy
more than 30 percent of such required yard.
8. Special Yards Abutting Ela Road And Cuba Road: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Ela
Road or Cuba Road shall be not less than 40 feet.
9. Special Yards Abutting Route 12 And Route 22: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Route 12
or abutting Route 22 between Ela Road and the westernmost village limits shall be not less than 50 feet.
(Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 6
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
9-6-1: PURPOSES:
The I industrial district is intended to provide for a range of nuisance free manufacturing, warehousing, transportation, wholesaling, and industrial uses that
are compatible with the suburban residential character of the village. The industrial district is also meant to accommodate certain professional offices and
similar uses that may provide services to the industrial users and are compatible with the industrial character of the district. It is the goal of these
regulations to provide and preserve an area within the village for industrial uses that create employment and economic benefits for the village and the
industrial district. (Ord. 2016-12-169, 12-19-2016)
9-6-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and no others are permitted as of right in the industrial district as indicated in the following table. In interpreting the use designations,
reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the North American industry classification system, and chapter 15 of this title.
SIC codes and NAICS codes, where applicable, are given in parentheses following each use listing.
I
A.
Agricultural services:
1. Cash grains (011) P
2. Soil preparation services (071) P
3. Crop services (072) P
4. Farm labor and management services (076) P
5. Landscape and horticultural services (078) P
B.
Building construction:
1. General contractors and operative builders (15), not including outdoor storage P
2. Heavy construction contractors (16), not including outdoor storage P
3. Special trade contractors (17), not including outdoor storage P
C.
Manufacturing:
1. Textile mill products (22), not including dyeing or finishing in any use category P
2. Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics and similar materials (23) P
3. Millwork, veneer, plywood, and structure wood members (243), not including hardwood veneer and plywood (2435) or softwood
veneer and plywood (2436)
P
4. Furniture and fixtures (25) P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 315/524
5. Paper and allied products (26), not including pulp mills (261), paper mills (262), or paperboard mills (263) P
6. Printing, publishing, and allied industries (27), not including platemaking and related services (2796) P
7. Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products (30), not including tires and inner tubes (301) P
8. Leather and leather products (31), not including leather tanning and finishing (311) P
9. Aluminum extruded products (3354) P
10.
Drawing and insulating of nonferrous wire (3357) P
11.
Aluminum die castings (3363) P
12.
Fabricated metal products (34), not including fabricated plate work (3443), iron and steel forgings (3462), nonferrous forgings (3463),
automotive stampings (3465), or ordnance and accessories (348)
P
13.
Industrial and commercial machinery and computer equipment (35) P
14.
Electronic and other electrical equipment and components, except computer equipment (36) P
15.
Motor vehicle parts and accessories (3714), not including outdoor storage P
16.
Motorcycles, bicycles, and parts (3751), not including outdoor storage P
17.
Measuring, analyzing and controlling instruments; photographic, medical, and optical goods; watches and clocks (38) P
18.
Miscellaneous manufacturing industries P
D.
Transportation and public utilities:
1. Local transit stations (411) P
2. Trucking and courier services, except air (421) P
3. Public warehousing and storage (422), not including miniwarehouse warehousing or self-storage warehousing (4225) or special
warehousing and storage, not elsewhere classified (4226)
P
4. United States postal service (431) P
5. Arrangement of passenger transportation (472) P
6. Communications (48), not including studios and antennas P
7. Combination utilities not elsewhere classified (4939) P
E.
Wholesale trade:
1. Wholesale trade - durable goods (50), not including automobile auction (5012), motor vehicle parts, used (5015), meals and minerals
(505), scrap and waste materials (5093), or ammunition, cord wood, firearms, firewood, logs, hewn ties, posts, and poles, machine
guns, pulpwood, roundwood, timber products, rough, or wood chips (5099)
P
2. Wholesale trade - nondurable goods (51), not including farm product raw materials (515), or petroleum and petroleum products (517) P
F.
Retail trade:
1. Nonstore retailers if accessory to a principal use (596), not including mobile food carts, mobile food trucks, trucks, ice cream trucks, or
any direct selling establishment (5963) where retail sales occur on the premises
P
G.
Finance, insurance, and real estate:
1. Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, and services (62) P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 316/524
2. Insurance carriers (63) P
3. Insurance brokers, and service (64), not including insurance agents and life insurance agents P
4. Real estate (65) not including primarily residential real estate agents and managers P
5. Holding and other investment offices (67) P
H.
Services: P
1. Power laundries, family and commercial, but not chemical or flammable solvents (7211) P
2. Linen supply (7213) P
3. Industrial launderers (7218) P
4. Laundry and garment services not elsewhere classified (7219) P
5. Business services (73), not including heavy construction equipment rental and leasing (7353) P
6. Motion pictures (78), not including motion picture theaters (783) and videotape rental (784) P
7. Medical and dental laboratories (807) P
8. Business associations (861) P
9. Engineering, accounting, research, management, and related services (87), not including jails, privately operated and correctional
facilities, adult: privately operated (8744)
P
10.
Miscellaneous industrial and business uses, not otherwise classified, if approved by the village manager; provided, however, that any
such use: a) shall be compatible with and consistent with existing uses in the vicinity of the proposed use and shall be compatible with
the general character of the industrial uses throughout the I district, b) shall not entail any use, process, or item that poses any threat
of environmental injury to land, air, or water, c) shall not interfere with industrial traffic patterns, and d) shall not be substantially
devoted to retail sales that are dependent on customer traffic to the premises. If the village manager approves such a use, then the
manager shall report such approval to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of trustees, which may by majority vote of
those present overrule such approval
P
(Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-6-3: SPECIAL USES:
Except as specifically limited, the uses listed in the following table may be permitted in the industrial district subject to the issuance of a special use permit
as provided in chapter 19 of this title. In interpreting the use designations, reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the
North American industry classification system, and chapter 15 of this title. SIC codes and NAICS codes, where applicable, are given in parentheses
following each use listing.
I
A.
Agricultural services:
1. Veterinary services for animal specialties (0742) S
2. Animal specialty services, except veterinary services, limited to the following uses (0752): S
Boarding kennels
Animal grooming
Shelter/pound for homeless/abandoned animals
Showing of pets and other animals
Training of pets and other animals
3. Medical cannabis cultivation centers S
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 317/524
B.
Construction:
1. General building contractors (15) with outdoor storage S
2. Heavy construction contractors (16) with outdoor storage S
3. Special trade contractors (17) with outdoor storage S
C.
Manufacturing:
1. Dairy products (202) S
2. Canned, frozen, and preserved fruits, vegetables, and food specialties (203) S
3. Grain mill products (204), but not including dog and cat food (2047) or prepared foods and feed ingredients for animals, etc. (2048) S
4. Bakery products (205) S
5. Sugar and confectionery products (206), but not including cane sugar refining (2062) S
6. Beverages (208) S
7. Miscellaneous food preparations and kindred products (209) S
8. Wood containers (244) S
9. Wood products, not elsewhere classified (2499) S
10.
Chemicals and allied products (28), but not including agricultural chemicals (287) or explosives (2892) S
11.
Stone, clay, glass, and concrete products (32), but not including cement, hydraulic (324), concrete, gypsum, and plaster products
(327), or asbestos products (3292)
S
12.
Coating, engraving, and allied services (347) S
D.
Transportation and public utilities:
1. Local and interurban transit companies, yards, and maintenance facilities S
2. Facilities and studios of communication services with permitted antennas S
3. Miniwarehouse warehousing and self-storage warehousing (4225) S
4. Miniwarehouse warehousing and self-storage warehousing with
outdoor storage (4225), subject to the following standards:
S
a.
The use of an outdoor storage yard shall only accompany the land use of miniwarehouse warehousing and self-storage
warehousing, and be restricted to the storage of automobiles, recreational vehicles, boats and other similar vehicles as approved
by the Development Administrator. Such vehicles must be maintained in good repair and a sightly condition and no vehicles shall
be allowed to remain indefinitely or in an abandoned state within the storage area
b.
No storage of merchandise or equipment shall be permitted within such outdoor storage area
c.
The establishment of an outdoor storage yard accompanying miniwarehouse warehousing and self-storage warehousing shall be
prohibited on properties with frontage along Route 12 and Route 22
d.
The outdoor storage area shall be located only within the side and rear interior yards of a property approved for such use
e.
The area proposed for outdoor storage shall be clearly defined by an area that is paved in compliance with the standards provided
for in title 10 of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code
f.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 9-6-10A of this chapter, the maximum height of permitted items stored, warehoused
or placed within the designated outdoor storage area shall not exceed the height of the principal building on the zoning lot
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 318/524
g.
The designated outdoor storage area shall be screened on all sides with a fence in conformance with the provisions of subsection
8-11-1F4 of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code and with landscape material in conformance with the provisions of chapter 8, article A
of this title. Such landscaping must be maintained and replaced as needed to conform to the requirements of the landscaping
screening for the site
5. Special warehousing and storage, not elsewhere classified (4226) S
E.
Finance, insurance and real estate:
1. Limited financial services facilities (see subsection 9-6-9J of this chapter) S
2. Tax preparation services (7291) S
F.
Services, as follows, but only if the maintenance of any such service does not require or actually include routine attendance of clients,
customers, patients, patrons, or other clientele:
1. Dry cleaning plants, except rug cleaning (7216) S
2. Carpet and upholstery cleaning (7217) S
3. Laundry and garment services, not elsewhere classified (7219) S
4. Heavy construction equipment rental and leasing (7353) -
5. Automotive repair, services, and parking (75) S
6. Miscellaneous repair services (76) S
7. Physical fitness facilities (7991) S
8. Membership sports and recreation clubs (7997) S
9. Gymnastics instructions (7999) S
10.
Legal services (811) S
11.
Vocational schools (824) S
12.
Schools and education services, not elsewhere classified (829) S
13.
Adult daycare centers (8322) as an accessory use S
14.
Childcare centers (8351) as an accessory use S
15.
Adult entertainment establishments S
16.
Medical cannabis dispensaries S
G.
Miscellaneous:
1. Land banking of required parking S
H.
Planned unit developments S
(Ord. 2016-12-169, 12-19-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
9-6-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all industrial districts subject to the provisions of section 9-9-1 of this title. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 319/524
9-6-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses are permitted in all industrial districts subject to the provisions of section 9-9-2 of this title. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-6-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
The parking and loading requirements applicable in all industrial districts are set forth in sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of this title. All service uses shall meet
the parking and loading requirements set forth in sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of this title. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-6-7: SIGN REGULATIONS:
The sign regulations applicable in all industrial districts are set forth in the Lake Zurich municipal code. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-6-8: LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING:
Landscaping and lighting standards for uses and structures in the industrial districts are set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014;
amd. Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-2016)
9-6-9: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE REGULATIONS:
A. Exterior Appearance Review: No construction or development requiring a building permit and affecting the exterior appearance of any structure shall be
permitted in any industrial district except after approval of the building permit application pursuant to chapter 21 of this title.
B. Noise: All noise (other than ordinary vehicular noise) from operations of any use in the industrial districts shall comply with limitations on noise and
noise pollution standards established by state of Illinois law.
C. Odors: No continuous, frequent or repetitive emission of odors or odor causing substances in quantities which would be offensive beyond any property
lines of any industrial use will be permitted. An odor emitted no more than fifteen (15) minutes in any one day shall not be deemed as continuous,
frequent or repetitive within the meaning of these regulations. The existence of an odor shall be presumed when analysis by a competent technician
demonstrates that a discernible odor is being emitted. In determining such quantities of offensive odors, table III (Odor Thresholds) in chapter 5 of the
"Air Pollution Abatement Manual" (copyright 1951) by Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., shall be used as a guide. The rules
and regulations of the Illinois air pollution control board shall be complied with at all times.
D. Glare And Heat: No glare or heat from any operations of any use in the industrial districts shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the
use is located.
E. Vibration: No earthborne vibration from any operations of any use in the industrial districts shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which
the use is located.
F. Electromagnetic Interference: Electromagnetic interference from any operations of any use in the industrial district shall not adversely affect the
operation of any equipment located off the zoning lot on which interference originates.
G. Fire And Explosive Hazards: Materials that present potential fire and explosive hazards shall be transported, stored, and used only in conformance with
all applicable federal, state of Illinois, and local laws.
H. Special Hazards: Hazardous, toxic, and radioactive materials shall be transported, stored, and used only in conformance with all applicable federal,
state of Illinois, and local laws.
I. Safety Equipment: No research or development laboratory or commercial testing facility requiring a special use permit pursuant to section 9-6-3 of this
chapter shall be established after the effective date of this zoning code unless and until the building in which such use is established shall be equipped
with sprinkler systems, automatic fire detection and suppression systems, and class 1 electrical fixtures as required by the then current village codes
for new construction.
J. Limited Financial Service Facilities: All limited financial service facilities shall comply with the following standards:
1. No such facility shall be advertised or held out as offering banking or financial services to the general public. Any banking or financial services
provided by such facilities to businesses not within the contiguous area of the same zoning district or to any individuals must be incidental only and
accessory to the limited financial services offered to businesses within the contiguous area of the district.
2. No such facility shall occupy more than six thousand (6,000) square feet of floor area.
3. No such facility shall have any interior or exterior tellers.
4. No such facility shall offer any drive-in service.
5. No such facility shall have any self-service, automatic, or remote units or machines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 320/524
6. No such facility shall be operated by more than a maximum of six (6) employees on the premises at any one time.
7. No such facility shall be open for business on Saturdays, Sundays, or banking holidays, or before the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after the
hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
K. Adult Entertainment Location Restrictions:
1. Minimum Distance From Other Adult Entertainment Establishments: No adult entertainment establishment shall be established, maintained, or
operated on any lot that has a property line within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property line of any other lot on which any other adult
entertainment establishment is located, established, maintained, or operated.
2. Minimum Distance From Protected Uses: No adult entertainment establishment shall be established, maintained, or operated on any lot that has a
property line within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the property line of any other lot on which a protected use is located, established,
maintained, or operated.
3. Minimum Distance From Residential Property: No adult entertainment establishment shall be located, established, maintained, or operated on any
lot that has a property line within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the property line of any residential property.
4. Measurement: For the purposes of this subsection K, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the adult entertainment establishment is located to the nearest point on a
property line of: a) any residential property or b) any lot on which a protected use or other adult entertainment establishment, as the case may be, is
located, established, maintained, or operated.
5. Limited Exception For Subsequent Protected Uses And Residential Property: An adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating under this
zoning code and under the Lake Zurich adult use ordinance shall not be deemed to be in violation of the location restrictions set forth herein solely
because: a) a protected use subsequently locates within the minimum required distance of the adult entertainment establishment, or b) property
within the minimum required distance subsequently becomes residential property. This subsection K5 shall not apply to an adult entertainment
establishment at a time when an application for an "adult entertainment license" under the adult use ordinance for that establishment is submitted
after the license has previously expired, has been revoked, or is at that time under suspension.
L. Screening Of Rooftop Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical equipment located on a roof shall be screened in accordance with the requirements of
section 9-8A-3 of this title. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
M. Medical Cannabis Dispensary Restrictions:
1. Compliance With State Regulations And Rules: All medical cannabis dispensary establishments shall comply with the compassionate use of medical
cannabis pilot program act (Public Act 098-0122) and any rules adopted in accordance thereto.
2. Single Use Property: Medical cannabis dispensaries shall not be established in multiple use or tenant property or on a property that shares parking
with other uses.
3. Minimum Distance From Incompatible Uses: No medical cannabis dispensary shall be located, established, maintained, or operated on any lot that
has a property line within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the property line of the following:
a. A church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship.
b. A public or private nursery, elementary, or secondary school.
c. A childcare facility, licensed by the Illinois department of children and family services.
d. A public park, playground, playing field, or forest preserve.
e. A residential property.
4. Measurement: For the purposes of this subsection M, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the medical cannabis dispensary is located to the nearest point on a property
line of the uses described in subsection M3 of this section.
5. Parking: Client parking shall be located in an area which is visible from a public road or a private road that is accessible to the public. It cannot be
screened from the roadway with vegetation, fencing, or other obstructions.
6. Exterior Display: No medical cannabis dispensary shall be maintained or operated in a manner that causes, creates, or allows the public viewing of
medical cannabis, medical cannabis infused products, or cannabis paraphernalia from any sidewalk, public or private right of way, or any property
other than the lot on which the dispensary is located.
7. Signage: A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near all dispensary entrances and shall include the following language: "Only
cardholders, designated caregivers, and staff may enter these premises. Persons under the age of 18 are prohibited from entering". The required
text shall be no larger than one inch (1") in height and no smaller than one-fourth inch (1/4") in height.
8. Hours Of Operation: Medical cannabis dispensaries shall only operate between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
9. Drive-Through Windows: A medical cannabis dispensary may not have a drive-through service.
N. Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center Restrictions:
1. Compliance With State Regulations And Rules: All medical cannabis cultivation centers shall comply with the compassionate use of medical
cannabis pilot program act (Public Act 098-0122) and any rules adopted in accordance thereto.
2. Single Use Property: Medical cannabis cultivation center establishments shall not be established in multiple use or tenant property or on a property
that shares parking with other uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 321/524
3. Minimum Distance From Residential Property: No medical cannabis cultivation center shall be located, established, maintained, or operated on any
lot that has a property line within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the property line of any residential property.
4. Measurement: For the purposes of this subsection N, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the medical cannabis cultivation center is located to the nearest point on a
property line of a residential property. (Ord. 2014-2-957, 2-4-2014)
9-6-10: BULK, SPACE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The building height, lot, yard, floor area ratio, and landscaped surface requirements applicable in the industrial districts are set forth in the following table:
I
A. Maximum Height (Whichever Is Less):
1. Feet 55
2. Stories n/a
B. Lot Area And Dimensions: 1,2
1. Minimum lot area (square feet) 20,000
2. Minimum lot width (feet) 100
C. Minimum Yards: 3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11
1. Front and corner side (feet) 35
2. Interior side (feet) 20
3. Rear (feet) 25
D. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 0.45
E. Minimum Landscaped Surface Area (Percent): 20
F. Exceptions And Explanatory Notes:
1. Nonconforming Lots: See section 9-11-5 of this title for lot requirements with respect to legal nonconforming lots of record.
2. Minimum Lot Area: Water areas and land areas with natural resource restrictions including floodplains, wetlands, and low land conservancy soils
are not included as part of the calculation of the required minimum lot area.
3. Visibility Across Corners: Notwithstanding any other provision of this zoning code nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, maintained, or allowed
to grow on any corner lot in an industrial district in violation of the provisions of subsection 4-2-1-3C of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
4. Transitional Setbacks Abutting Residential Districts: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, every building in any industrial district shall
be set back at least 100 feet from every lot line adjacent to any residential district, unless land is to be used for boundary agreements.
5. Transitional Height Abutting Residential Districts: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, every building in any industrial district on a lot
that directly abuts any residential zoning district shall not exceed a maximum height of 35 feet.
6. Transitional Landscaped Surface Area Abutting Residential Districts: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, every lot in any industrial
district that directly abuts any residential zoning district shall provide a minimum of 30 percent landscaped surface area.
7. Special Setbacks For Signs: Special setbacks established for some signs in the Lake Zurich municipal code shall control over the yards and
setbacks established in the table.
8. Specified Structures And Uses In Required Yards: The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required
yard:
a. Statuary, arbors, trellises, and ornamental light standards having a height of 8 feet or less; and
b. Eaves and gutters projecting not more than 3 feet from an exterior wall; and
c. Awnings, canopies, bay windows, and balconies projecting not more than 3 feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the
length of such wall; and
d. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, and the like projecting not more than 2 feet from an
exterior wall; and
e. Outside stairways projecting from an exterior wall not more than 3 feet and having a height of 4 feet or less; and
f. Flagpoles; and
g. Terraces; and
h. Fitness trails; and
i. Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the limitations of the Lake Zurich municipal code; and
j. Driveways, subject to the limitations of subsection 9-10-1C of this title; and
k. Parking spaces and access aisles in the interior side and rear yards only, but not closer than 10 feet from a lot line.
9. Special Setbacks And Yards Abutting East Route 22: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, every building in any industrial district
shall be set back at least 100 feet from the right of way of East Route 22 in the village. All yards along every lot line abutting East Route 22 shall be
not less than 50 feet.
10. Special Yards Abutting Ela Road And Cuba Road: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Ela
Road or Cuba Road shall be not less than 40 feet.
11. Special Yards Abutting Route 12 And West Route 22: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting
Route 12 or abutting West Route 22 between Ela Road and the westernmost village limits shall be not less than 50 feet.
(Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 322/524
Chapter 7
SPECIAL DISTRICTS AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
9-7A-1: PURPOSES:
The OS Open Space District is established to recognize the existence of major open space and recreational areas in the Village and is intended to apply to
all public open space of notable quality and to major private open spaces such as golf courses and cemeteries. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and no others are permitted as of right in the Open Space District:
A. Publicly owned parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, forest preserves, botanical and zoological gardens, arboreta, conservatories, recreational
areas, and other open areas.
B. Common open space, when such property is voluntarily restricted by covenant, deed, or other agreement for use only as open space. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7A-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the Open Space District subject to the issuance of a special use permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title. In
interpreting the use designations, reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the North American industry classification
system, and chapter 15 of this title. SIC codes and NAICS codes, where applicable, are given in parentheses following each use listing.
A. Band shells and amphitheaters.
B. Cemeteries, including associated structures such as mausoleums, columbariums, crematories, and chapels (6553).
C. Public or private golf courses, including associated structures such as clubhouses, maintenance buildings, and pro shops (7992, 7997).
D. Public sports and recreation buildings and facilities, including Village owned park and recreation office facilities.
E. Commercial facilities, incidental to the operation of public or private recreational uses, but not including drive-in facilities.
F. Marinas, as specifically defined in section 9-24-2 of this title and pursuant to the standards and provisions within section 9-7C-3 of this chapter (4493).
G. Planned unit developments.
H. Natural open space, subject to the following provisions:
1. Definition Of Natural Open Space: Prairie land, woodlands, wetlands, and similar land areas comprised primarily of indigenous plants and animals in
good, natural ecological relationship.
2. Intent Of Special Use: This special use is intended to promote the preservation and maintenance of natural open space. The principal intent in the
promotion of natural open space is to maintain biodiversity that acts as a buffer to certain types of vectorborne human diseases. This special use
also may promote the development of natural open space. This special use is not intended for open spaces that have been disturbed, altered, or
maintained other than for natural open space unless there is a specific plan for the conversion of such open space into natural open space.
3. Village Owned Property: The Village may grant a special use permit for natural open space on property owned by the Village. The Village also may
grant a special use permit for natural open space on other property, but only with the consent of the property owner and subject to a binding
agreement between the Village and the owner in a form satisfactory to the Board of Trustees that the owner will properly maintain, or develop and
maintain if appropriate, the natural open space. See subsection H6 of this section regarding development of natural open space.
4. Minimum Area: The minimum required total area of property for a special use for natural open space shall be one hundred seventy five thousand
(175,000) square feet.
5. Limitation On Uses And Structures Within Natural Open Space Area: Uses and structures within a natural open space area shall be limited to public
observation and education activities, passive recreation areas and similar, compatible uses specifically approved by the Board of Trustees.
6. Development Of Natural Open Space Areas; Expiration Of Special Use If Not Developed: A special use for natural open space granted for an area
that is not currently natural open space shall be conditioned by the Board of Trustees on development within the area of natural open space. If the
area is not developed as natural open space within five (5) years or such longer period of time as the Board of Trustees may set specifically, then the
special use for natural open space shall expire automatically and be null and void as of the five (5) years or other time set by the Board of Trustees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 323/524
7. Proper Maintenance Of Natural Open Space: All natural open space shall be maintained in good, natural ecological relationship by the property
owner. After a public hearing before the Board of Trustees or, at the Board of Trustees' option, the Plan Commission, the Board of Trustees may
revoke a special use permit if the property subject to the permit has not been maintained properly. (Ord. 2018-09-269, 9-4-2018)
9-7A-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
Accessory structures and uses are permitted in the open space district subject to the provisions of section 9-9-1 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7A-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses are permitted in the Open Space District subject to the provisions of section 9-9-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7A-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the Open Space District are set forth in sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7A-7: SIGN REGULATIONS:
The sign regulations applicable in the Open Space District are set forth in the Lake Zurich Municipal Code. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7A-8: LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING:
Landscaping and lighting standards for uses and structures in the Open Space District are set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord.
2016-6-137, 6-6-2016)
9-7A-9: EXTERIOR APPEARANCE REVIEW:
No construction or development requiring a building permit and affecting the exterior appearance of any structure shall be permitted in any open space
district except after approval of the building permit application pursuant to chapter 21 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7A-10: BULK, SPACE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The building height, lot, yard, floor area ratio, and landscaped surface requirements applicable in the Open Space District are set forth in the following
table:
OS
A. Maximum Height (Feet):
1. Principal structures 30
2. Accessory structures 25
B. Minimum Lot Area And Dimensions:1,2,3
1. Minimum lot area (square feet) 15,000
2. Minimum lot width (feet) 90
C. Minimum Yards:1,2,4,5,6,7,8,9
1. Front and corner side (feet) 25
2. Side (feet) 10
3. Rear (feet) 25
D. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 0.20
E. Minimum Landscaped Surface Area (Percent): 75
F. Exceptions And Explanatory Notes:
1. Applicability Of Certain Bulk Regulations: The regulations for lot area, lot dimensions, yards, and setbacks shall apply only to special uses and shall not
apply to uses in the Open Space District permitted pursuant to section 9-7A-2 of this article.
2. Nonconforming Lots: See section 9-11-5 of this title for lot requirements with respect to legal nonconforming lots of record.
3. Minimum Lot Area: Water areas and land areas with natural resource restrictions including floodplains, wetlands, and low land conservancy soils are
not included as part of the calculation of the required minimum lot area.
4. Visibility Across Corners: Any other provision of this Zoning Code to the contrary notwithstanding, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, allowed to
grow, or maintained on any corner lot in the Open Space District in violation of the provisions of subsection 4-2-1-3C of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 324/524
5. Special Setbacks For Signs: Special setbacks established for some signs in the Lake Zurich Municipal Code shall control over the yards established in
the table.
6. Special Yard And Setback Requirements For Recreational Devices: Recreational devices and play fields shall be set back a distance of 50 feet from all
property lines.
7. Side And Rear Yard Regulations For Accessory Structures And Uses: Parking areas wherever located and other detached accessory structures and
uses when located within the rear 25 percent of the depth of the lot shall not be required to maintain an interior side or rear yard or setback in excess of 8
feet; provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to antennas and antenna support structures and provided further, however, that no accessory
structure or use, or combination of such structures or uses, located within an otherwise required side or rear yard pursuant to this subsection F7 shall
occupy more than 30 percent of such required yard.
8. Special Yards Abutting Ela Road And Cuba Road: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Ela Road or
Cuba Road shall be not less than 40 feet.
9. Special Yards Abutting Route 12 And Route 22: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Route 12 or
abutting Route 22 between Ela Road and the westernmost Village limits shall be not less than 50 feet.
(Ord., 10-2004)
ARTICLE B. INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS DISTRICT
9-7B-1: PURPOSES:
The IB Institutional Buildings District is established to accommodate existing and future public buildings and buildings having purposes and impacts similar
to public buildings. It is the intent of this Zoning Code, by this district, to avoid the problems inherent in treating such buildings as permitted or special uses
in zoning districts characterized by uses and structures bearing no similarity to public and institutional uses and buildings. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and no others are permitted as of right in the Institutional Buildings District:
A. Any Village owned or leased structure and any governmental activity or service conducted within a building owned or leased by a public body.
B. Publicly owned parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, botanical and zoological gardens, arboreta, conservatories, recreational areas, and other open
areas.
C. Any use listed in section 9-7B-3 of this article, to the extent it existed on the effective date of this Zoning Code. Any change of such use or any lot or
structure associated with it after such effective date shall comply with the regulations of this article, except as provided in chapter 11 of this title.
D. Railroad telecommunications towers, antennas, and related equipment on property acquired from the Village of Lake Zurich specifically for that use.
The standards of this article apply to this use, except as follows:
1. Directional or panel antennas may extend from the structure to which they are attached to a distance approved by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
2. Omnidirectional or whip antennas may extend above the highest point of the structure to which they are attached to a distance approved by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
3. No railroad telecommunications tower may be located within three hundred feet (300') of any lot zoned in any residential district or in the OS Open
Space District.
4. The standards in section 9-7B-10 of this article apply to this use, except as provided in subsections D1, D2, and D3 of this section and except that
the following standards will apply as specifically approved by resolution of the Board of Trustees:
a. Maximum height as set forth in subsection 9-7B-10A of this article;
b. Minimum lot area and dimensions as set forth in subsection 9-7B-10B of this article;
c. Minimum yards as set forth in subsection 9-7B-10C of this article; and
d. Minimum landscaped surface area as set forth in subsection 9-7B-10E of this article. (Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2010-03-702, 3-1-2010; Ord.
2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
9-7B-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following private uses may be permitted in the Institutional Buildings District subject to the issuance of a special use permit as provided in chapter 19
of this title. In interpreting the use designations, reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the North American industry
classification system, and chapter 15 of this title. SIC codes and NAICS codes, where applicable, are given in parentheses following each use listing.
A. Elementary and secondary schools (821).
B. Colleges and universities (822).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 325/524
C. Libraries (8231).
D. Youth centers (832).
E. Child daycare services (835) operated by or for a membership organization.
F. Museums and art galleries (8412).
G. Business associations (861).
H. Professional membership organizations (862).
I. Civic, social, and fraternal associations (864).
J. Religious organizations (866).
K. Planned unit developments.
L. Electronic equipment and equipment structures, but only: 1) when the antenna is fully enclosed, or 2) when the antenna is limited to an omnidirectional
or whip antenna or a directional or panel antenna located on the roof of a lawfully preexisting building that will serve as an antenna support structure, or
3) when the antenna is located on a facility owned and operated by the Village, and 4) when all electronic equipment is fully enclosed in a structure
otherwise permitted on the zoning lot, and subject to the following standards:
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 9-7B-10A of this article, omnidirectional or whip antennas may extend to a height not exceeding fifteen
feet (15') above the highest point of the roof of the building or structure to which they are attached; and
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 9-7B-10A of this article, directional or panel antennas may extend not more than six feet (6') above the
roof of, or six inches (6") out from, the building or structure to which they are attached.
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Zoning Code, the regulations in the IB District related to antenna support structures shall not apply to the
Village in constructing, operating, or maintaining such an antenna or antenna support structure for governmental purposes.
M. Telephone exchange buildings.
N. Massage therapy services (7299), but only subject to the following conditions:
1. The use must be ancillary to a civic, social, or fraternal association; and
2. The use is authorized only during the regular business hours of the business to which it is ancillary; and
3. The use may be conducted only by trained therapists professionally certified by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation.
(Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2009-01-610, 1-19-2009; Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
9-7B-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
Accessory structures and uses are permitted in the Institutional Buildings District subject to the provisions of section 9-9-1 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7B-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses are permitted in the Institutional Buildings District subject to the provisions of section 9-9-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7B-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the Institutional Buildings District are set forth in sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-
2004)
9-7B-7: SIGN REGULATIONS:
The sign regulations applicable in the Institutional Buildings District are set forth in the Lake Zurich Municipal Code. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7B-8: LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 326/524
Landscaping and lighting standards for uses and structures in the Institutional Buildings District are set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004; amd.
Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-2016)
9-7B-9: EXTERIOR APPEARANCE REVIEW:
No construction or development requiring a building permit and affecting the exterior appearance of any structure shall be permitted in any Institutional
Buildings District except after approval of the building permit application pursuant to chapter 21 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7B-10: BULK, SPACE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The building height, lot, yard, floor area ratio, and landscaped surface requirements applicable in the Institutional Buildings District are set forth in the
following table:
IB
A. Maximum Height (Feet):
1. Principal structure 30
2. Accessory structures 25
B. Minimum Lot Area And Dimensions: 1,2,3,6
1. Minimum lot area (square feet) 15,000
2. Minimum lot width (feet) 90
C. Minimum Yards: 1,2,4,5,7,8,9,11,12
1. Front and corner side (feet) 25
2. Side (feet) 10
3. Rear (feet) 25
D. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 10 0.35
E. Minimum Landscaped Surface Area (Percent): 10 50
F. Exceptions And Explanatory Notes:
1. Exception For Residential Structures: When any residential structure is located in an IB District, it shall be subject to the bulk, space, yard, and floor
area ratio regulations of the residential district to which it is nearest adjacent.
2. Height Limitation For Accessory Structures: Except as provided in subsection F3 of this section, no accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height
measured from grade; provided, however, that flagpoles may extend to a height of 10 feet above the highest point of the roof of the principal structure.
3. Height Exceptions: Church spires and minarets may extend to a height of 70 feet, and publicly owned structures may extend to such height as the
Village Manager may approve as necessary to carry out the public function in question.
4. No Application To Existing Uses: These requirements apply only to uses established after the effective date of this Zoning Code. A use established
prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code shall not be considered to be a nonconformity by reason of its failure to comply with these requirements, but
shall be allowed to continue on its existing zoning lot or any expansion thereof zoned or rezoned for institutional buildings use.
5. Nonconforming Lots: See section 9-11-5 of this title for lot requirements with respect to legal nonconforming lots of record.
6. Minimum Lot Area: Water areas and land areas with natural resource restrictions including floodplains, wetlands, and low land conservancy soils are
not included as part of the calculation of the required minimum lot area.
7. Visibility Across Corners: Any other provision of this Zoning Code to the contrary notwithstanding, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, allowed to
grow, or maintained on any corner lot in the Institutional Buildings District in violation of the provisions of subsection 4-2-1-3C of the Lake Zurich Municipal
Code.
8. Special Setbacks For Signs: Special setbacks established for some signs in the Lake Zurich Municipal Code shall control over the yard requirements
established in the table.
9. Side And Rear Yard Regulations For Accessory Structures And Uses: Parking areas wherever located and other detached accessory structures and
uses when located within the rear 25 percent of the lot depth of the lot shall not be required to maintain an interior side or rear yard or setback in excess of
8 feet; provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to antennas and antenna support structures and provided further, however, that no accessory
structure or use, or combination of such structures or uses, located within an otherwise required side or rear yard pursuant to this subsection F9 shall
occupy more than 30 percent of such required yard.
10. No Application To Existing Structures: The maximum floor area ratio and minimum landscaped surface area regulations apply only to structures
erected after the effective date of this Zoning Code; provided, however, that no structure existing on such effective date shall be expanded in violation of
these regulations.
11. Special Yards Abutting Ela Road And Cuba Road: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Ela Road
or Cuba Road shall be not less than 40 feet.
12. Special Yards Abutting Route 12 And Route 22: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all yards along every lot line abutting Route 12 or
abutting Route 22 between Ela Road and the westernmost Village limits shall be not less than 50 feet.
(Ord., 10-2004)
ARTICLE C. LAKE PROTECTION DISTRICT
9-7C-1: PURPOSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 327/524
The Village of Lake Zurich enjoys the privilege of having within its borders the lake of Lake Zurich. The lake has unique qualities and characteristics and a
strong impact on the overall character of the Village. The lake's distinctive characteristics deserve special protection, and the appropriate development and
use of lakefront property requires special rules and regulations. The LP Lake Protection District is established to protect and preserve the special qualities
and characteristics of the lake and thereby preserve the quality of its impact on the Village. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7C-2: OVERLAY DISTRICT:
The LP Lake Protection District appears on the zoning map as an "overlay district", imposed on top of other districts created by this Zoning Code and
referred to in this article as "base districts". Development of properties in the LP Lake Protection District must comply both with the regulations of the LP
Lake Protection District and with the regulations of the base district in which they are located. When there is any conflict between the regulations of the LP
Lake Protection District and the regulations of the base district, the regulations of the LP Lake Protection District shall control. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7C-3: ADDITIONAL PERMITTED USES:
A. In addition to any use authorized by the regulations of the base district, the following uses may be permitted in the LP Lake Protection District, subject to
the limitations placed thereon by this section.
1. Piers: Piers, subject to the following limitations:
a. No more than one pier shall be permitted per each seventy five feet (75') of lake frontage on any zoning lot.
b. The deck of any pier shall not extend more than four feet (4') above the mean high water level of the lake (currently known to be elevation 844
USGS datum).
c. No structure or part of a pier may extend above the level of the deck except that protective, decorative, or ornamental appurtenances such as
handrailings, benches, and the like may extend to a height of forty two inches (42") above the deck.
d. The total deck area of a pier shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
e. No pier shall be more than four feet (4') wide at any point, except as required for accessibility under applicable State or Federal law.
f. Every pier shall be constructed entirely of noncorrosive or decay resistant materials such as coated steel, aluminum, cedar, redwood, or
Wolmanized® or similarly treated wood.
g. No pier shall project into the middle twelve feet (12') of any waterway.
h. No pier shall project into any waterway more than fifty feet (50') from the mean high water elevation at the bank of such waterway.
i. No pier shall be located within ten feet (10') of any property line as extended into the waterway.
2. Rafts And Other Floating Devices: Subject to the following limitations:
a. The deck of any such raft or device shall not extend more than four feet (4') above water level.
b. The total deck area of all such rafts or devices may not exceed two hundred (200) square feet per zoning lot.
c. No single horizontal dimension of any such raft or device may exceed twelve feet (12').
B. In addition to any use authorized by the regulations of the base district, the following uses shall only be allowed as special uses in the LP Lake
Protection District, subject to the limitations placed thereon by this section.
1. Marinas: As specifically defined in section 9-24-2, "Definitions", of this title and subject to the following limitations:
a. No more than one marina shall be permitted per property.
b. The operation of marinas shall require compliance with the provisions of title 7, chapter 4, "Lake Of Lake Zurich And Beaches", of the Lake Zurich
Municipal Code.
c. Marinas shall provide for the launching and retrieval of boats using a bonafide "boat launch ramp" as provided for in subsection B2 of this section
and provide proper vehicular access to a public right-of-way by means of a paved surface or other approved surface.
d. All structures of a marina including related piers and side docks shall be constructed on the respective shoreline owner's lake bottom property and
conform to the provisions of subsection A1, "Piers", of this section.
e. All motorized watercraft operating from the marina shall be certified with the Office of Law Enforcement of the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources (DNR), with exceptions to watercraft operated by a governmental agency.
f. Marinas shall apply for and obtain a business license from the Village.
g. The storage and sale of fuel at a marina shall be prohibited.
2. Boat Launch Ramps: As specifically defined in section 9-24-2, "Definitions", of this title and subject to the following limitations:
a. The standards for boat launch ramps contained within this section shall only apply to those associated with the establishment of a marina as
specifically defined in section 9-24-2, "Definitions", of this title.
b. No more than one boat launch ramp shall be permitted on a zoning lot.
c. Design specifications shall be as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 328/524
(1) Minimum width: Fifteen feet (15').
(2) Ramp slope: Minimum twelve percent (12%) to fifteen percent (15%) (7 degrees to 8.5 degrees) - drainage grooves troweled into their surface,
sloping away from the center of the ramp.
(3) Ramp depth: Foot of ramp minimum four feet (4') below surface of water at any level.
(4) Ramp height above water at any level: Minimum one foot six inches (1'6").
(5) Material: Asphalt or concrete. Gravel launch ramps shall be permitted upon inspection and approval of the building official.
d. Side docks as specifically defined in section 9-24-2, "Definitions", of this title may be provided as an option. If provided, side docks should be a
minimum four feet (4') wide, and constructed in compliance with the provisions of subsection A1, "Piers", of this section. (Ord. 2018-09-269, 9-4-
2018)
9-7C-4: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
A. Fill Compensation: Whenever any development requires placement of fill, or of a building, structure, or recreational device or vehicle, at or below the
mean high water level of the lake (currently known to be elevation 844 USGS datum), then the volume of space occupied by such fill, building,
structure, device, or vehicle shall be compensated for and balanced by an equal volume of excavation taken from below said mean high water level.
B. Erosion Protection: All construction shall be designed to prevent the seepage or erosion of any fill or other material into the water of the lake.
C. Exterior Appearance Review: No construction or development requiring a building permit and affecting the exterior appearance of any structure shall be
permitted on property zoned in the LP Lake Protection District and in the following base districts except after approval of the building permit pursuant to
chapter 21 of this title. Exterior appearance review shall be required for the following base districts within the LP Lake Protection District: R-6, B-1, B-2,
B-3, O-1, O-2, O-3, I, OS, and IB. (Ord., 10-2004)
ARTICLE D. DR DOWNTOWN REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
9-7D-1: BACKGROUND; GOAL; PURPOSES:
A. The downtown center of the village of Lake Zurich is an important meeting place where residents and visitors greet neighbors, shop, stroll, picnic, visit
public buildings, and enjoy the beauty of the lake. The village has continued to prosper, but the vitality of downtown Lake Zurich has diminished over
the years. Because the downtown is critical to the well being of the community, the village undertook extensive planning, study, and analyses regarding
how to restore the downtown's vitality.
The result of the village's efforts was the adoption of carefully crafted master plans, redevelopment guidelines, the tax increment financing ("TIF")
redevelopment plan, and other standards for all new development throughout the downtown. Those plans and standards establish a distinct character
for the downtown that is necessary for its success. That character can be achieved only by the comprehensive and consistent application of the
regulations of the DR downtown redevelopment overlay district to all new construction, redevelopment, exterior remodeling, and exterior alteration of
downtown buildings, structures, and amenities.
B. The village's overarching goal for downtown Lake Zurich is to create and sustain a thriving residential and retail environment that will:
1. Make downtown Lake Zurich a desired destination for residents of the village and nearby communities,
2. Improve the quality of life in the community by creating a new and vibrant retail and residential district, complete with gathering places and improved
traffic flow,
3. Protect and enhance the value of property within the downtown and throughout the village,
4. Strengthen the economy of the village, and
5. Enhance the village's overall ability to deliver quality services and support to its residents.
C. The village has determined that it is essential that the downtown include:
1. Buildings of consistent architectural style and of scale, height, design, and materials conforming to the village's master plans and the high standards
set in those plans,
2. Use of the buildings and all other property within the DR overlay district only in a manner consistent with the master plans, to achieve the proper
balance of high quality retail shops, office spaces, and residential dwellings, and
3. Pedestrian friendly features such as inviting storefronts, landscaped walkways, comfortable street furniture, plazas and other gathering places,
aesthetically pleasing signage, convenient passage from building to building and to parking, and similar thoughtful design features.
D. The regulations of this article are intended to govern all development; redevelopment; building construction, exterior alteration, and exterior
modification; all related physical activity; and all uses, all to promote the important goals and purposes set forth above and to protect against the use or
maintenance of any property within the DR overlay district inconsistent with the village's master plans and standards. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7D-2: OVERLAY DISTRICT FUNCTION; APPLICATION OF BASE DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 329/524
The DR downtown redevelopment overlay district appears on the zoning map as an "overlay district", imposed on top of other districts created by this
zoning code and referred to in this article as "base districts". Development of property in the DR overlay district must comply with the regulations of the DR
overlay district, with the regulations of the base district in which they are located, and, in certain instances, with the regulations of the lake protection
district.
In many instances, the regulations of the DR overlay district are more restrictive than, and preemptive of, the regulations of the base district, particularly in
regard to building design and location and with what uses may be established.
Property may be developed under the standards and regulations applicable to the base district. However, property owners may exercise the option to
develop a planned unit development pursuant to the FBR standards. (Ord. 2012-08-852, 8-20-2012)
9-7D-3: MAPPING LOCATION AND STANDARDS:
The DR downtown redevelopment overlay district shall be mapped as provided on the zoning map as of March 1, 2004, which includes, principally, the
property in the central business district area of the village along Main Street and Old Rand Road as well as certain adjacent property. Most of the property
within the DR overlay district is included within the village's downtown TIF district. The DR overlay district may be mapped on such additional property as
the board of trustees determines is appropriate based on the board of trustees' sound legislative judgment that such property is properly a part of the
village's downtown redevelopment master plans defined in section 9-7D-7 of this article and should be regulated in the same manner as other property
within the DR overlay district. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7D-4: PERMITTED USES:
A. Permitted Uses On First Story Abutting Main Street Or Old Rand Road: The following uses shall be permitted as of right on the first story (street level) of
any building in the DR overlay district on property that abuts Main Street or Old Rand Road:
1. Those retail trade uses listed in subsection 9-4-2C of this title as permitted in the B-2 central business district, but not including any of the following
uses: any use that does not generate retail sales tax except as otherwise specifically authorized in this article; drinking places (5813); drugstores and
proprietary stores (591); used merchandise stores (593) except that antique stores, antique furniture stores and books and rare manuscripts stores
shall be permitted; tobacco stores and stands (5993); news dealers and newsstands (5994); and miscellaneous retail stores not elsewhere classified
(5999) except that art dealers, autograph and philatelist supply stores, coin shops, and cosmetics stores shall be permitted.
2. Financial services in existence and operation within the B-2 central business district and a drive-through associated with such a financial service.
3. Pet grooming salon, but not including a pet store or pet supply store.
4. Gourmet independent pet food store not exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet in gross floor area.
5. Uses owned or operated by the village of Lake Zurich.
6. Residential units on the first story as a special use.
B. Permitted Uses Above First Story Abutting Main Street Or Old Rand Road: The following uses shall be permitted as of right on stories above the first
story (that is, not at street level) of a building in the DR overlay district on property that abuts Main Street or Old Rand Road:
1. Multiple-family dwellings.
2. Legal services.
3. Financial services.
4. Engineering, architectural and surveying services.
5. Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services.
6. Management and public relations services.
7. Offices and clinics of doctors of medicine and dentists.
8. Services not elsewhere classified.
9. Uses owned or operated by the village of Lake Zurich.
C. Permitted Uses Not Abutting Main Street Or Old Rand Road: The following uses shall be permitted as of right in a building in the DR overlay district on
property that does not abut Main Street or Old Rand Road:
1. Townhouse dwellings.
2. Uses owned or operated by the village of Lake Zurich.
D. Adherence To The FBR Standards As Part Of A Planned Unit Development: In the event a developer chooses to develop property within the downtown
overlay district using the FBR standards, such FBR standards must be applied as part of a planned unit development approved by the board of
trustees. (Ord. 2012-08-852, 8-20-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01-291 - ACCESSORY TO A SPECIAL USE. Go to new ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 330/524
9-7D-5: SPECIAL USES:
A. Special Uses On First Story Abutting Main Street Or Old Rand Road: The following uses and no others may be authorized on the first story (street level)
of any building in the DR overlay district on property that abuts Main Street or Old Rand Road, subject to the issuance of a special use permit as
provided in chapter 19 of this title:
1. Drinking places (5813) accessory to permitted eating places.
2. Garden supplies, tools, and nursery stock stores (526) in existence and operation within the B-2 central business district as of January 1, 2004.
3. Outdoor seating accessory to permitted eating places.
4. Beauty shops (723), barbershops (724), and full service beauty and health spas.
5. Such other retail sales tax generating uses as the board of trustees determines are consistent with the uses stated in this subsection A and in
subsection 9-7D-4A of this article and that are consistent with and promote the goals and purposes set forth in section 9-7D-1 of this article.
In interpreting the use designations, reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the North American industry
classification system, and chapter 15 of this title.
B. Special Uses Above First Story Abutting Main Street Or Old Rand Road: The following uses and no others may be authorized above the first story (that
is, not at street level) of any building in the DR overlay district on property that abuts Main Street or Old Rand Road, subject to the issuance of a special
use permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title:
Such services uses as the board of trustees determines are consistent with and promote the goals and purposes set forth in section 9-7D-1 of this
article.
In interpreting the use designations, reference should be made to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", the North American industry
classification system, and chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2012-08-852, 8-20-2012)
9-7D-6: LIMITATIONS ON USES:
In addition to the limitations established in sections 9-7D-4 and 9-7D-5 of this article, the board of trustees shall have the authority to limit, specifically or
generally, the types of retail, office, or service uses that are authorized within the DR downtown redevelopment overlay district. The board of trustees shall
have the authority to place any condition on any such uses as the board of trustees determines is appropriate, consistent with the goals and purposes of
the DR overlay district set forth in section 9-7D-1 of this article. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7D-7: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE REGULATIONS; CONFLICTS:
All development and uses of all property within the DR downtown redevelopment overlay district shall be consistent with the downtown redevelopment
master plans, as determined by the board of trustees. The downtown redevelopment master plans shall include all of the following:
A. Master Plans:
1. The set of various plans and drawings titled "Lake Zurich Lakefront Corridor Project" prepared by Lucien Lagrange Architects, dated February 17,
2004, and numbered 1 through 32, copies of which are on file in the village clerk's office.
2. The "Redevelopment Guidelines For Downtown Lake Zurich", prepared originally in April 2003, and revised and dated February 5, 2004, copies of
which are on file in the village clerk's office.
3. Such other standards for development and use that the board of trustees may adopt by ordinance from time to time. (Ord., 10-2004)
B. Additional Standards: From time to time the board of trustees may adopt, by ordinance, additional standards for development and uses within the DR
overlay district. Such standards shall apply and control within the DR overlay district as provided by the board of trustees. (Ord. 2012-08-852, 8-20-
2012)
C. Special Exterior Appearance And Design Standards: In addition to compliance with subsections A and B of this section and with all other applicable
exterior appearance standards, the board of trustees shall consider and evaluate all development and use of all property within the DR overlay district
guided by the standards established by the downtown redevelopment master plans, including, without limitation, location, bulk, height, architectural
design, color, and consistency with the goals and purposes set forth in section 9-7D-1 of this article.
For buildings proposed within the DR overlay district near existing residential houses and taller than three (3) stories, the following standards shall
apply to site plan and exterior appearance plan reviews:
1. When a building is proposed near existing residential houses, the plans shall depict how the building's design, architecture, landscaping, and other
features are reasonable in the residential context within which the building will be located, and
2. When a building is proposed near existing residential houses and for a height of four (4) stories or greater, the application shall include information
related to viability and need for the building.
Site plan review and exterior appearance review for buildings existing prior to January 1, 2004, shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of chapters 20 and 21 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 331/524
D. Master Plans Control In Case Of Conflict: In the event of any conflict between the downtown redevelopment master plans and any provision of this
article or of any base district, the downtown redevelopment master plans shall apply and control. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7D-8: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures, including, without limitation, sheds, parking lots, vending machines, sales, kiosks, and garages, shall not be permitted in
the DR district. The board of trustees shall have the authority to authorize an accessory use or structure in conjunction with a development approved by
the board of trustees if the board of trustees finds that the proposed accessory use or structure will be consistent with the goals and purposes set forth in
section 9-7D-1 of this article, will comply with the standards set forth in section 9-7D-7 of this article, and will be consistent with and promote the intent of
the downtown redevelopment master plans. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7D-9: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the base districts set forth in sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of this title shall apply to development within
the DR downtown redevelopment overlay district except as may be modified for uses in the DR overlay district by ordinance duly adopted by the board of
trustees. The board of trustees shall have the authority to change, alter, vary, modify, or waive a parking or loading requirement as it applies to a
development approved by the board of trustees if the board of trustees finds that the proposed development will be consistent with the goals and purposes
set forth in section 9-7D-1 of this article, will comply with the standards set forth in section 9-7D-7 of this article, and will be consistent with and promote
the intent of the downtown redevelopment master plans. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7D-10: SIGN REGULATIONS:
No sign shall be permitted in the DR downtown redevelopment overlay district except only as specifically approved by the board of trustees. All signs
within the DR overlay district shall be consistent with the downtown redevelopment master plans. The sign regulations applicable in the base districts set
forth in the Lake Zurich municipal code shall apply on the DR overlay district only to the extent that they are consistent with the downtown redevelopment
master plans. The board of trustees shall have the authority to change, alter, vary, modify, or waive any sign regulation if the board of trustees finds that a
proposed sign will be consistent with the goals and purposes set forth in section 9-7D-1 of this article, will comply with the standards set forth in section 9-
7D-7 of this article, and will be consistent with and promote the intent of the downtown redevelopment master plans. Signs that are not authorized by the
Lake Zurich municipal code shall not be permitted in the DR overlay district except only as approved in advance by ordinance duly adopted by the board of
trustees. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-7D-11: BULK, YARD, SPACE, AND PARKING STANDARDS:
The bulk, yard, space, and parking standards of the applicable base district shall apply to development within the DR downtown redevelopment overlay
district except as may be specifically modified by ordinance duly adopted by the board of trustees. The board of trustees shall have the authority to
change, alter, vary, modify, or waive any bulk, yard, space, or parking regulation as it applies to a development approved by the board of trustees, but only
if the board of trustees finds that the proposed development will be consistent with the goals and purposes set forth in section 9-7D-1 of this article, will
comply with the standards set forth in section 9-7D-7 of this article, and will be consistent with and promote the intent of the downtown redevelopment
master plans.
In addition, the following standards shall apply unless changed, altered, varied, modified, or waived by the board of trustees:
A. Minimum Lot Area: Eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet.
B. Minimum Lot Width: One hundred feet (100').
C. Maximum Height: District maximum except only as otherwise specifically approved by ordinance of the board of trustees, but in no event more than five
(5) stories.
D. Minimum Number Of Off Street Parking Spaces For Residential Uses: 1.2 spaces per dwelling unit. (Ord., 10-2004)
E. Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces For Retail And Office Uses: 3.0 spaces for each one thousand feet (1,000') net floor area.
F. All Other Parking And Loading Requirements: Compliance with requirements applicable in the base district as set forth in sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of
this title. Reduced parking and loading requirements may be accepted by the village in lieu of minimum standards as a condition of a special use
provided that evidence of a reduced demand for parking or loading spaces is substantiated by a traffic/parking study prepared by a qualified
professional engineer or planner.
G. Parking And Loading Requirements: The board of trustees may modify parking and loading requirements for a particular development by an ordinance
approved by the board of trustees. Such modifications may include, but are not limited to, adjustments or waivers of the required number of off street
parking spaces in connection with a shared parking arrangement, a cooperative parking arrangement or public parking credits as defined below.
1. Shared Parking Arrangements: Shared parking arrangement, in which two (2) or more nonresidential uses with different peak parking demands use
the same off street parking spaces to meet off street parking requirements, may be approved by the board of trustees by ordinance. Prior to
approval, the board of trustees must determine that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the uses for which the sharing of
parking is proposed. That determination must be based on a parking study and other evidence submitted by the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 332/524
2. Cooperative Parking Arrangements: Cooperative parking arrangements, when two (2) or more nonresidential uses located in different buildings
provide their required off street parking spaces in the same parking structure or lot, may be approved by the board of trustees by ordinance. Parking
within any cooperative parking arrangement must be within five hundred feet (500'), measured along a dedicated pedestrian path, to the entrance of
all uses included within the arrangement. The parties to the cooperative parking arrangement must provide a binding, perpetual agreement in a form
satisfactory to the village, and such other assurances as the board of trustees may require, demonstrating the continued enforceability of the
cooperative parking arrangement. If a cooperative parking arrangement is no longer in force for any reason, then parking must be provided as
otherwise required by this section and otherwise by this zoning code.
3. Public Parking Credits: The board of trustees may approve, by ordinance, credits against the otherwise required off street parking, which credits will
be based on the availability of public parking. The board of trustees may credit designated on street parking within five hundred feet (500'), measured
along a dedicated pedestrian path, to any entrance to a use against the parking requirements, at a rate of one credit for every two (2) on street
parking spaces. Parking within a public lot or structure within five hundred feet (500'), measured along a dedicated pedestrian path, of any entrance
to a use may be credited against the parking requirement at a rate of one credit for every three (3) public parking spaces. (Ord. 2012-08-852, 8-20-
2012)
Chapter 8
LANDSCAPING; LIGHTING; NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION
ARTICLE A. LANDSCAPING
9-8A-1: PURPOSE:
This article establishes the standards for placement of landscaping materials along lot lines and around certain uses, in a manner that will preserve and
promote the character of the village and that will minimize the potential adverse impacts on adjacent land uses. The standards set forth herein are
intended to provide flexibility in the choices of landscaping materials and the placement of those materials, but at the same time are intended to ensure
that the public interests and welfare are protected at all times. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-2: APPLICABILITY:
All development shall comply with the provisions of this article and shall provide landscaping in accordance with the provisions of this article, except the
following:
A. Single-Family Lots: Development of a dwelling in any single-family residential district on a vacant lot of record existing prior to the effective date of this
zoning code.
B. Previously Approved Development: Development pursuant to plans that received all required final approvals of the village prior to the effective date of
this zoning code.
C. Minor Additions: Development that increases the floor area of any structure or building in an amount less than ten percent (10%) of the existing floor
area. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-3: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENT:
Landscaping shall be required along every lot line and along the perimeter of parking lots, residential recreational facilities, and antennas and antenna
support structures. The landscaping shall extend along the entire length of the lot line, right of way line, or structure in question and, unless otherwise
specifically provided, shall have a width at least as wide as that specified in section 9-8A-6 of this article. The required landscaping shall include at least
the minimum number of standard plant units as set forth in sections 9-8A-4, 9-8A-5, and 9-8A-6 of this article and such additional number of plant units as
may be required to achieve the minimum required opacity within the required landscaped area. The requirement of landscaped yards along the perimeter
of parking lots shall not apply to parking lots located in required interior side or rear yards in the I industrial district. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-4: DEFINITION OF STANDARD PLANT UNIT:
For the purposes of this article, the term "standard plant unit", which has five (5) alternatives, is defined as follows:
STANDARD PLANT UNIT
Standard Plant
Unit Alternative Number, Type, And Size Of Plants Per Unit
Unit A 1 3-inch caliper canopy tree; and 2 2-inch caliper understory trees; and 9 3-foot high shrubs
Unit B 1 3-inch caliper canopy tree; and 1 2-inch caliper understory tree; and 2 6-foot high evergreens
Unit C 1 3-inch caliper canopy tree; and 5 3-foot high shrubs; and 2 3-foot high potted evergreens
Unit D 3 6-foot high evergreens; and 15 3-foot high shrubs
Unit E 2 3-inch caliper canopy trees; and 9 3-foot high shrubs
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 333/524
Each standard plant unit alternative is intended to be similar in landscape value to the other four (4) standard plant unit alternatives. Five (5) alternative
standard plant units are provided so that an applicant has flexibility to use different approaches in different applications. In general, one "canopy" (or
"shade") tree is equivalent to three (3) "understory" trees or to two (2) evergreen trees. The board of trustees may reduce the required number of plants
per unit as part of any exterior appearance review or site plan review, but only if the applicant provides some plants larger than the sizes required for that
standard plant unit. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-5: OPACITY VALUES:
A. Lot Line Landscaped Areas: Except for the areas within the B-2 zoning district, every area along a lot line not abutting a street shall be landscaped with
at least the number of standard plant units set forth in section 9-8A-6 of this article necessary to achieve the following required levels of opacity.
Opacity levels are expressed in percentages, with zero percent (0%) being completely transparent and one hundred percent (100%) being completely
opaque. The opacity levels provided for the B-2 zoning district shall apply only for the purpose of determining the applicable required opacity level for a
lot abutting a lot classified in the B-2 zoning district, and not for the B-2 lot itself.
Zoning District Of
Proposed Development
Zoning District Of Abutting Property
R-1/2 R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-1 O-2 O-3 I OS IB
R-1/2 0 0 0 0 10 50 20 50 30 30 50 50 20 30
R-3 0 0 0 0 10 50 20 50 30 30 50 50 20 30
R-4 0 0 0 0 10 50 20 50 30 30 50 50 20 30
R-5 0 0 0 0 10 50 20 50 30 30 50 60 20 30
R-6 20 20 20 20 20 60 30 70 20 30 60 70 40 40
B-1 60 60 60 60 70 10 10 20 20 20 30 40 30 30
B-2 50 50 50 50 30 10 10 20 20 20 30 40 30 30
B-3 60 60 60 60 50 30 10 10 30 40 40 40 40 30
O-1 40 40 40 40 30 30 20 20 10 10 30 60 40 30
O-2 50 50 50 50 40 30 20 20 10 10 20 70 40 30
O-3 60 60 60 60 50 30 30 30 30 30 10 70 40 30
I 80 80 80 80 70 40 40 40 50 60 70 20 30 40
OS 10 10 10 10 15 15 15 20 10 15 20 30 10 20
IB 30 30 30 30 40 20 20 30 30 30 30 40 20 10
B. Street Line Landscaped Areas: Every area along a lot line abutting a street shall be landscaped with at least the number of standard plant units set forth
in section 9-8A-6 of this article necessary to achieve the following required levels of opacity. Opacity levels are expressed in percentages, with zero
percent (0%) being completely transparent and one hundred percent (100%) being completely opaque. Every lot created in an R-1/2, R-3, R-4, or R-5
district after January 1, 1994, shall comply with the standards for local residential streets and shall have at least the equivalent of one shade tree for
each one hundred (100) linear feet or fraction thereof of side and rear lot lines and a minimum landscaped area width of three feet (3') along interior
side and rear lot lines.
Zoning District Arterial Street
Collector
Street
Local
Residential
Street Other Street
R-1/2 30 20 10 10
R-3 30 20 10 10
R-4 30 20 10 10
R-5 30 20 10 10
R-6 40 30 20 20
B-1 30 30 30 30
B-3 30 30 40 40
O-1 30 30 20 30
O-2 40 30 40 30
O-3 50 40 50 30
I 40 30 50 30
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 334/524
OS 20 15 10 20
IB 30 20 30 30
(Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-6: REQUIRED MINIMUM NUMBER OF STANDARD PLANT UNITS:
Every required landscaped area shall be landscaped with at least the number of standard plant units per one hundred feet (100') of required length
provided in the following table:
Required Opacity
(Percent)
Minimum Required
Number Of Plant
Units Per 100 Feet
Minimum Landscaped
Area Width (Feet)
10 1 3
15 1 5
20 1.5 10
30 2 10
40 3 10
50 4 10
60 5 10
70 6 10
80 7 20
100 8 25
Landscaped area widths greater than the minimum widths established in this section may be required to achieve the required minimum levels of opacity.
Such areas may vary in width around parking lots, buildings, driveways, and other authorized structures, and the minimum width requirements established
in this section are not intended to create ridged, straight lines of plantings throughout the required landscaped area. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-7: CALCULATION OF REQUIRED PLANT UNITS:
A. Lot Line Lengths: For each lot line that is more than one hundred feet (100') in length, the following rules shall apply for any fractions of one hundred
feet (100'):
1. Zero to fifty feet (0 - 50'): Add one-half (1/2) plant unit; and
2. Fifty one to ninety nine feet (51 - 99'): Add one plant unit.
Accordingly, a lot line of one hundred twenty five feet (125') in length will require the minimum applicable plant units listed in section 9-8A-6 of this
article times one and one-half (11/2). A lot line of one hundred seventy five feet (175') in length will require the minimum applicable plant units listed
in section 9-8A-6 of this article times two (2).
For lot lines less than one hundred feet (100') in length, the full number of applicable plant units listed in section 9-8A-6 of this article shall be
installed.
B. Plant Units: All fractional numbers of required plants shall be rounded to the next highest number. For example, if one and one-half (11/2) plant units are
required, and the applicant elects to use standard plant unit C, then the following plants are required:
1. Two (2) 3-inch caliper canopy trees (1 x 1.5 = 1.5, rounded up to 2); and
2. Eight (8) 3-foot high shrubs (5 x 1.5 = 7.5, rounded up to 8); and
3. Three 6-foot high potted evergreens (2 x 1.5 = 3). (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-8: CREDIT FOR EXISTING PLANT MATERIALS:
Existing trees that are to be preserved may be counted as part of a required standard plant unit; provided, however, that each such tree must be located
within a reasonable distance of the required landscaped area, must be clearly indicated for preservation on an approved landscape plan, must be an
acceptable species and an acceptable size, must be healthy, and must be approved by the board of trustees. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-9: GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL LANDSCAPING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 335/524
A. Containment Of Landscaped Areas: All landscaped areas located within a parking lot or adjacent to any public right of way shall be designed to properly
contain all landscaping materials and to prevent encroachment by vehicles through the use of curbs, ties, depressed construction, or similar
techniques.
B. Artificial Materials Prohibited: No artificial materials shall be used to satisfy the requirements of this article.
C. Location Of Landscaping Materials: Plant materials shall be selected, planted, and maintained so that such materials, at maturity, shall not interfere with
utility facilities or public rights of way and related facilities. Plant materials shall be permitted to grow to their natural shapes and sizes except only if
there is interference with utilities.
D. Maintenance Of Landscaping: All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition at all times. All dead, diseased, or damaged plant material shall be
replaced promptly with live plant material in good condition and in quantities and sizes so that the requirements of this article are met at all times.
Except for accessory uses expressly permitted to be located in required yards, all yards and open space, whether or not required by this article, shall
be kept free of accumulations of garbage, trash, refuse, debris, and other unsightly or nuisance creating materials. All landscaping shall be continually
maintained by the owner or other person responsible for maintenance of the premises, and all planting areas shall be kept free of weeds and debris.
Undeveloped areas shall be mowed and kept free of accumulations of garbage, trash, refuse, debris, and other unsightly or nuisance creating materials
until developed. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-10: PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES:
A. Parking Lot Screening: Except any parking lot owned or leased by the village, all parking lots shall be buffered and screened by a peripheral
landscaped area having a width of at least ten feet (10') or the width of the required yard, whichever is less.
The provisions of this subsection A shall apply to parking lots developed prior to the effective date of this zoning code only to the extent that such
parking lots have, on said effective date, unpaved area abutting them in which landscaping and screening may be installed.
B. Parking Garage Design: Every parking garage constructed after the effective date of this zoning code, other than garages accessory to single-family
dwellings or garages constructed or maintained by any governmental agency, shall comply with the following design standards:
1. The exterior walls of the garages shall be such as to shield all parked vehicles from view from the exterior of the garage; and
2. When a parking structure abuts property zoned in any single-family residential district, a continuous landscape screen of ornamental trees and
shrubs with a minimum height of ten feet (10') at the time of planting shall be provided along the entire length of each side of such parking structure
that faces such district. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-11: REFUSE CONTAINERS; OUTDOOR STORAGE:
A. Screening: All refuse containers and all areas of permitted outdoor storage shall be fully enclosed by an opaque fence, wall, or densely planted
evergreen hedge of a height sufficient to completely screen such containers or storage areas from view from adjoining properties and public or private
streets.
B. Location: No refuse containers or storage areas shall be located between any principal structure and either its front or corner side lot line.
C. Exemption: The requirements of subsection A of this section shall not apply to standard receptacles permitted for use by single-family dwellings. None
of the requirements of this section shall apply to receptacles placed and maintained for use by the general public to avoid littering.
D. Existing Refuse Containers And Storage Areas: All existing refuse containers or storage areas, except those exempted in subsection C of this section,
shall be screened in accordance with the standards of subsection A of this section on or before January 1, 2004. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-12: ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES:
Ground mounted antennas and antenna support structures, except such antennas and antenna support structures as are permitted pursuant to subsection
9-9-1C7 of this title, shall be buffered and screened by a perimeter landscaped area equal in width to the applicable required yard or ten feet (10'),
whichever is more, and consisting of a densely planted evergreen hedge of not less than six feet (6') in height, in combination with other landscaping
materials. Such screening shall be provided between any such ground mounted antenna or antenna support structure and each lot line of the property on
which such antenna or antenna support structure is located so as to provide the maximum reasonably achievable screening, as determined by the village
manager, of such antenna and antenna support structure from view from adjacent properties and public or private streets. See subsections 9-9-1C6 and
C7 of this title for additional requirements applicable to antennas and antenna support structures. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-8A-13: ROOFTOP MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT:
A. All Districts Other Than The Industrial District: In all zoning districts other than the industrial district, all mechanical equipment located on the roof of any
building, except for antennas, vent pipes, chimneys, and exhaust fans, shall be fully screened by a parapet wall or similar structure to a point not less
than twelve inches (12") higher than the highest point of such equipment. This requirement shall apply, without limitation, to a newly constructed
building, to all newly installed equipment whether on a new building or an existing building, and to any building to which significant changes to the
exterior of the building are made. The parapet wall or similar structure shall be made of the same materials as the principal facade of the building
except only if other materials are approved in advance by the village manager.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 336/524
B. Industrial District:
1. General Requirement: All mechanical equipment located on the roof of any building, other than antennas, vent pipes, chimneys, and exhaust fans,
shall either be located in such a position, or shall be fully screened, so that the equipment shall not be visible from any point located at the end of an
eighty foot (80') line drawn at a ninety degree (90°) angle in any direction from any exterior wall of the building at an elevation five feet (5') above the
grade at the base of the exterior wall at the point where the line is drawn.
2. Material, Color, And Texture Of Screening: The screening wall or other structure shall be constructed of: a) the same material as the principal facade
of the building, or b) material having the same color and texture as the principal facade of the building, or c) such other material as may be approved
in advance by the village manager. The finished exterior surface of the screening wall or other structure shall not include wood, fabric, chainlink, or
any similar material.
3. Portable Or Temporary Screening Prohibited: Portable, movable, and temporary screening walls and other structures are prohibited. The screening
wall or other structure shall be securely affixed to the building or the mechanical equipment being screened.
4. Applicability: The requirements of this subsection B shall apply, without limitation, to every building constructed after January 1, 2007; to all
equipment installed after January 1, 2007, whether on a new building or an existing building; and to any building to which significant changes to the
exterior of the building are made after January 1, 2007. The requirements of subsection A of this section shall apply to every building and all
equipment not governed by the requirements of this subsection B. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
ARTICLE B. EXTERIOR LIGHTING
9-8B-1: PURPOSES:
The regulations established in this article are designed and intended to prevent excessive spillover of light and glare from the zoning lot on which the light
source is located. The standards contained in this article are deemed to be the minimum standards necessary to prevent nuisance and adverse impacts
on the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-8B-2: EXEMPTION FOR VILLAGE FACILITIES:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to village owned and operated lighting and facilities or to street lighting. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-8B-3: STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO EXTERIOR LIGHTING:
All exterior lighting shall comply with the following standards:
A. Maximum Illumination At Property Lines If No Luminaire Cutoffs: When a luminaire has no cutoff, the maximum permitted illumination and luminaire
height shall be as follows:
Maximum
Foot-Candles Maximum Height
1. In all residential districts and for all residential uses regardless of district 0.20 10 feet
2. In all commercial districts 0.30 20 feet
B. Maximum Illumination At Property Lines If Luminaire Cutoff Greater Than Ninety Degrees: When a luminaire has a cutoff angle greater than ninety
degrees (90°), the maximum permitted illumination and luminaire height shall be as follows:
Maximum
Foot-Candles Maximum Height
1. In all residential districts and for all residential uses regardless of district 0.30 15 feet
2. In all nonresidential districts 0.50 35 feet
C. Maximum Illumination At Property Lines If Luminaire Cutoff Less Than Ninety Degrees: When a luminaire has a cutoff angle less than ninety degrees
(90°), the maximum permitted illumination and luminaire height shall be as follows:
Maximum
Foot-Candles Maximum Height
1. In all residential districts and for all residential uses regardless of district 0.50 20 feet
2. In all nonresidential districts 0.50 50 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 337/524
D. Maximum Illumination At Any Point Within Interior Of Property: The maximum permitted illumination at any time at any point within the property shall be
10.0 foot-candles.
E. Prevention Of Direct Glare: All exterior lighting shall be so arranged as to prevent direct glare of beams to any point off of the property.
F. Residential Recreational Facilities: Residential recreational facilities shall not be illuminated by lighting fixtures exceeding fifteen feet (15') in height.
(Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 9
ACCESSORY USES; TEMPORARY USES; HOME OCCUPATIONS
9-9-1: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
A. Authorization: Subject to the limitations of this section, accessory structures and uses are permitted in any zoning district in connection with any
principal use lawfully existing within such district.
B. Definition: An "accessory structure or use" is a structure or use that:
1. Is subordinate in extent and purpose to, and serves, a principal structure or use; and
2. Is customarily found as an incident to such principal structure or use; and
3. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of those occupying, working at, or being served by such principal structure or use; and
4. Except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this Zoning Code, is located on the same zoning lot as such principal structure or use;
and
5. Is under the same ownership and control as such principal structure or use.
C. Special Regulations Applicable To Particular Accessory Structures And Uses:
1. Storage:
a. General Regulations: Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this Zoning Code, outdoor storage shall not be allowed as an accessory use.
When so permitted, such storage shall be screened as required in chapter 8, article A of this title.
b. Garages: No garage shall exceed seven hundred twenty (720) square feet in gross floor area. No garage shall extend to a height taller than the
principal structure to which it is accessory or the otherwise permitted height, whichever is less. Not more than one detached garage shall be
permitted on any zoning lot.
c. Other Accessory Structures: No accessory storage structure other than a garage shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in gross floor
area if it is accessory to a residential use. Nor shall any such structure exceed ten percent (10%) either of the floor area or of the volume of the
principal structure if such structure is accessory to any other type of principal structure.
d. Seasonal Materials, Supplies, And Equipment: All seasonal maintenance materials, supplies, and equipment, including, without limitation, salt or
other snow melting material; snow removal equipment; landscaping materials, supplies, and equipment; and plows, blades, heavy trucks, and
similar equipment, shall be stored only in areas entirely outside the view of all public rights-of-way or in a location approved in writing in advance
by the Director of Building and Zoning.
2. Residential Recreational Facilities: Residential recreational facilities shall be limited to use by the occupants of the principal residential use and their
guests and shall not be illuminated by lighting fixtures exceeding fifteen feet (15') in height.
3. No Accessory Parking In Single-Family Residential Districts: Parking lots shall not be permitted as an accessory use in any single-family residential
district.
4. Parking Of Vehicles In All Residential Districts: In any residential district, no vehicle may be parked except in a fully enclosed structure unless that
vehicle complies with the standards set forth in this subsection C4. For purposes of this subsection C4, "parked" shall mean the standing of a
vehicle, regardless of whether the vehicle is occupied, other than when the vehicle is temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
a. Vehicle Restrictions: Except as provided in subsection C4b of this section, no vehicle may be parked in a residential district unless that vehicle
meets all of the following standards:
(1) Vehicle Classification: The vehicle shall be classified in, and shall have on proper display a sticker reflecting, one of the following current Illinois
vehicle registrations or equivalent or an equivalent registration issued by another state:
(A) Motorized pedal cycle,
(B) Motor driven cycle,
(C) Motorcycle,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 338/524
(D) Passenger car,
(E) Taxi,
(F) Livery,
(G) B registration plate,
(H) D registration plate,
(I) Trailer, or
(J) Recreational vehicle.
(2) Vehicle Weight: The vehicle shall not exceed a gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds. See subsection C4b of this section for
exceptions related to certain vehicles.
(3) Vehicle Height: No portion or element of the vehicle shall exceed a height of eight feet (8') from the ground to its highest point including, without
limitation, any cargo box or other permanently mounted equipment; provided, however, that ladder racks, warning lights, and antennas shall not
be included in the measurement of height. Height shall be measured with the vehicle's tires properly inflated. See subsection C4b of this section
for exceptions related to certain vehicles.
(4) Vehicle Length: The vehicle shall not exceed a length of twenty feet (20'). See subsection C4b of this section for exceptions related to certain
vehicles.
(5) Cargo Bed Standards: For every vehicle designed to carry cargo of any kind, the cargo bed shall be fixed, with permanently mounted bed
walls. All flatbed trucks, dump trucks, and stake bed trucks shall not be permitted at any time.
(6) Restriction On Commercial Identification: Not more than one vehicle with any exterior marking in excess of one square foot in area identifying
or advertising a commercial enterprise shall be stored in any parking area on any lot in a residential district, nor shall any such vehicle be stored
in any required front or corner side yard. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "storage" shall mean the parking of a vehicle for any
continuous twenty four (24) hour period.
b. Exceptions: The following vehicles shall not be subject to the restrictions set forth in subsection C4a of this section:
(1) Pickup Trucks And Sports Utility Vehicles: A vehicle commonly known as a pickup truck or sports utility vehicle whose principal use is for
conveyance of passengers and which vehicle conforms to all requirements of the Illinois vehicle code shall be exempt from height and length
restrictions set forth in subsections C4a(3) and C4a(4) of this section.
(2) Recreational Vehicles Including A Boat: A recreational vehicle including a boat that is less than thirty feet (30') in length, and eight feet (8') in
width, and eleven feet (11') in height may be stored anywhere on the lot except in any required front or side yard. A recreational vehicle including
a boat that is greater than thirty feet (30') in length, eight feet (8') in width, eleven feet (11') in height may be parked anywhere on a lot during the
period from May 1 through October 31 of any year, so long as it is not within any required front or side yard or within five feet (5') of any lot line
or any vehicular or pedestrian right of way. A recreational vehicle including a boat must be stored only on an asphaltic or cement pavement
surface.
(3) Oversized Livery Vehicles: An oversized livery vehicle, commonly known as a stretch limousine, that is used or intended to be used for the
transportation of persons for hire shall not be subject to the length restrictions set forth in subsection C4a(4) of this section.
(4) Service, Emergency, And Utility Vehicles: The following vehicles shall be exempt from the weight, height and length restrictions set forth in
subsections C4a(2), C4a(3), and C4a(4) of this section, but only while engaged in their customary business use: garbage trucks, school buses,
utility company vehicles, government owned vehicles, emergency vehicles conducting emergency operations, service trucks, landscaping
vehicles, vehicles servicing a construction site, delivery trucks, and moving vans (while loading or unloading).
(5) Temporary Authorizations: A vehicle for which a request of a Lake Zurich resident for parking authorization has been made on the same day,
and the Lake Zurich Police Department has authorized the parking of that vehicle. Such authorization shall be for one day only. The number of
authorizations from a particular address may not exceed ten (10) in any calendar year.
c. General Parking Restrictions:
(1) Surface: All vehicles shall be parked on an asphaltic or cement pavement surface.
(2) Permanent Location Prohibited: No vehicle shall have its wheels removed or be affixed to the ground so as to prevent its ready removal.
(3) Residential Use Prohibited: No vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes.
(4) Utility Hookups: No vehicle shall be connected to any public utility except for required servicing.
(5) Unsafe Conditions: No vehicle shall be parked so as to create a dangerous or unsafe condition. The ground under or surrounding the location
of the parked vehicle shall be free of noxious weeds, debris, and combustible material.
(6) Parking In Parking Lots: No commercial or recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored in a residential parking lot. No other vehicle shall be
stored in a residential parking lot. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "storage" shall mean the parking of a vehicle for any continuous
twenty four (24) hour period. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "commercial vehicle" shall mean any vehicle operated for the
transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for hire or not for hire, but not including a
commuter van, a vehicle used in a ride sharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreation vehicle not being used
commercially.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 339/524
(7) Location Of Parking In A Parking Area: No vehicle shall be parked in a parking area located in the required front and side yards unless on a
driveway.
d. Penalty:
(1) General Penalty Applies: The general penalties stated in this Zoning Code shall apply to any violations of any provisions of this subsection C4.
(2) Separate Offenses: A separate violation shall be deemed to have been committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
(3) Payment In Lieu Of Prosecution: Any person to whom a citation has been issued who is no longer in violation may avoid prosecution by making
payments to the Village pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014; amd.
Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
5. Storage Of Inoperable Vehicles: No vehicle incapable of being driven or used for the purpose or use for which it was designed, other than a vehicle
awaiting timely repair at an automotive repair shop, gasoline service station, or new or used car dealer, shall be stored in any parking lot or parking
area in the Village.
6. Antennas With Surface Areas Of Ten Square Feet Or Less: Antennas and antenna support structures having a combined surface area not greater
than ten (10) square feet, and no single dimension exceeding twelve feet (12'), shall be permitted as an accessory use.
7. Antennas, Other Than Amateur Radio Facilities, With Surface Areas Exceeding Ten Square Feet: Except for amateur radio facilities permitted
pursuant to subsection C8 of this section, antennas and antenna support structures having a combined surface area greater than ten (10) square
feet, or having any single dimension exceeding twelve feet (12'), shall be permitted as an accessory use only in compliance with the following
regulations:
a. Number Limited: No more than one such antenna and antenna support structure may be located on any zoning lot; provided, however, that one
such antenna and antenna support structure may be permitted for each use on a zoning lot in the B-2 or B-3 District up to a maximum of five (5)
such antennas and antenna support structures on such zoning lot. The limitations of this subsection C7a shall not apply to cable television
services in the industrial districts.
b. Height Limited: No such antenna or antenna support structure shall exceed twelve feet (12') in height unless such antenna and antenna support
structure is attached to a building pursuant to subsection C7c of this section.
c. Attachment To Buildings Limited: No such antenna or antenna support structure shall be attached to a principal or accessory structure unless all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) Size: The antenna and its support structure shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area or twelve feet (12') in any dimension.
(2) Height: The antenna and its support structure shall not extend more than eight feet (8') above the highest point of the building on which it is
mounted or exceed the maximum permissible building height, whichever is less.
(3) Visibility: The antenna and its support structure shall not be visible from any point located at the end of an eighty foot (80') line drawn at a
ninety degree (90°) angle in any direction from any exterior wall of the building at an elevation five feet (5') above the grade at the base of the
exterior wall at the point where the line is drawn.
(4) Mounting: The antenna and its support structure shall not be attached or mounted upon any building appurtenance, such as a chimney. The
antenna and its support structure shall not be mounted or attached to the front of any principal building or to the side of any building facing a
street, including any portion of the building roof facing any street. The antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind
force of eighty (80) miles per hour without the use of supporting guywires.
(5) Color: The antenna and its support structure shall be a color that blends with the roof or building side on which it is mounted.
(6) Grounding: The antenna and its support structure shall be bonded to a grounding rod.
(7) Other Standards: The antenna and its support structure shall satisfy such other design and construction standards as the Director of Building
and Zoning reasonably determines are necessary to ensure safe construction and maintenance of the antenna and its support structure.
d. Setback From Street: No such antenna or its support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the wall of the principal
building to which it is accessory that is nearest to such street.
e. Guywires Restricted: No guy or other support wires shall be used in connection with such antenna or its support structure except when used to
anchor the antenna or support structure to an existing building to which such antenna or support structure is attached.
f. Screening: See chapter 8 of this title for landscaping and screening requirements applicable to ground mounted antennas.
g. Site Plan Review: See chapter 20 of this title for site plan review requirements.
8. Amateur Radio Facilities With Surface Area Exceeding Ten Square Feet: Any antenna and antenna support structure having a combined surface
area greater than ten (10) square feet or having any single dimension exceeding twelve feet (12') that is capable of transmitting as well as receiving
signals and is licensed by the federal communications commission as an amateur radio facility must satisfy each of the following conditions:
a. Number Limited: No more than one such antenna support structure with a surface area greater than ten (10) square feet or any single dimension
exceeding twelve feet (12') may be located on any zoning lot.
b. Height Limited: No such antenna support structure shall, if ground mounted, exceed sixty five feet (65') in height or, if attached to a building
pursuant to subsection C8c of this section, the height therein specified.
c. Attachment To Buildings Limited: No such antenna or its support structure shall be attached to a principal or accessory structure unless all of the
following conditions are satisfied:
(1) Height: The antenna and its support structure shall not extend more than twenty feet (20') above the highest point of the building on which it is
mounted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 340/524
(2) Visibility: The antenna and its support structure shall not be visible from any point located at the end of an eighty foot (80') line drawn at a
ninety degree (90°) angle in any direction from any exterior wall of the building at an elevation five feet (5') above the grade at the base of the
exterior wall at the point where the line is drawn.
(3) Mounting: The antenna and its support structure shall not be attached to or mounted upon any building appurtenance, such as a chimney. The
antenna and its support structure shall not be mounted or attached to the front of any principal building or to the side of any building facing a
street, including any portion of the building roof facing any street. The antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind
force of eighty (80) miles per hour without the use of supporting guywires.
(4) Grounding: The antenna and its support structure shall be bonded to a grounding rod.
(5) Other Standards: The antenna support structure shall satisfy such other design and construction standards as the village manager reasonably
determines are necessary to ensure safe construction and maintenance of the antenna and its support structure.
d. Setback From Street: No such antenna or its support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the wall of the principal
building to which it is accessory that is nearest to such street.
e. Setbacks From Adjacent Buildings: No such antenna or its support structure shall be located in any required side yard or nearer than one-half (1/2)
the height of the antenna and support structure to any habitable building on any adjacent property.
f. Site Plan Review: See chapter 20 of this title for site plan review requirements.
9. Exterior Lighting: Any permitted accessory lighting fixtures shall be so designed, arranged, and operated as to prevent direct glare and direct rays of
light from being cast onto any adjacent public or private property or street and so as not to produce excessive sky reflected glare. See chapter 8,
article B of this title for additional standards applicable to exterior lighting.
10. Uses Subject To Special Restrictions: When the district regulations of this zoning code require compliance with any procedures or standards with
respect to a specific use, such use shall not be established as an accessory use except in compliance with those procedures and standards.
11. Playhouses: Recreational structures, such as playhouses and similar structures, shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in gross floor area,
and shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height.
D. Use, Bulk, Space, And Yard Regulations: Except as expressly provided otherwise in this section, every accessory structure and use shall comply with
the use, bulk, space, and yard regulations made applicable to them by the regulations of the district in which they are located.
E. Use Limitation: No accessory structure or use shall be constructed, established, or maintained on any lot prior to the substantial completion of
construction of the principal structure to which it is accessory. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-9-2: TEMPORARY USES:
A. Authorization: Subject to the limitations of this section, temporary uses as hereinafter specified are permitted in the zoning districts hereinafter specified.
All temporary uses shall be approved by the village manager except as otherwise specifically provided in subsection D of this section.
B. Definition: A "temporary use" is a use that:
1. Is established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time; and
2. Does not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
C. Village Approval Required; Special Standards For Approval And Revocation Of Approval:
1. Approval Required: Except as provided in subsection D1 of this section, no temporary use shall be established or maintained unless approved by the
village manager or, if specifically required in the regulations of this section, by the board of trustees. Permitted temporary uses of public owned or
leased buildings and property shall be exempt from this requirement.
2. Bases For Denial: Approval may be denied if the village manager determines that the applicant has failed to comply with the terms or conditions of
any previously issued zoning certificate for a temporary use or that the permanent use of the subject property fails to comply in all respects with the
provisions of all village ordinances regulating the development, use, and maintenance of the property. Approval shall be denied if the village manager
determines that the public health, safety, or welfare would be, or may reasonably be expected to be, impaired by the issuance thereof.
3. Conditions On Approval: Any approval may be conditioned on such special requirements as the village manager may determine are necessary to
achieve the purposes of this zoning code and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
4. Revocation Of Approval: Any approval shall be revoked if any of the standards and conditions imposed pursuant to this section are violated.
D. Permitted Temporary Uses: Subject to the specific regulations and time limits that follow and to the other applicable regulations of the district in which
the use is permitted, the following temporary uses and no others are permitted in the zoning districts herein specified:
1. House, apartment, garage, and yard sales in any residential district. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days,
and no more than two (2) such sales shall be conducted from the same residence in any twelve (12) month period.
2. Indoor and outdoor art, craft, rummage, and plant shows, exhibits, and sales. In any business, office, industrial, open space, or institutional building
district; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific review and approval of the village manager on the bases of the adequacy of
the parcel size, parking provisions, and traffic access and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. Every such sale shall be limited
to a period not to exceed three (3) days.
3. Farm product sales. In any business, office, or industrial district, but only in compliance with the following conditions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 341/524
a. Seller Produced Goods Only: No product may be exhibited or offered for sale except those products grown or produced by the person offering
them for sale.
b. Number And Duration Of Sales Limited: Not more than one such farm product sale shall be conducted on the same premises in any seven (7) day
period. Every such sale shall be limited to a period not to exceed eight (8) consecutive hours.
4. Christmas tree sales. In any business or industrial district; and, when conducted by a not for profit religious, philanthropic, or civic group or
organization on property owned or leased by such group or organization, in any office, open space, or institutional building district; provided,
however, any such use shall require the specific review and approval of the village manager on the bases of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking
provisions, and traffic access and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed sixty
(60) days. Display of Christmas trees need not comply with the yard requirements of this zoning code, except that no tree shall be displayed within
the sight triangle defined in subsection 4-2-1-3C of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
5. Contractors' offices and equipment sheds. In any district when accessory to a construction project. No such use shall contain any sleeping or
cooking accommodations. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed the duration of the active construction phase of such project or one
year, whichever is less, except with the prior approval of the village manager.
6. Real estate offices, including model units. In any district when accessory to a new development. No such use shall contain any sleeping or cooking
accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit. Such use shall be limited to the period of the active selling or leasing of units or space in
such development and to activities related to the development in which such office is located. No such office shall be used as the general office or
headquarters of any firm.
7. Carnivals and circuses. In any nonresidential district; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific review and approval of the
village manager on the bases of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, and traffic access and the absence of undue adverse impact on
other properties. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed ten (10) days. Such use need not comply with the yard requirements of this
zoning code. Such use need not comply with the maximum height requirements of this zoning code. Any concessionaire responsible for the
operation of any such carnival or circus shall:
a. Submit in advance of the event date a site layout displaying adequate ingress and egress routes for emergency vehicles and no dead end aisles;
and
b. Provide fire extinguishers of a type and at site locations approved by the village manager; and
c. Provide and service refuse containers in the number and locations required by the village manager; and
d. Provide for a thorough cleanup of the site upon termination of the event; and
e. Upon written notice from the village manager, terminate the use of any amusement device or structure found by the manager to pose a threat to
the public safety.
8. Tents. In any district, in connection with any permitted, accessory, temporary, or special use.
No tent shall be allowed to remain for a period of more than four (4) days. Unless waived in writing by the village manager, every tent shall comply
with the bulk, space, and yard requirements applicable to accessory uses pursuant to subsection 9-9-1D of this chapter.
9. Sidewalk sales. In the B-1, B-2, and B-3 districts but only with respect to:
a. The display and sale of plant materials during the period of March 1 through September 30 (but in no event for more than 90 successive days or
more than 180 days during any calendar year); or
b. An areawide sidewalk sale involving substantially all of the merchants on abutting, similarly zoned lots for a period not in excess of four (4)
successive days;
provided that the village manager determines that such sales will not unduly interfere with pedestrian traffic.
10. Outdoor display of retail merchandise. In the B-1, B-2, and B-3 districts, but only after the specific review and approval of the village manager on
the bases of public safety, interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and absence of undue adverse impacts. Such use shall not occur more
than four (4) times in any calendar year, and no such use shall continue for a period in excess of thirty (30) successive days.
11. Civic uses of public property. In any district, any civic use of any public buildings or property when authorized by the governmental agency owning
or controlling such property; provided that the village manager determines that such use will not result in any undue interference with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or any undue adverse effect on neighboring streets or property.
12. Others. In any district, any other temporary use consistent with the purposes of this zoning code and with the regulations of the district in which
such use would be located; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the board of trustees.
E. Bulk, Space, And Yard Regulations: Except as expressly provided otherwise in subsection D of this section, every temporary use shall comply with the
bulk, yard, and space regulations applicable in the district in which such temporary use is located.
F. Use Limitations:
1. General Limitations: Every temporary use shall comply with the limitations made applicable to specified temporary uses by subsection D of this
section. No temporary use shall be permitted in any district if it would have a significant negative impact, including aesthetic impact, on any adjacent
property or on the area, as a whole, in which it is located.
2. Hours And Days Of Operation: No temporary use shall be operated during any hours or on any days of the week except such as are designated by
the village manager on the basis of the nature of the temporary use and the character of the surrounding area.
3. Public Safety: No temporary use shall be permitted that will result in an undue on site or off site threat to public safety. No temporary use shall be
operated except in accordance with such restrictions and conditions as the village manager may require in connection with such certification.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 342/524
4. Traffic: No temporary use shall be permitted if additional vehicular traffic reasonably expected to be generated by such temporary use would have
undue detrimental effects on surrounding streets and uses.
5. Conflicts With Other Temporary Uses: No temporary use shall be permitted if such use would conflict with another previously authorized temporary
use.
6. Sign Limitations: Except as otherwise expressly authorized by the Lake Zurich municipal code, signs shall be located only on the same zoning lot as
the temporary use, be limited to no more than one per street frontage, be set back at least six feet (6') from the front lot line, be no larger than six (6)
square feet in area in any residential district or twenty (20) square feet in area in any other district, be of sturdy construction, and not be detrimental
to the character of the area. Such signs shall not be erected sooner than twenty four (24) hours before the commencement of the temporary use and
shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours following the termination of the temporary use.
7. Parking: Before approving any temporary use, the village manager or board of trustees, as applicable, shall make an assessment of the total number
of off street parking spaces that will be reasonably required in connection with the proposed temporary use, on the basis of the particular use, its
intensity, and the availability of other parking facilities in the area, and shall approve such temporary use only if such off street parking is provided.
No temporary use shall be authorized that would, in the opinion of the manager, unreasonably reduce the amount of off street parking spaces
available for use in connection with permanent uses located on the zoning lot in question.
8. Restoration: All premises and property shall be restored to a clean and good condition and to a condition at least equal to the condition present
immediately prior to establishment of the temporary use. All damage to any premises or property, whether public or private, shall be immediately
repaired by the applicant.
9. Additional Conditions: Every temporary use shall, in addition, comply with, and the village manager may impose, such other conditions as may
reasonably be necessary to achieve the purposes of this zoning code or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-
2014)
9-9-3: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A. Authorization: Subject to the limitations of this section, any home occupation that is customarily incidental to the principal use of a building as a dwelling
shall be permitted in any dwelling unit.
B. Definition: A "home occupation" is a business, profession, occupation, or trade that:
1. Is conducted for gain or support by a full time occupant of a dwelling unit; and
2. Is incidental and secondary to the use of such dwelling unit for dwelling purposes; and
3. Does not change the essential residential character of such dwelling unit.
C. Certificate Of Zoning Compliance Required: No home occupation shall be established or maintained unless a certificate of zoning compliance shall
have first been issued in accordance with the provisions of chapter 13 of this title.
D. Use Limitations:
1. Employee Limitations:
a. The entrepreneur of every home occupation shall be domiciled in the dwelling unit where such occupation is conducted.
b. No more than one employee who is not domiciled in the dwelling unit where a home occupation is conducted shall be present in connection with,
or otherwise participate in the operation of, a home occupation at any one time. For the purposes of this subsection D1b, the term employee shall
not include persons domiciled in the dwelling unit where such home occupation is conducted. This limitation on the number of employees shall not
apply to employees who do not work at the dwelling unit devoted to such home occupation.
2. Structural Limitations:
a. No alteration of any kind shall be made to the dwelling unit where a home occupation is conducted that would change its residential character as a
dwelling unit, including the enlargement of public utility services beyond that customarily required for residential use.
b. No separate entrance shall be provided in connection with the conduct of any home occupation.
3. Operational Limitations:
a. Every home occupation shall be conducted wholly within a principal dwelling unit or permitted accessory structure; provided, however, that this
subsection D3a shall not apply to a daycare home operated as a home occupation.
b. No more than a total of six hundred (600) square feet of floor area (exclusive of garage floor area devoted to permissible parking of vehicles used
in connection with the home occupation) of any dwelling unit or any permitted accessory structure shall be specially designed, arranged, or set
apart for the conduct of a home occupation; provided, however, that this subsection D3b shall not apply to a daycare home operated as a home
occupation.
c. No stock in trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises of any home occupation.
d. No routine attendance of patients, clients, subcontractors, or employees (except as provided in subsection D1b of this section) associated with any
home occupation shall be allowed at the premises of the home occupation except that attendance of up to eight (8) children at any one time may
be allowed at a daycare home operated as a home occupation and that the attendance of up to four (4) persons at any one time may be allowed
for the purpose of receiving private instruction in any subject or skill. "Routine attendance" means that the conduct of the home occupation
requires nondomiciled persons to visit the premises of the home occupation as part of the regular conduct of the occupation, without regard to the
number, frequency, or duration of such visits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 343/524
e. No mechanical, electrical, or other equipment that produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, emissions, odor, or
radiation outside the dwelling unit or any permitted accessory structure that is greater or more frequent than that typical of equipment used in
connection with residential occupancy shall be used in connection with any home occupation.
f. No outdoor storage shall be allowed in connection with any home occupation.
g. No refuse in excess of the amount allowable for regular residential pick up shall be generated by any home occupation.
h. Vehicles used in connection with any home occupation shall be subject to the requirements of subsection 9-9-1C4 of this chapter.
4. Signage And Visibility:
a. No sign shall advertise the presence or conduct of the home occupation.
b. No home occupation shall be in any manner visible or apparent from any public or private street.
5. Traffic Limitations: No home occupation shall generate more vehicular or pedestrian traffic than is typical of residences in the area.
6. Nuisance Causing Activities: In addition to the foregoing specific limitations, no home occupation shall cause or create any nuisance, or cause or
create any substantial or undue adverse impact on any adjacent property or the character of the area, or threaten the public health, safety or general
welfare, or be noxious, offensive, or hazardous.
7. Licensing Requirements: Every home occupation shall be subject to applicable business licensing and inspection requirements, and shall comply
with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including, without limitation, obtaining, maintaining, and complying with regulations
applicable to any required Federal, State, or local license or permit. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
Chapter 10
PARKING AND LOADING
9-10-1: OFF STREET PARKING:
A. Authorization: Subject to the limitations of this section and subsections 9-9-1C3, C4, and C5 of this title, off street parking is permitted as an accessory
use in all districts. Off street parking as a principal use is permitted only when expressly authorized by the regulations applicable to the district in
question. No person shall provide off street parking in excess of the requirements established in this section except in compliance with the provisions of
subsection G of this section.
B. General Requirements:
1. Applicability To Existing, New, And Expanded Uses:
a. General Applicability: Except as provided otherwise in this subsection B1, the provisions of this section shall apply to, and off street parking
spaces sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this section shall be provided for, all existing and new uses, in accordance with the provisions of
chapters 11 and 23 of this title.
b. Change In Existing Use: Whenever a use existing on the effective date of this zoning code is changed thereafter to a new use, parking facilities
shall be provided as required herein for such new use; provided, however, that when any such existing use was deficient in required parking
spaces on such effective date, such new use may be established with a deficiency in required parking spaces equal in number to not more than
such preexisting deficiency.
c. Increase In Use Intensity: Whenever the intensity of use of any structure or use is increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor area,
seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking spaces, parking spaces as required herein shall be provided
for such increase in intensity of use; provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the addition of dwelling units in any structure in the B-
2 central business district.
d. Exceptions:
(1) Minor Additions: Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection B1, no building or use lawfully existing on the effective date of this
zoning code, or any amendment to it establishing parking requirements with respect to such structure or use, shall be required to provide any
additional parking spaces pursuant to this subsection B1 unless and until the aggregate increase in the units of measurement by which the
parking requirement is calculated shall equal ten percent (10%) or more of the units of measurement required upon such effective date, in which
event parking spaces as required herein shall be provided for the total aggregate increase.
(2) Nonconforming Locations And Designs: Nothing in this subsection B1 shall be construed to prohibit the continued utilization of any parking
space as an accessory use to any structure or use for parking of a vehicle that may lawfully be parked in such space solely because such space
does not satisfy the location or design requirements of this zoning code, or any amendment to it, if such space was validly in use as an
accessory use to such structure or use on the effective date of this zoning code or such amendment.
2. Location Of Required Parking Spaces:
a. General Rule: Except as provided in subsections B2c and B2d of this section, parking spaces required by this section shall be located on the
same zoning lot as the use to which they are accessory.
b. In Residential Garage: At least two (2) of the parking spaces required by this section for each residential dwelling unit shall be located in an
enclosed garage.
c. Parking For Townhouses:
(1) Townhouses: At least one of the parking spaces required by this section for each townhouse shall be located in an enclosed garage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 344/524
(2) Multiple-Family Dwellings: Not more than two (2) parking spaces located in a garage, driveway, or other area reserved for the exclusive use of
the residents of an individual dwelling unit shall be counted toward the parking spaces required pursuant to subsection F2a(1) of this section for
multiple-family dwellings. Not more than two (2) spaces required by said subsection may, and at least one such space shall, be located in an
area or areas available for use in common by at least three (3) such individual units. Such areas may include parking spaces located in parking
areas or lots within the development in which such units are located, whether located on or off the lot on which such units are located; provided,
however, that no such required space shall be located farther than three hundred feet (300'), measured along an established pedestrian
circulation route, from the unit it is required to serve.
d. Deficiency Spaces: When proposed to eliminate a parking deficiency or when required because of a change in use or an increase in use intensity
pursuant to subsections B1b or B1c of this section, parking spaces may be located within any district adjacent to the district in which the principal
use in question is a permitted use, or within the same zoning district as, and within five hundred feet (500') of, the zoning lot on which the use to be
served is located; provided, however, that such remote parking spaces may be allowed only when such remote site is covenanted to remain as
parking for so long as said parking spaces are required to meet the standards of this code and only when such remote site is authorized by the
regulations of the district within which it is located.
C. Design And Maintenance: Every parking area, lot, and garage shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards and
requirements herein set forth:
1. Location On Lot: Off street parking spaces may be provided on surface areas or lots, underground, under a building, or in parking structures. Parking
lots, areas, and garages shall comply with the yard requirements made applicable to them by the regulations of the district in which they are located.
See subsection 9-9-1C4 of this title for additional regulations concerning the off street storage of vehicles in residential districts.
2. Landscaping: All parking lots and garages shall comply with the landscaping requirements set forth in chapter 8, article A of this title.
3. Design: Design standards for all parking lots and garages are set forth in title 10 of the Lake Zurich municipal code.
4. Surface: Every parking lot shall be constructed with a paved asphaltic or cement surface.
D. Use: No off street parking area, lot, or garage shall be used for any purpose other than the temporary storage of motor vehicles related to the premises.
No motor vehicle shall be so stored for longer than seventy two (72) hours or stored in violation of the provisions of subsections 9-9-1C4 and C5 of this
title. The storage of merchandise in or outside of any motor vehicle, and the sale or commercial repair of vehicles, are prohibited.
E. Land Banking Of Required Parking:
1. Land Banking Authorized: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the board of trustees may reduce the total number of off street parking
spaces required to be paved pursuant to subsection F of this section or the stall length and width dimension required pursuant to subsection C3 of
this section, subject to acceptance by the property owner of the conditions set forth in subsections E2 through E4 of this section. The board of
trustees may grant such reductions up to ten percent (10%) of the required numbers as part of a site plan review pursuant to chapter 20 of this title
and may grant such reductions to any extent by special use permit granted pursuant to chapter 19 of this title.
2. Termination Of Land Banking: The board of trustees shall have the right, in its sole and absolute discretion, to require the property owner or his or
her successor at any time to increase the stall length and width to the dimension required pursuant to subsection C3 of this section or to increase the
number of parking spaces provided to serve said development up to the maximum required pursuant to subsection F of this section for the property
in question as if no special use permit for land banking had been granted.
3. Alternate Plans Required: Every application for land banking of required parking spaces shall be accompanied by alternate detailed parking plans.
One plan shall show the full stall length and width required pursuant to subsection C3 of this section and the full number of parking spaces required
pursuant to subsection F of this section; the other plan shall show the reduced stall length and width or the reduced number of parking spaces or
both, as the case may be, proposed to be provided pursuant to the special use permit being sought and also shall show the landscaping treatment of
areas proposed to be reserved for future parking requirements. Both such plans shall show the location on the site of all parking areas, the exact
number of parking spaces to be provided, and complete details for: a) wheel stops, b) markings, c) curbing, d) surfacing, e) screening and
landscaping, f) lighting, g) signing, and h) access. The design plans for such parking areas shall be subject to the approval of the board of trustees.
4. Open Space Covenant: As a condition of approval of any land banking, the applicant shall file with the village manager the applicants' unconditional
agreement and covenant in form and substance satisfactory to the village attorney that areas reserved for future parking shall be maintained as
landscaped open space until and unless required to be used for off street parking pursuant to subsection E2 of this section or until such covenant is
released by the board of trustees. The ordinance approving land banking, together with such agreement and covenant, shall be recorded with the
recorder of deeds in Lake County, Illinois.
F. Required Spaces:
1. Computation Of Required Spaces:
a. Fractional Spaces: When determination of the number of required parking spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction
shall require one additional parking space.
b. Capacity Calculations: When parking spaces are required on the basis of capacity, capacity shall be determined based on the occupancy
standards established by the Lake Zurich building code.
c. Bench Seating: In stadia, auditoria, houses of worship, and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or
other similar seating facilities, each twenty two inches (22") of such seating facility shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining the
requirement for off street parking facilities under this zoning code.
d. Population Calculations: When parking spaces are required on the basis of the number of customers, students, or similar measure, the maximum
number for which the structure is designed shall govern, except that when the structure has no design capacity the maximum number present at
any one time shall govern. When parking spaces are required on the basis of the number of employees, the number of employees working during
the largest work shift shall govern.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 345/524
2. Specified Uses: For the following uses, the following minimum number of off street parking spaces or stacking spaces shall be provided:
Use Required Spaces
a.
Residential:
(1) Multiple-family dwellings 11/2 for each efficiency dwelling unit plus 2 for each 1- or 2-bedroom dwelling unit plus 3 for
each 3 or more bedroom dwelling unit plus 1 for each 10 spaces required by this paragraph
(2) Single-family dwellings 3 for each dwelling unit
(3) Senior housing 1 for each dwelling unit plus 1 for each 2 employees
(4) Transitional service facilities 1 for each 3 beds plus 1 for each licensed practitioner, not including nurses and assistants,
plus 1 for each employee
b.
Retail trade:
(1) All retail trade uses not otherwise listed
in this subsection F2b
1 for each 200 square feet of net floor area, except 1 for each 400 square feet of net floor area
in the B-2 district
(2) Gasoline service stations, not including
minimarts
3 for each service bay plus 1 for each employee
(3) Car washes 5 stacking spaces leading to each washing rack or bay plus 1 parking space for each employee
(4) Eating and drinking places 1 for each 3 persons of design capacity, except 1 for each 5 persons of design capacity in the
B-2 district
(5) Drive-in facilities 8 stacking spaces leading to each drive-in window
c.
Finance, insurance, and real estate 1 for each 250 square feet of net floor area, except 1 for each 300 square feet of net floor area
in the B-2 district
d.
Business and professional offices: All uses
except as otherwise listed in this subsection
F, as follows:
Gross square footage: 1 for each 300 square feet of net floor area in the B-2 district
0 to 10,000 1 for each 250 square feet of net floor area
10,001 to 50,000 1 for each 275 square feet of net floor area
50,001 to 100,000 1 for each 300 square feet of net floor area
100,001 or more 1 for each 335 square feet of net floor area
e.
Services:
(1) All services not otherwise listed in this
subsection F2e
1 for each 250 square feet of net floor area, except 1 for each 300 square feet of net floor area
in the B-2 district
(2) Hotels and other lodging places 1 for each lodging room plus 1 for each 200 square feet of net floor area devoted to affiliated
meeting, lobby, recreational, and administrative uses plus parking for affiliated eating and
drinking places as herein specified
(3) Motion picture theaters and auditoriums
1 for each 3 persons of design capacity
(4) Bowling and billiard establishments 6 for each lane plus 2 for each table
(5) Physical fitness facilities 1 for each 3 persons of design capacity
(6) Membership sports and recreation
clubs and other commercial recreation
uses
1 for each 3 persons of design capacity
(7) Health service offices 1 for each 175 square feet of net floor area
(8) Nursing and personal care facilities 1 for each 3 beds plus 1 for each licensed practitioner, not including nurses and assistants,
plus 1 for each additional 2 employees
(9) Hospitals 1 for each 2 beds plus 1 for each active practitioner, not including nurses and assistants, plus 1
for each additional 2 employees
(10)
Elementary schools 1 for each 2 employees or 1 for each 15 students, whichever is greater
(11)
Secondary schools 1 for each 5 students or 1 for each 3 persons of auditorium design capacity, whichever is
greater, plus 1 for each employee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 346/524
(12)
Libraries and information centers 1 for each 250 square feet of public area plus 1 for each 3 persons of auditorium design
capacity
(13)
Vocational schools, except
correspondence schools
1 for each 200 square feet of net floor area
(14)
Child daycare services 1 for each employee plus 1 for each 6 children or 4 for each 1,000 square feet of net floor area,
whichever is greater
(15)
Museums and art galleries 1 for each 250 square feet of public area plus 1 for each 3 persons of auditorium design
capacity
(16)
Undertaking and funeral establishments
25 for first chapel or parlor plus 10 for each additional chapel or parlor
(17)
Public parks None for the first acre; plus 5 for each additional acre up to 5 acres; plus 5 for each acre in
excess of 5 acres; plus 1 for each 5 persons of design capacity of any structure or facility
located in the park
(18)
Golf courses, including all related
facilities
80 for each 9 holes related facilities
(19)
Membership organizations (including
churches)
1 for each 250 square feet of net floor area or 1 for each 4 persons or auditorium design
capacity, whichever is greater
(20)
Skating rinks 1 for each 300 square feet of net floor area
(21)
Cemeteries 1 for each acre of property
(22)
Swimming pools 1 for each 75 square feet of gross water surface area
f.
Industrial:
(1) Manufacturing uses 1 for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
(2) Truck terminals 1 for each employee plus 1 for each truck regularly stored on site plus 1 for each patron to
design capacity
(3) Warehouse uses 1 for each employee plus 1 for each 6,000 square feet of gross floor area
g.
Public administration: 1 for each 250 square feet of net floor area or 1 for each 3 persons of design capacity,
whichever is greater
h.
Uses conducted outside structures:
All uses except as otherwise specifically listed
1 space for each 1,500 square feet of outdoor area devoted to such use plus spaces as above
required for any aspect of the use conducted within a structure
3. Unspecified Uses: When the ultimate use of a structure is not known, the maximum number of spaces that might be required for any use to which
the structure might reasonably be devoted, as determined by the village manager, shall be provided.
G. Spaces In Excess Of Minimum Requirement: Any person may provide off street parking in excess of the requirements established in this section up to a
maximum of one space or ten percent (10%) of the minimum number of off street parking spaces required by this section, whichever is greater. No
person shall provide off street parking in excess of the standard set in this subsection except upon issuance of a special use permit as provided in
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-10-2: OFF STREET LOADING:
A. Authorization: Subject to the limitations of this section, off street loading is permitted as an accessory use in all districts other than single-family
residential districts. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any person to provide off street loading in excess of the requirements herein
established, but all such loading shall comply with the standards of this section.
B. General Requirements:
1. Applicability To Existing, New, And Expanded Uses:
a. General Applicability: Except as provided otherwise in this subsection B1, the provisions of this section shall apply to, and off street loading spaces
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of, this section shall be provided for all existing and new uses, in accordance with the provisions of chapters
11 and 23 of this title.
b. Change In Existing Use: Whenever a use existing on the effective date of this zoning code is changed thereafter to a new use, loading facilities
shall be provided as required herein for such new use; provided, however, that when any such existing use was deficient in required loading
spaces on such effective date, such new use may be established with a deficiency in required loading spaces equal in number to not more than
such preexisting deficiency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 347/524
c. Increase In Use Intensity: Whenever the intensity of use of any structure or use is increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor area,
seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for required loading spaces, loading spaces as required herein shall be provided;
provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the addition of dwelling units in any structure in the B-2 central business district.
d. Exception: Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection B1, no building or use lawfully existing on the effective date of this zoning
code, or any amendment to it establishing loading requirements with respect to such structure or use, shall be required to provide any additional
loading spaces pursuant to this subsection B1 unless and until the aggregate increase in units of measurement shall equal the full number of units
for which one additional loading space would be required pursuant to subsection D of this section, in which event loading spaces as required
herein shall be provided for the total aggregate increase.
2. Location Of Required Loading Spaces: Loading spaces shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use they serve.
C. Design And Maintenance: Every loading space must be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards and requirements of
this subsection.
1. Location On Lot: All loading spaces must be located and arranged to provide logical and convenient access thereto from the use they serve. All
loading spaces must comply with the yard requirements applicable to principal uses in the district in which they are located, except that open loading
spaces may be located in a required rear yard. No loading space may be located within fifty feet (50') of the nearest point of intersection of any two
(2) public or private streets. A loading space or dock may open onto any building facade facing a public right of way only pursuant to subsection C2
of this section.
2. Loading Spaces Or Docks Facing Public Streets: A loading space or dock may not open onto a building facade facing a public street except only
under the following circumstances:
a. Small Zoning Lots: One loading space or one loading dock may open onto a building facade facing a public street if all of the following conditions
are satisfied:
(1) The zoning lot on which the loading space or dock is located is classified in the I industrial district.
(2) The longest street frontage of the zoning lot is not more than four hundred feet (400') long.
(3) The loading space or dock meets the following setback requirements:
(A) On a zoning lot with a longest street frontage of two hundred feet (200') or less, the loading space or dock is set back at least one hundred
feet (100') from the lot line it faces.
(B) On a zoning lot with a longest street frontage greater than two hundred feet (200') (but not greater than 400 feet), the loading space or dock
is set back at least one hundred feet (100') from that lot line and fifty feet (50') behind the building line facing that street.
b. Large, Street Bounded Zoning Lots: Up to twelve (12) loading spaces or docks may open onto a building facade facing a public street if all of the
following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The zoning lot on which the loading spaces or docks are located is located in the I industrial district;
(2) That zoning lot is bounded on all sides by improved public streets.
(3) That zoning lot has a single lot line abutting a public street that is at least six hundred feet (600') long.
(4) Each loading space or dock on that zoning lot that faces a public street is set back at least one hundred feet (100') from the lot line it faces or a
distance not less than the closest point of the building to that lot line, whichever is farther.
(5) Each loading space or dock on that zoning lot that faces a public street is screened to not less than forty percent (40%) opacity by a continuous
planting of evergreen conifers and ornamental trees of not less than six feet (6') in height at the time of planting as well as bushes, shrubs, and
similar understory plantings.
3. Design:
a. Access To Street: Loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to provide access to a street or alley in a manner that will create the least
possible interference with through traffic movements. No curb cut across public property shall exceed thirty feet (30') in width without the written
approval of the village manager.
b. Maneuvering Space: Every loading space shall be provided with sufficient maneuvering space on the zoning lot where it is located to allow
vehicles to access and exit the space without having to make any backing movement on or into any public or private street.
c. Surface, Drainage; Markings: Every loading space shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or portland cement pavement providing an all weather,
durable, and dustless surface. Unless otherwise approved by the village engineer, such construction shall have a coefficient rating for structural
materials as derived from the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Design Manual", current edition. All loading space surfaces shall be graded
and drained to dispose of surface water accumulation by means of a positive stormwater drainage system connected to a public sewer system.
Individual stalls shall be clearly identified by markings four inches to six inches (4" - 6") in width.
d. Lighting: All lighting shall comply with the requirements of chapter 8, article B of this title. Fixed lighting shall be so arranged as to prevent direct
glare of beams onto any public or private property or streets by the use of luminaire cutoffs. All lighting shall be reduced to security levels at all
times of nonuse of the loading space.
e. Space Dimensions: Each loading space, excluding required maneuvering areas, shall have the following minimum dimensions, in feet:
(1) Tractor-trailer 12W x 50L x 15H
(2) Standard 10W x 25L x 14H
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 348/524
D. Required Spaces:
1. General Requirement: Loading spaces or receiving areas shall be provided in sufficient number, of sufficient size, and so located that no loading and
unloading operations infringe upon any street or sidewalk.
2. Minimum Requirements: For the following uses, the following minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided:
Use Required Spaces
a. Hotels 1 for each building with more than 10,000 square feet but less than 150,000 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 for each additional
200,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof
b. Multiplefamily
dwellings
1 for each building having in excess of 20,000 feet of gross floor area
c. Office
uses
1 for each building with more than 10,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 for each additional
100,000 square feet of gross floor area up to total of 500,000 square feet plus 1 for each additional 500,000 square feet of gross floor
area or any fraction thereof
d. Food
stores
1 for each building with 50,000 square feet of gross floor area or any fraction thereof plus 1 for each additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof
e. Other
uses
1 for each building for the first 150,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof plus 1 for each additional 200,000 square
feet of floor area or fraction thereof
Unless waived by the village manager, the first space required for any building having in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall be sized to
accommodate a tractor trailer and, unless otherwise required by the manager, all other spaces may be standard size. The decision of the manager shall be
based upon the anticipated needs of each particular building. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
Chapter 11
NONCONFORMITIES
9-11-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Purposes: This chapter regulates and limits the continued existence of uses, structures, and lots established prior to the effective date of this zoning
code that do not conform to the applicable regulations of this zoning code.
The continued existence of nonconformities is frequently inconsistent with the purposes for which the zoning districts of this zoning code are
established and thus the gradual elimination of such nonconformities is generally desirable.
B. General Score And Scheme Of Regulation: Separate restrictions are established for nonconforming uses of land and nonconforming uses of structures
designed for a permitted use, nonconforming uses of structures not designed for a permitted use, nonconforming structures, nonconforming lots of
record, and nonconforming signs. The degree of restriction made applicable to each category of nonconformity is generally related to the degree of
incompatibility with permitted uses and the amount of investment typically associated with nonconformities of that type.
In the cases of nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming uses in structures designed for a permitted use, and nonconforming signs, the degree of
incompatibility is frequently great, the investment is comparatively small, and the economic life is short. In these cases, elimination of the nonconformity
is required after a relatively short, but reasonable, amortization period. In the case of nonconforming uses in structures not designed for any conforming
use, the degree of incompatibility is also frequently great, but so too is the investment and economic life of the structure. In such cases, while eventual
elimination is required, a more extended period is allowed in which to amortize the investment.
C. Exception For Repairs Pursuant To Public Order: Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition
of a structure in accordance with an order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public safety and who declares such structure to be
unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition, provided such restoration is not otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this chapter
prohibiting the repair or restoration of partially damaged or destroyed structures or signs.
D. Nonconforming Accessory Uses And Structures: No use, structure, or sign that is accessory to a principal nonconforming use or structure shall continue
after such principal use or structure shall have been terminated, unless it shall thereafter conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it
is located.
E. Burden Of Owner To Establish Legality Of Nonconformity: The burden of establishing that any nonconformity is lawfully existing under the provisions of
this chapter shall be upon the owner of such nonconformity in all cases and not upon the village.
F. Inventory; Notice: The village manager shall inventory all existing nonconforming uses as soon as practicable. The village shall notify in writing the
owner or owners of record of each such nonconforming use, which notice shall state the village manager's determination that the particular use is
nonconforming and shall provide to such owner or owners a copy of the provisions of this chapter applicable to such nonconforming use.
G. Certificate Of Zoning Compliance For Legal Nonconformities: The owner of any nonconforming use, structure, lot, or sign may at any time apply to the
village manager for a certificate of zoning compliance to establish the legality of such nonconformity as of a specified date. Such application shall be
filed and processed pursuant to the provisions of chapter 13 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 349/524
If, upon reviewing an application for a certificate of zoning compliance for a nonconformity, the village manager shall determine that the use, structure,
lot, or sign in question was lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of the provision creating the nonconformity in question and remains lawfully
existing subject only to such nonconformity at the time of such application, and that any required affidavit is in order, then the village manager shall
issue a certificate of zoning compliance evidencing such facts and setting forth the nature and extent of the nonconformity and the date, if any, upon
which such nonconformity is required to be terminated; otherwise, the village manager shall decline to issue such certificate and shall declare such
building, structure, lot, or sign to be in violation of this zoning code. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-11-2: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND AND NONCONFORMING USES IN STRUCTURES DESIGNED FOR A PERMITTED
USE:
A. Authority To Continue: Except as provided in subsection I of this section, any lawfully existing nonconforming use not involving the use of a structure, or
involving only a structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land, or located in a structure designed for a use permitted in the district in which
it is located may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the regulations contained in subsections B through H of this section and
in subsections 9-11-1D, E, and F of this chapter.
For purposes of this section, any structure that is used in connection with a nonconforming use of land and that has an assessed value of less than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) on the effective date of this zoning code or any amendment hereto creating such nonconformity shall be considered to be
a structure accessory to a nonconforming use of land.
B. Ordinary Repair And Maintenance: Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, and installation or relocation of nonbearing walls,
nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, may be performed on any structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is
designed for a permitted use but devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be deemed to
authorize any violation of subsections C through I of this section.
C. Structural Alteration: No structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted in whole or in
part to a nonconforming use shall be structurally altered unless the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located. No such alteration shall create a new parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing
parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity of such structure. In determining whether a parking or loading nonconformity has been created or
increased, the provisions of subsections 9-10-1B1 and 9-10-2B1 of this title shall control.
D. Enlargement Of Structure: No structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted in whole or
in part to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or added to in any manner, including the interior addition of floor area, unless the use of such structure
shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. No such enlargement shall create any new parking, loading, bulk,
yard, or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity of such structure. In
determining whether a parking or loading nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of subsections 9-10-1B1 and 9-10-2B1 of this
title shall control.
E. Extension Of Use: A nonconforming use of land or of a structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use in a structure
designed for a permitted use shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged, or increased in intensity. Such prohibited activity shall include, without being
limited to:
1. An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, to any structure or land area other than that occupied by such nonconforming use on the
effective date of this zoning code or any amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming; and
2. An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, within a building or other structure to any portion of the floor area that was not occupied by
such nonconforming use on the effective date of this zoning code or any amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming; and
3. An extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the normal hours of operation on the effective date of this zoning code or any amendment
hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming.
F. Moving: No structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire
structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved. No
nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless
such use shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.
G. Change In Use: A nonconforming use of land not involving a structure or involving only a structure that is accessory to the nonconforming use of land or
a nonconforming use in a structure designed for a use permitted in the district in which it is located shall not be changed to any use other than a use
permitted in the zoning district in which the use or structure is located. When such a nonconforming use has been changed to a permitted use, it shall
not thereafter be changed back to any nonpermitted use. For purposes of this subsection, a use shall be deemed to have been so changed when an
existing nonconforming use shall have been terminated and a permitted use shall have commenced and continued for a period of five (5) days. Any
change of use in violation of this subsection shall be deemed to be an abandonment of the lawfully existing nonconforming use.
H. Damage Or Destruction: Any structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted in whole or
in part to a nonconforming use and that is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of
replacement of such structure new shall not be restored unless the use of such structure shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located and unless such restoration is accomplished without creating any new parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity
or increasing the degree of any parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity existing prior to such damage or destruction. In determining
whether a parking or loading nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of subsections 9-10-1B1 and 9-10-2B1 of this title shall
control.
When any such structure is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the control of the owner thereof to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or less
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 350/524
of the cost of replacement of the structure new, repair or restoration of such structure may be made and the nonconforming use may continue subject
to the regulations of this section; provided, however, that no repairs or restorations shall be made that would create any new parking, loading, bulk,
yard, or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity existing prior to such damage or
destruction, nor shall any repairs or restoration except in conformity with the applicable zoning district regulations be made unless a building permit is
obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by means within the control of the owner be repaired or restored except in accordance
with subsections B, C, and D of this section.
I. Termination Of Certain Uses:
1. Termination By Abandonment: When a nonconforming use of land not involving a structure or involving only a structure that is accessory to the
nonconforming use of land or when a nonconforming use of part or all of a structure that was designed for a use that is permitted in the zoning
district in which such structure is located is discontinued or abandoned for a period of three (3) consecutive months, regardless of any intent to
resume or not to abandon such use, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such land or
structure shall comply with the use regulations of the zoning district in which such land or structure is located.
Any period of such discontinuance caused by government action, strikes, material shortages, or acts of God, and without any contributing fault by the
nonconforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes of this subsection I1.
2. Termination By Amortization: Any nonconforming use of land not involving a structure or involving only a structure that is accessory to the
nonconforming use of land, or any nonconforming use in a structure located in any residential district and designed for a use permitted in that district,
that has not been terminated pursuant to any other provision of this zoning code shall be considered to have been terminated by amortization as of
December 31, 1999. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-11-3: NONCONFORMING USES IN STRUCTURES NOT DESIGNED FOR A PERMITTED USE:
A. Authority To Continue: Except as provided in subsection I of this section, any lawfully existing nonconforming use located in a structure not designed or
intended for any use permitted in the district in which it is located may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the regulations
contained in subsections B through H of this section and in subsections 9-11-1D, E, and F of this chapter.
B. Ordinary Repair And Maintenance: Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, and installation or relocation of nonbearing walls,
nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, may be performed on any structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not
designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such structure is located; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be
deemed to authorize any violation of subsections C through I of this section.
C. Structural Alteration: No structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district
in which such structure is located shall be structurally altered unless the entire structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located. No such alteration shall create a new parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or increase the
degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity of such structure. In determining whether a parking or loading
nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of subsections 9-10-1B1 and 9-10-2B1 of this title shall control.
D. Enlargement Of Structure: No structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the
district in which such structure is located shall be enlarged or added to in any manner, including the interior addition of floor area, unless the entire
structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. No such alteration shall create a new
parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity of such
structure. In determining whether a parking or loading nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of subsections 9-10-1B1 and 9-10-
2B1 of this title shall control.
E. Extension Of Use:
1. Prohibited Extensions: A nonconforming use in a structure not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such structure is
located shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged, or increased in intensity by:
a. An extension of such use to any structure or land area other than that occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this zoning
code or any amendment to it that causes such use to become nonconforming; or
b. An extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the normal hours of operation on the effective date of this zoning code or any
amendment to it that causes such use to become nonconforming.
2. Permitted Extensions: A nonconforming use in a structure not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such structure is
located may be extended throughout any part of such structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this zoning code or any amendment to it that
causes such use to become nonconforming; provided, however, that such extension shall not be allowed unless off street parking and loading
spaces required for such extension can be, and are, provided in accordance with the requirements and restrictions of sections 9-10-1 and 9-10-2 of
this title. No such extension shall be deemed to affect the duty to terminate such use pursuant to subsection I of this section.
F. Moving: No structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such
structure is located shall be moved, in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire
structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.
G. Change In Use: A nonconforming use in a structure not designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which such structure is located shall
not be changed to any use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which the structure is located or in a more restrictive zoning district. When
a nonconforming use has been changed to a permitted use of the subject or more restrictive zoning district, it shall not thereafter be changed to any
use other than a use permitted in the subject or more restrictive district. For purposes of this subsection, a use shall be deemed to have been so
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 351/524
changed when an existing nonconforming use shall have been terminated and a permitted use of the subject or more restrictive district shall have
commenced and continued for a period of five (5) days. Any change of use in violation of this subsection shall be deemed to be an abandonment of the
lawfully existing nonconforming use.
H. Damage Or Destruction: Any structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the
district in which such structure is located that is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of
replacement of such structure new shall not be restored unless such structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located and unless such restoration is accomplished without creating any new parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space
nonconformity or increasing the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity of such structure existing prior to such
damage or destruction. In determining whether a parking or loading nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of subsections 9-10-
1B1 and 9-10-2B1 of this title shall control. When any such structure is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the control of the owner thereof
to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or less of the cost of replacement of the structure new, repair or restoration of such structure may be made and the
nonconforming use may continue subject to the regulations of this section; provided, however, that no repairs or restorations shall be made that would
create any new parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity
of such structure existing prior to such damage or destruction nor shall any repairs or restoration except in conformity with the applicable zoning district
regulations be made unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial damage or
destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by means within the control of the owner be repaired or restored except in accordance
with subsections B, C, and D of this section.
I. Termination Of Certain Uses:
1. Termination By Abandonment: When a nonconforming use of a part or all of a structure that was not designed or intended for any use permitted in
the zoning district in which such structure is located is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, regardless of any intent
to resume or not to abandon such use, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such
structure shall comply with the use regulations of the district in which such structure is located.
Any period of such discontinuance caused by government actions, strikes, material shortages, or acts of God, and without any contributing fault by
the nonconforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes of this subsection I1.
2. Termination By Amortization: Any structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in
the district in which such structure is located that has not been terminated pursuant to any other provision of this zoning code shall be either
converted to a conforming use or shall be demolished and removed no later than the date provided in the following schedule. The regulation in this
subsection I2 shall not apply to residential uses in the B-2 central business district, but such residential uses shall comply with every other applicable
provision of this chapter.
Assessed Valuation On The
Effective Date Of This Zoning
Code Or Any Amendment Thereto
Creating Such Nonconformity
Conversion Or Removal
Within Following Stated
Period After Said Effective Date
a. Less than $5,000.00 5 years
b. $5,000.00 or more:
(1) Fireproof or noncombustible construction 25 years or 40 years from date of building permit, whichever is later
(2) Exterior masonry wall construction 20 years or 30 years from date of building permit, whichever is later
(3) Frame construction 10 years or 20 years from date of building permit, whichever is later
(Ord., 10-2004)
J. Exceptions For Renovation Of Certain Buildings In Residential Districts:
1. Purpose; Applicability To Qualified Buildings: The purpose of the exceptions stated in this subsection J is to encourage the preservation of old
buildings in the R-3, R-4, and R-5 single-family residential districts that, in the past, were put to uses no longer authorized in the zoning districts in
which they are classified and that are intended for residential use not incompatible with adjacent residential uses. This subsection applies to any
building that meets all of the following standards (a "qualified building"):
a. The building was initially constructed prior to January 1, 1900;
b. The building was designed and used for residential uses or as a boarding house, corporate retreat center, or similar quasi-residential use;
c. The building has been classified in the R-3, R-4, or R-5 single-family residential district continuously since January 1, 2009; and
d. The building is being renovated for a residential use in a manner so that the exterior appearance of the building after renovation is consistent with
its original character.
2. Exception From Structural Alteration Provisions Of Subsection C Of This Section: The structural alteration provisions in subsection C of this section
do not apply to the renovation of a qualified building so long as that building satisfies all of the standards set forth in subsection J5 of this section.
3. Exception From Termination Provisions Of Subsection H Of This Section: Subject to the next sentence of this subsection J3, the damage or
destruction provisions in subsection H of this section do not apply to a qualified building so long as that building satisfies all of the standards set forth
in subsection J5 of this section. Any qualified building that is damaged or destroyed by any means may be restored only: a) in a manner consistent
with the original character of the structure or b) in a manner that conforms to all of the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located,
including, without limitation, use, bulk, yard, and space regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 352/524
4. Exception From Termination Provisions Of Subsection I Of This Section: The termination provisions in subsection I of this section do not apply to a
qualified building so long as that building satisfies all of the standards set forth in subsection J5 of this section.
5. Required Standards: No exceptions stated in this subsection J may apply to any qualified building except only if all of the following standards are
met:
a. The qualified building must be renovated in a manner so that the exterior appearance of the building after renovation is consistent with its original
character.
b. The qualified building may be used only for a single-family dwelling, two-family dwellings, or multiple-family dwellings, and for no other use at any
time.
c. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit for every qualified building is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
The standards set forth in this subsection J5 may not be modified or varied in any manner, notwithstanding any provision of chapter 17 or 22 of this
title.
6. Board Of Trustees Approval Required; Conditions: In addition to any other process or approval required by this zoning code, no qualified building
may be structurally altered without the prior approval of the board of trustees by ordinance or resolution in a form suitable for recording against the
zoning lot on which the qualified building is located. The board of trustees may impose conditions on the approval of a structural alteration as it
deems appropriate to promote the purpose of this subsection J and to prevent an application of the provisions of this subsection J contrary to that
purpose.
7. Recording: The ordinance or resolution approved by the board of trustees pursuant to subsection J6 of this section must be recorded in the office of
the Lake County recorder of deeds against the zoning lot on which the qualified building is located prior to the issuance of any permit for work on the
qualified building authorized by the ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 2009-11-673, 11-16-2009)
9-11-4: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A. Authority To Continue: Any nonconforming structure that is devoted to a use that is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions in subsections B through D of this section and subsections 9-11-1D, E, and
F of this chapter.
B. Maintenance, Alterations, And Enlargement: Any nonconforming structure may be repaired, maintained, altered, or enlarged; provided, however, that no
such repair, maintenance, alteration, or enlargement shall either create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of the existing nonconformity of
all or any part of such structure.
For the purposes of this section, the horizontal extension of an exterior wall of an existing structure shall not be construed to increase the degree of an
existing nonconformity related to a required side yard or setback; provided, however, that no such horizontal extension shall be permitted within five
feet (5') of any side lot line.
C. Moving: No nonconforming structure shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot
unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.
D. Damage Or Destruction: Any nonconforming structure that is damaged or destroyed, by any means not within the control of the owner thereof, to any
extent, may be repaired or restored; provided, however, that no repair or restoration shall be made that would create any new nonconformity not
existing prior to such damage or destruction nor shall any repair or restoration except in conformity with the applicable district regulations be made
unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such damage or destruction and is diligently
pursued to completion.
In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by means within the control of the owner be repaired or restored except in accordance
with subsection B of this section. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-11-5: LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
In any zoning district, a legal nonconforming lot of record may be used for any use permitted in the district in which it is located if, but only if, the following
requirements are met:
A. Such lot must have a total lot area and must have a total lot width of at least sixty five percent (65%) of the lot area and lot width required in the district
in which said lot is located, as follows:
DISTRICTS1
R-1/2 R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6 B-1 B-2 B-3
Area (sq. ft.) 26,000 13,000 9,750 5,612 6,500 13,000 n/a 28,314
Width (ft.) 97.5 65 58.5 46 48.75 65 n/a 97.5
O-1 O-2 O-3 I OS IB LP
Area (sq. ft.) n/a 6,500 28,314 13,000 9,750 9,750 n/a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 353/524
Width (ft.) n/a 48.75 97.5 65 58.5 58.5 n/a
Note:
1. These figures represent 65 percent of the district requirement in every district except the R-5 district.
B. The development of such lot meets at least seventy five percent (75%) of the side yard and rear yard requirements of the district in which it is located,
as follows:
DISTRICTS
R-1/2 R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6
Side 11.25 7.5 7.5 7.51 5.25
Rear 37.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5
B-1 B-2 B-3
Side 7.5 n/a 11.25
Rear 18.75 n/a 22.5
O-1 O-2 O-3
Side 7.5 7.5 11.25
Rear 18.75 18.75 22.5
I OS IB LP
Side 15 7.5 7.5 n/a
Rear 18.75 18.75 18.75 n/a
Note:
1. The side yard standard shall be 5.25 feet in the R-5 district for lots less than 10,000 square feet developed prior to 1991.
C. The development of such lot meets all requirements of the district in which it is located, including, without limitation, floor area ratio, lot coverage, and
front yard requirements, except lot area and width requirements and side and rear yard requirements.
D. Such lot is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been a lot of record owned separately or individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when
the creation of a lot of such size, depth, and width at such location would not have been prohibited by any zoning or other ordinance or regulation and
that said lot has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time since such lot became
nonconforming by reason of this zoning code or any predecessor zoning or other ordinance or regulation. For purposes of this subsection, a lot shall
not be deemed to have been owned separately and individually unless the owner of such lot did not, directly or indirectly, have legal title to or enjoy the
beneficial interest in the lot or lots contiguous thereto at any relevant time. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
Chapter 12
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS AND BODIES
9-12-1: VILLAGE MANAGER:
A. General Powers: The village manager shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of this zoning code. In addition to the jurisdiction,
authority, and duties conferred on the manager by other provisions of state statutes and village codes and ordinances, the manager shall have all
powers necessary to such administration and enforcement and shall, in particular, have the jurisdiction, authority, and duties hereinafter set forth.
B. Rules; Regulations; Application Forms: The village manager, consistent with the express standards, purposes, and intent of this zoning code, shall
promulgate, adopt, and issue such procedural rules, regulations, and forms as are in the manager's opinion necessary to the effective administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this zoning code.
C. Staff Assistance To The Zoning Board Of Appeals And Plan Commission: The village manager, within budgets available for that purpose, shall make
staff and consulting assistance available to the zoning board of appeals and the plan commission, and the manager or his or her delegate shall in that
capacity:
1. Attend the meetings of each such body; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 354/524
2. Inform each such body of all facts and information at the manager's disposal with respect to any matter brought before each such body; and
3. Assist each such body by performing research and making recommendations on matters brought before each such body; and
4. Perform such other duties as may be assigned to the manager by this zoning code and by the rules of such bodies.
D. Records: The village manager shall maintain:
1. Permanent and current records of this zoning code, including all maps, amendments, special permits, planned development, exterior appearance,
and site plan approvals and denials, interpretations, and decisions rendered by the board of trustees, the zoning board of appeals, the plan
commission, the village attorney, and the manager, together with relevant background files and materials; and
2. A current file of all certificates of zoning compliance, and all notices of violations, discontinuances, terminations, or removals, issued by or entrusted
to the manager's office for such time as necessary to ensure continuous compliance with the provisions of this zoning code; and
3. A current file of all known nonconforming uses and signs in the village, by location and type of use.
E. Zoning Text; Zoning Map: The village manager shall prepare and have available for public sale:
1. The compiled text of this zoning code in book or pamphlet form, including all amendments thereto through the preceding December 31; and
2. The official zoning map, showing the zoning districts, divisions, and classifications in effect on the preceding December 31.
The manager, at all other times, shall maintain and have available for reproduction at least one up to date copy of both the zoning code text and the
zoning map, showing all amendments through the most recent meeting of the board of trustees for which official minutes have been approved.
F. Applications; Receipt, Processing, And Referral To Interested Parties And Agencies: The village manager shall receive all applications required to be
filed pursuant to this zoning code. After receipt of any such application, the manager shall see to its processing, including its prompt referral to and
retrieval from each official, department, board, or commission of the village, or other government, with any interest or duty with respect to such
application.
G. Investigation Of Applications: Whenever the plan commission, the zoning board of appeals, or the board of trustees shall so request, by general rule or
specific direction, the village manager shall conduct or cause to be conducted such surveys, investigations, and field studies and shall prepare or
cause to be prepared such reports, maps, photographs, charts and exhibits as shall be necessary and appropriate to the processing of any application
filed pursuant to this zoning code.
H. Zoning Certificates: Pursuant to the provisions of chapter 13 of this title, the village manager shall review all applications for certificates of zoning
compliance and shall approve or disapprove such applications and issue or refuse to issue such certificates based on compliance or noncompliance
with the provisions of this zoning code.
I. Interpretations: Pursuant to the provisions of chapter 15 of this title, the village manager shall issue a written interpretation of the meaning and
applicability of specific provisions of this zoning code. Any interpretation of this zoning code that may be rendered by the zoning board of appeals or the
manager shall be kept on file with the manager and shall be a public record of the village open to inspection by interested parties at reasonable times
and upon reasonable notice.
J. Extensions Of Time: The village manager, after written request, may for good cause shown and without any notice or hearing grant extensions of any
time limit imposed on an applicant or permittee by this zoning code or, unless the ordinance or resolution shall expressly provide otherwise, by any
ordinance or resolution of any body acting pursuant to this zoning code. The total period of time granted by such extension or extensions shall not
exceed the length of the original period.
K. Inspection And Enforcement: In furtherance of the enforcement of this zoning code, the village manager shall undertake such regular and continuing
programs of inspection of work approved and under way and of existing structures and uses as may be feasible and proper within the limits of staff and
budgeted funds; shall undertake such additional inspections as may be necessary to the performance of his or her duties hereunder; shall receive from
any person complaints alleging with particularity a violation of this zoning code; and when appropriate shall cause such investigations and inspections
as may be warranted by such complaints to be made. Upon finding the existence of any violation of this zoning code, the manager shall take or direct
all actions necessary and appropriate to abate and redress such violation. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-12-2: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. Creation; Membership:
1. Composition: The plan commission for the village of Lake Zurich is hereby established as the zoning board of appeals and the members of such
commission shall constitute the members of the zoning board of appeals under this zoning code. The length of term of each such member of the
zoning board of appeals shall be four (4) years, provided however that the initial appointment of the members and composition of the zoning board of
appeals shall be as follows: a seven (7) member board, with three (3) members initially appointed to two (2) year terms, and the other four (4)
members appointed to four (4) year terms, resulting in the expiration of the terms of office of either three (3) or four (4) members of the zoning board
of appeals every two (2) years. The members of the plan commission shall serve as members of the zoning board of appeals and perform all the
duties provided for by ordinance and law, in the same capacity and for the same term of office as they serve on the plan commission. The successor
to each member so appointed shall serve for a term of four (4) years. The entity comprising the plan commission, which will also serve as and fulfill
the duties of the zoning board of appeals, is hereby formally designated the "planning and zoning commission (PZC)" of the village of Lake Zurich.
All appointments to the planning and zoning commission of the village of Lake Zurich shall be made by the village president, subject to the approval
of the village board of trustees. One of the members so appointed shall be named as chairperson at the time of appointment. The village president,
subject to approval by the village board of trustees, shall have the power to remove, after a public hearing, any member of the zoning board of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 355/524
appeals (planning and zoning commission) for cause. Vacancies shall be filled as soon as possible for the unexpired term of any member whose
office has become vacant. In the event that the office of chairperson is vacant for any reason, the village president shall appoint at his/her option, any
one of the remaining members on the board, or any member who is appointed to fill such vacancy on the board as the new chairperson. Such
appointment shall be subject to the approval of the village board of trustees at its next scheduled meeting. All appointments of successors upon the
expiration of any term of any member shall be for a period of four (4) years and until a successor has been appointed and has qualified for office. A
member shall be eligible for reappointment. All members of the zoning board of appeals shall serve without compensation. Any chairperson, vice
chairperson, alternate, and/or staff secretary appointed or designated to serve on the zoning board of appeals, shall serve in the identical capacity for
the plan commission as a member of the planning and zoning commission.
2. Alternate Member Of Zoning Board Of Appeals: In addition to the seven (7) members of the plan commission appointed by the president, subject to
the approval of the board of trustees, the president can also appoint one additional member to the zoning board of appeals who shall be an alternate
member of the zoning board of appeals on the planning and zoning commission. Such alternate shall be an ex officio member of the zoning board of
appeals without power to vote when all seven (7) members of the planning and zoning commission are in attendance at a particular meeting, but with
full power to participate in all discussions before the planning and zoning commission. If any member of the planning and zoning commission is
absent at any meeting of the planning and zoning commission, the alternate zoning board of appeals member shall have the power to vote on all
matters before the planning and zoning commission at such meeting, and to participate in such meeting as fully as if he or she was a full time
member of such commission, including being counted for purposes of determining a quorum. It is the intent of this provision that the alternate zoning
board of appeals member shall be appointed to eliminate the problems involved with reaching decisions on matters before the planning and zoning
commission on issues before the zoning board of appeals because of absences occurring during meetings from time to time. The term of the
alternate member of the planning and zoning commission (as zoning board of appeals member) shall be for a period of three (3) years from the date
of such member's appointment, or such lesser term as may be established by the village president in making the appointment of such alternate
zoning board of appeals member. (Ord. 2015-4-060, 4-20-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
B. Chairperson And Vice Chairperson: The president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall name one member of the zoning board of
appeals as chairperson, to preside at all meetings and hearings and to fulfill the customary functions of that office, and another member as vice
chairperson. The chairperson and vice chairperson may administer oaths. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson, or, in the absence of
the vice chairperson, a temporary chairperson elected by the board of appeals shall act as chairperson and shall have all the powers of the
chairperson. The vice chairperson shall have, in addition, such other powers and duties as may from time to time be provided by the rules of the zoning
board of appeals.
C. Staff Secretary; Minutes, Public Records: The village manager shall designate a staff secretary of the zoning board of appeals, who shall attend all of its
proceedings. The staff secretary shall provide for the keeping of minutes of the proceedings of the zoning board of appeals, showing the vote of each
member upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall maintain permanent records of all zoning board of appeals
meetings, hearings, and proceedings and all correspondence of the zoning board of appeals. The staff secretary shall provide for keeping a file of all
records of the zoning board of appeals, and such records shall, except to the extent provided by the Illinois freedom of information act, be public
records open to inspection.
D. Quorum And Necessary Vote: No business shall be transacted by the zoning board of appeals without a quorum, consisting of four (4) members, being
present. The concurring vote of at least four (4) members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary on any motion to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed to it; to decide in favor of the applicant any application made; or to recommend any variation from the
provisions of this zoning code. Any lesser vote on any such motion, even if a majority of those voting, shall be considered a final decision denying or
recommending denial of the appeal, application, or variation. If less than a quorum is present, the hearing may be adjourned from time to time as
provided in the Illinois open meetings act. The staff secretary shall in writing notify all members of the zoning board of appeals of the date of the
adjourned hearing and shall also notify such other interested parties as may be designated in the vote of adjournment.
E. Absent Members: No member absent from any portion of a proceeding shall be qualified to vote upon the matter heard unless that member shall first
certify on the record that he or she has reviewed the entire record of any such portion of the proceeding during which he or she was absent and has
fully informed himself or herself of the essential facts and issues of the matter being heard so as to be able to cast an informed and independent vote.
F. Meetings; Hearings; Procedures: Regular meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson or as provided by rule of
the zoning board of appeals. Special meetings shall be called at the request of the chairperson or of any two (2) members of the zoning board of
appeals or of the board of trustees. All meetings, hearings, and deliberations of the zoning board of appeals shall be open to the public except when
closed pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois open meetings act. All testimony at any hearing of the zoning board of appeals shall be given under
oath.
The zoning board of appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its business not inconsistent with this zoning code and the
statutes of the state of Illinois. Such rules shall be filed with the staff secretary of the zoning board of appeals and with the village clerk. Any rule so
adopted that relates solely to the conduct of the zoning board of appeals' hearing and that is not mandated by this zoning code or the statutes of the
state of Illinois, may be waived by the chairperson upon good cause being shown. (Ord., 10-2004)
G. Record: The minutes of the staff secretary; all applications, requests, exhibits, and papers filed in any proceeding before the zoning board of appeals;
and the decision of the zoning board of appeals shall constitute the record. (Ord. 2015-3-050, 3-2-2015)
H. Decisions: Every recommendation or decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be by written resolution which shall include findings of fact; shall
refer to all the evidence in the record and to the exhibits, plans or specifications upon which such recommendation or decision is based; shall specify
the reason or reasons for such recommendation or decision; shall contain a conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact setting forth the
specific relief granted or denying relief or setting forth the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals; and shall expressly set forth any limitations
or conditions imposed on any relief granted or recommended or work or use authorized.
The zoning board of appeals may take final action on any recommendation or decision pertaining to an application pending before it prior to the
preparation of a written resolution, but in such event it shall, before taking such action, first state its findings and conclusions as above required at a
meeting open to the public. The zoning board of appeals' recommendation or decision shall be deemed made as of the date of the taking of such final
action. The written resolution incorporating such findings and conclusions shall be presented and approved at the next regular meeting of the zoning
board of appeals open to the public.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 356/524
In any case where this zoning code provides that the failure of the zoning board of appeals to act within a fixed period shall be deemed to be a denial of
or recommendation of denial of an application, such failure shall, notwithstanding the absence of required findings and conclusions, be considered to
be a decision of the zoning board of appeals rendered on the day following the expiration of such fixed period.
The decisions of the zoning board of appeals on appeals made pursuant to chapter 16 of this title shall in all instances be considered final
administrative determinations and shall be subject to appeal in accordance with the Illinois administrative review act.
I. Conflicts: No member of the zoning board of appeals shall participate in the hearing or disposition of any matter in which that member has an interest as
such term is defined in the Lake Zurich municipal code. Any conflict of interest prohibited by the Lake Zurich municipal code or state law shall disqualify
a member.
J. Appeals: An appeal from any final decision of the zoning board of appeals may be taken in the manner provided in article III of the Illinois code of civil
procedure pertaining to administrative review.
K. Jurisdiction And Authority: The zoning board of appeals shall have the following jurisdiction and authority:
1. Subject to the provisions of chapter 16 of this title, to hear and decide appeals from, and to review orders, decisions, or determinations made by the
village manager and to that end have the powers of the village manager with respect to such order, decision, or determination.
2. Subject to the provisions and standards of chapter 17 of this title, to hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the board of trustees on
applications for variations from the requirements of this zoning code.
3. Subject to the provisions and standards of chapter 18 of this title, to initiate changes and amendments to this zoning code.
4. After reasonable written request, to make its special knowledge and expertise available to any official, department, board, or commission of the
village, county, state, or federal governments to aid them in the performance of their respective duties relating to zoning and its administration in the
village.
5. In furtherance of the above jurisdiction and authority, to make such investigations, maps, reports, and recommendations in connection therewith,
relating to zoning and its administration in the village as seem desirable to it; provided, however, that the expenditures of the zoning board of appeals
shall not exceed the amount appropriated therefor. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-12-3: PLAN COMMISSION:
A. Creation; Membership:
1. Composition: The plan commission is hereby created for the village of Lake Zurich and is authorized to assume that authority and to perform those
responsibilities established by Illinois law for a non-home rule plan commission. To minimize the number of persons needed to staff the plan
commission and the zoning board of appeals of the village of Lake Zurich, the resources needed for the board, the meetings needed and due to the
related responsibilities of the zoning board of appeals of the village of Lake Zurich, the same persons who are appointed to and serve on the plan
commission of the village of Lake Zurich, shall also be appointed to and serve as the members of the zoning board of appeals. The plan commission
shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. All members shall be residents
of the village of Lake Zurich. The length of term of each such member of the plan commission shall be four (4) years, provided however that the initial
appointment of the members and composition of the plan commission shall be as follows: a seven (7) member board, with three (3) members initially
appointed to two (2) year terms, and the other four (4) members appointed to four (4) year terms, resulting in the expiration of the terms of office of
either three (3) or four (4) members of the plan commission every two (2) years. The members of the plan commission shall also serve as members
of the zoning board of appeals and perform all the duties provided for by ordinance and law, in the same capacity and for the same term of office as
they serve on the plan commission. The successor to each member so appointed shall serve for a term of four (4) years. The entity comprising the
plan commission, which will also serve as and fulfill the duties of the zoning board of appeals, is hereby formally designated the "planning and zoning
commission (PZC)" of the village of Lake Zurich. A vacancy that may occur shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term by appointment of the
president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. All appointments of successors upon the expiration of any term of any member shall
be for a period of four (4) years and until a successor has been appointed and has qualified for office. A member shall be eligible for reappointment.
All members of the plan commission shall serve without compensation. Any chairperson, vice chairperson, alternate, and/or staff secretary appointed
or designated to serve on the plan commission, shall serve in the identical capacity for the zoning board of appeals.
2. Alternate Member Of Planning And Zoning Commission: In addition to the seven (7) members of the plan commission serving on the planning and
zoning commission appointed by the president, subject to the approval of the board of trustees, the president can also appoint one additional
member to the plan commission who shall be an alternate member of the plan commission on the planning and zoning commission. Such alternate
shall be an ex officio member of the plan commission on the planning and zoning commission without power to vote when all seven (7) members of
the planning and zoning commission are in attendance at a particular meeting, but with full power to participate in all discussions before the plan
commission. If any member of the planning and zoning commission is absent at any meeting of the planning and zoning commission, the alternate
plan commission member shall have the power to vote on all matters before the plan commission at such meeting, and to participate in such meeting
as fully as if he or she was a full time member of such commission, including being counted for purposes of determining a quorum. It is the intent of
this provision that the alternate plan commission member shall be appointed to eliminate the problems involved with reaching decisions on matters
before the plan commission because of absences occurring during meetings from time to time. The term of the alternate member of the planning and
zoning commission (as plan commissioner) shall be for a period of three (3) years from the date of such member's appointment, or such lesser term
as may be established by the village president in making the appointment of such alternate member of the planning and zoning commission. (Ord.
2015-4-060, 4-20-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
B. Chairperson And Vice Chairperson: The village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall name one member of the plan
commission as chairperson, to preside at all meetings and hearings and to fulfill the customary functions of that office, and another member as vice
chairperson. The chairperson and vice chairperson may administer oaths. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson or, in the absence of
the vice chairperson, a temporary chairperson elected by the plan commission, shall act as chairperson and shall have all the powers of the
chairperson. The vice chairperson shall have such other powers and duties as may from time to time be provided by the rules of the plan commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 357/524
C. Staff Secretary; Minutes; Public Records: The village manager shall designate a staff secretary of the plan commission, who shall attend all its
proceedings. The staff secretary shall provide for the keeping of minutes of the proceedings of the plan commission, showing the vote of each member
upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall maintain permanent records of all commission meetings, hearings,
and proceedings and all correspondence of the plan commission. The staff secretary shall provide for keeping a file of all records of the plan
commission, and such records shall, except to the extent provided by the Illinois freedom of information act, be public records open to inspection. (Ord.,
10-2004)
D. Quorum And Necessary Vote: No business shall be transacted by the plan commission without a quorum, consisting of four (4) members, being
present. The concurring vote of a majority of the plan commission, consisting of at least four (4) members, shall be necessary on any motion to
recommend approval of any matter or any application. Any lesser vote on any such motion, even if a majority of those voting, shall be considered a
final decision to recommend denial of such matter or application. If less than a quorum is present, the hearing may be adjourned from time to time as
provided in the Illinois open meetings act. The staff secretary shall in writing notify all members of the date of the adjourned hearing and shall also
notify such other interested parties as may be designated in the vote of adjournment. (Ord. 2015-4-060, 4-20-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
E. Absent Members: No member absent from any portion of a hearing shall be qualified to vote upon the matter heard unless that member shall first certify
on the record that he or she has reviewed the entire record of any such portion of the hearing during which he or she was absent and has fully informed
himself or herself of the essential facts and issues of the matter being heard so as to be able to cast an informed and independent vote.
F. Meetings; Hearings; Procedures: Regular meetings of the plan commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson or as provided by rule of the plan
commission. Special meetings shall be called at the request of the chairperson or of any three (3) members of the plan commission or of the board of
trustees.
All meetings and hearings of the plan commission shall be open to the public except when closed pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois open
meetings act.
All testimony at any hearing of the plan commission shall be given under oath.
The plan commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure governing it and regulating its business as it, from time to time, deems proper and
necessary. The adoption, amendment, or revision of such rules shall be by a majority vote of all members of the plan commission. Every member of the
plan commission shall be furnished a copy of such proposed rules and any amendment or revision thereto at least ten (10) days before consideration
for adoption. Such rules shall be filed with the staff secretary of the plan commission and with the village clerk. Any rule so adopted that relates solely
to the conduct of the plan commission's meeting or hearings and that is not mandated by this zoning code or the statutes of the state of Illinois, may be
waived by the chairperson upon good cause being shown. (Ord., 10-2004)
G. Record: The minutes of the staff secretary; all applications, requests, exhibits, and papers filed in any proceeding before the plan commission; and the
decision of the plan commission shall constitute the record. (Ord. 2015-3-050, 3-2-2015)
H. Decisions: Every recommendation or decision of the plan commission upon an application filed pursuant to this zoning code shall be by written
resolution which shall include findings of fact; shall refer to all the evidence in the record and to the exhibits, plans, or specifications upon which such
recommendation or decision is based; shall specify the reason or reasons for such recommendation or decision; and shall contain a conclusion or
statement separate from the findings of fact setting forth the recommendation or decision of the plan commission. Every resolution shall expressly set
forth any limitations or conditions recommended or imposed by the plan commission.
In any case where this zoning code provides that the failure of the plan commission to act within a fixed period shall be deemed a recommendation for
grant or denial of an application, such failure shall, notwithstanding the absence of required findings and conclusions, be considered to be a decision of
the plan commission rendered on the day following the expiration of such fixed period.
As to other matters brought before the plan commission, the plan commission shall prepare such report as it shall deem appropriate to the subject
matter.
I. Conflicts: No member of the plan commission shall participate in the hearing or disposition of any matter in which that member has an interest as that
term is defined in the Lake Zurich municipal code. Any conflict of interest on any particular issue prohibited by the Lake Zurich municipal code or state
law shall disqualify a member.
J. Jurisdiction And Authority: In addition to the jurisdiction conferred on it by the state statutes and other codes and ordinances of the village, the plan
commission shall have the following jurisdiction and authority:
1. Subject to the provisions of chapter 2 of this title, to prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan, including an official map, to the board of
trustees, which, upon its adoption by the board of trustees, shall be known as the "official comprehensive plan" of the village of Lake Zurich.
2. Subject to the provisions of chapter 2 of this title, to review, prepare, and recommend to the board of trustees changes in and amendments to the
official comprehensive plan, including the official map.
3. Subject to the provisions and standards of chapter 18 of this title, to initiate, hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the board of trustees on
applications for amendments to this zoning code.
4. Subject to the provisions and standards of chapter 19 of this title, to hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the board of trustees on
applications for special use permits.
5. Subject to the provisions and standards of chapter 20 of this title, to hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the board of trustees on
applications or site plan approval made to the board of trustees.
6. Subject to the provisions and standards of chapter 21 of this title, to review and offer its recommendations to the board of trustees on applications for
building permits requiring exterior appearance review.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 358/524
7. Subject to the provisions and standards of chapter 22 of this title, to review and offer its recommendations to the board of trustees on applications for
lake protection permits.
8. To aid and assist the board of trustees and the departments of the village in implementing general plans and in planning, developing, and completing
specific projects.
9. To review and report on any matters referred to it by the board of trustees or the village manager.
10. After reasonable written request, to make its special knowledge and expertise available to any official, department, board, or commission of the
village, county, state, or federal governments to aid them in the performance of their respective duties relating to the planning and development of
the village and its region.
11. In furtherance of the above jurisdiction and authority, to make such investigations, maps, reports, and recommendations in connection therewith
relating to the planning and development of the village as seem desirable to it; provided, however, that the expenditures of the plan commission shall
not exceed the amount appropriated therefor. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 13
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
9-13-1: AUTHORITY:
The village manager shall have authority to issue certificates of zoning compliance; provided, however, that no such certificate shall be issued except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the Lake Zurich municipal code governing development, building, and related matters.
(Ord., 10-2004)
9-13-2: PURPOSE:
For the purposes of this zoning code, the certificate of zoning compliance provides a procedure for the inspection of completed premises to ensure their
compliance with this zoning code and approved plans prior to commencement of the use or occupancy of such premises and for ensuring the compliance
of any home occupation before it is established or maintained. It is intended that the certificate of zoning compliance be issued in conjunction with a
certificate of occupancy pursuant to the Lake Zurich building code when such a certificate of occupancy is required thereby. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-13-3: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
Unless a certificate of zoning compliance shall have first been obtained certifying compliance with the provisions of this zoning code:
A. No Occupancy Or Use Of Structure: No structure, or addition thereto, constructed, reconstructed, remodeled, altered, or moved after the effective date
of this zoning code shall be occupied or used for any purpose; and
B. No Use Or Occupancy Of Vacant Land: No land vacant as of the effective date of this zoning code shall be used or occupied for any purpose, except
the raising of crops; and
C. No Change Of Use: Except for changes involving only substitution of occupants in existing dwelling units, no use or occupancy of any land or structure
shall be changed to any other use or occupancy, whether or not construction, remodeling, alteration, or moving is involved; and
D. No Home Occupation: No home occupation shall be established or maintained. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-13-4: PROCEDURE:
A. Application: Applications for certificates of zoning compliance shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title.
In any case where the structure or use involved has been constructed or established pursuant to any approval granted pursuant to this zoning code,
the application shall be accompanied by "as built" plans depicting the structure or use as built and bearing the certificate of a surveyor, engineer,
architect, land planner, or owner-designer, as may be appropriate, certifying that the structure or use as built conforms in all respects to the approval
granted.
B. Action On Application: Within ten (10) days after the receipt of a completed application, the village manager shall cause the subject structure or
premises to be inspected and shall take one of the following actions based on such inspection:
1. Work Complete And Proper: If all work has been completed and the structure and use thereof are in full and complete compliance with all applicable
provisions of this zoning code, other relevant codes and ordinances of the village, the applicant's plans as approved, and any conditions attached to
any approval issued pursuant to this zoning code, then the village manager shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance.
2. Work Incomplete Or Noncompliance: If, however, all work is not complete or is in any manner not in full compliance with all applicable requirements,
then the village manager shall deny the application and shall inform the applicant in writing of the specific deficiencies on which such denial is based,
citing the particular provisions of the codes and ordinances of the village, the particular items in the applicant's plans, or the applicable special
approval conditions with respect to which compliance is lacking.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 359/524
C. Contents Of Certificate: In addition to the matters required to be contained in a certificate of zoning compliance pursuant to other applicable provisions
of the Lake Zurich municipal code, each certificate of zoning compliance issued pursuant to this section shall state the specific use of the subject
property for which it is issued, shall identify the specific plans, if any, pursuant to which it is issued, and shall set forth any conditions imposed in
connection with any approval granted pursuant to this zoning code. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-13-5: TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE:
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 9-13-4B of this chapter, when construction, reconstruction, remodeling, or alteration of a structure does not
require the vacating of the structure, or when parts of the structure are finished and ready for occupancy before the completion of such construction,
reconstruction, remodeling, or alteration and are certified upon inspection to be safe for use or occupancy and to be in full compliance with all applicable
provisions of this zoning code, other relevant codes and ordinances of the village, the applicant's plans as approved, and any conditions attached to any
approvals issued pursuant to this zoning code with respect to such structure or its premises, a temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued
for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its date, which temporary certificate shall bear on its face, in bold type, a statement of its temporary nature;
provided, however, that no such temporary certificate shall be issued pursuant to this zoning code unless said structure also qualifies for a temporary
certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the Lake Zurich building code. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-13-6: CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE FOR EXISTING USES:
The village manager may issue a certificate of zoning compliance certifying the lawful existence and use of any existing structure or use in the same
manner, and subject to the same standards and limitations, as authorized by this chapter with respect to new structures and uses. Such certificate of
zoning compliance shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it with respect to any structure or use as of the date of its issue and remain
effective for that purpose for so long as neither the use or structure nor the applicable provisions of this zoning code are changed. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-13-7: VOID CERTIFICATES:
Any certificate of zoning compliance issued in violation of the provisions of this zoning code, whether intentionally, negligently, or innocently, shall be void
ab initio, and shall give rise to no rights whatsoever. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 14
ZONING APPLICATIONS AND HEARINGS
9-14-1: APPLICATIONS:
A. Place Of Filing: All applications filed pursuant to this zoning code shall be filed with the office of the village manager or with such other village official or
body as the village manager may by administrative order designate.
B. Form; Number; Scale: All applications filed pursuant to this zoning code shall be on forms supplied by the village and shall be filed in such number of
duplicate copies as the village manager may designate by administrative order. All plans filed as part of any application shall be at a scale sufficient to
permit a clear and precise understanding of the contents of said plans and the proposal being made and shall be folded to a size of eight and one-half
inches by fourteen inches (81/2" x 14").
C. Filing Deadlines:
1. Applications Requiring Public Hearings: An application requiring a public hearing will not be scheduled for such hearing unless filed, in proper form
and number and containing all required information, not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the fourth Friday preceding the requested hearing
date. An application so filed will be scheduled for hearing on the requested hearing date, or on the first available date thereafter open on the relevant
hearing agenda, on a first filed, first scheduled basis.
2. Applications Not Requiring Public Hearing: An application that does not require a public hearing shall be filed, in proper form and number and
containing all required information, at least twenty eight (28) days prior to the time when action on the application is requested. An application so filed
will be processed on a first filed, first processed basis.
3. Supplemental Data: Whenever supplemental data in connection with a previously filed application is required by the village or offered by the
applicant, it shall be submitted at least seven (7) days prior to the date on which it is to be considered at a hearing or a meeting or acted upon in
connection with such application. The filing of such data shall, in the discretion of the village manager and of the body hearing the application, be
cause to delay a requested or scheduled hearing date. (Ord., 10-2004)
D. Fees:
1. Fee Established; Lien: Every application filed pursuant to this zoning code shall be subject to an application and filing fee as established from time to
time by the board of trustees, to recover the costs incurred by the village in processing such application. The owner of the property subject of the
application and, if different, the applicant shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of said fee. By signing the application, the owner shall
be deemed to have agreed to pay such fee and to consent to the filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject property to ensure collection of any
such fee, plus the costs of collection, in the event such fee has not been properly paid as required with the filing of the application. Any lien filed
pursuant to this subsection may be foreclosed in the manner provided by statute for mortgages or mechanics' liens.
2. Recoverable Costs: The costs incurred by the village in processing an application shall be deemed to consist of the following items of direct and
indirect expense:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 360/524
a. Legal publication; and
b. Recording secretarial services; and
c. Document preparation and review; and
d. Professional and technical consultant services; and
e. Legal review, consultation, and advice; and
f. Copy reproduction; and
g. Document recordation; and
h. Inspection fees. (Ord. 2015-3-050, 3-2-2015)
3. Condition Of All Applications, Approvals, And Permits; Time Periods: No application filed pursuant to this zoning code shall be considered complete
unless and until all fees due pursuant to this subsection have been paid. Every approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to this zoning
code, whether or not expressly so conditioned, shall be deemed to be conditioned upon payment of fees as required by this subsection.
When this zoning code provides that the passage of time without decision or action shall be deemed an approval or a recommendation for approval,
all time periods shall be tolled during any period of nonpayment, but shall otherwise continue to run.
The failure to fully pay any such fee when due shall be grounds for refusing to process an application and for denying or revoking any permit or
approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to which the unpaid fee relates.
4. Waiver For Specified Public Bodies: The provisions of this subsection D may be waived by the board of trustees for fees applicable to any
application filed by any public body, or any agency deriving the majority of its revenues from taxes levied within the village, or any charitable or
eleemosynary organization.
E. Minimum Data Requirements: Every application submitted pursuant to this zoning code shall contain such information as is required by the village from
time to time. Application requirements shall be established by administrative order and shall be made available to all applicants in the office of the
village manager.
F. Special Data Requests: In addition to the data and information required pursuant to subsection E of this section, every applicant shall submit such other
and additional data, information, or documentation as the village manager or any board or commission before which its application is pending may
deem necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of the particular application.
G. Waiver Of Application Requirements: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the village manager shall have the authority to waive any
requirement set forth in subsection A, B, C, or E of this section when, in his or her judgment, such waiver is appropriate in light of the nature and extent
of the relief being sought or in light of special circumstances making compliance with those provisions either unnecessary or unduly burdensome;
provided, however, that no filing deadline shall be waived or adjusted by the village manager except on a showing by the applicant of a particular undue
hardship caused by such deadline and provided further, however, that any board or commission before which such application may come shall
continue to have the right to request additional information pursuant to subsection F of this section and to delay processing of such application until
such information is provided and available in accordance with the deadlines established in subsection C of this section. The village manager shall
provide, in writing, his or her reasons why any such requirement has been waived, and shall refer such writing to the appropriate boards and
commissions.
H. Concurrent Applications: When a proposed use or development requires more than one approval pursuant to this zoning code, applications for all such
approvals may be filed concurrently notwithstanding the fact that approval of one application may be a precondition to approval of other applications.
Such applications may, in the discretion of the official, officials, body, or bodies charged with review of such applications be processed together;
provided, however, that no application shall be approved unless all applications that are a precondition to its approval have first been approved.
I. Withdrawal Of Application: An applicant may withdraw an application at any time prior to a final decision having been rendered with respect thereto,
provided that the applicant shall have paid all applicable fees pursuant to subsection D of this section. Such withdrawal shall be without prejudice to the
applicant's right to refile such application, but any such refiling shall be treated as an entirely new filing and shall be subject to the procedures and fees
of this zoning code in the same manner as any other new application. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-14-2: SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS:
A. Second Applications Without New Grounds Barred: Whenever any application filed pursuant to this zoning code has been finally denied on its merits, a
second application seeking essentially the same relief, whether or not in the same form or on the same theory, shall not be brought unless in the
opinion of the officer, board, or commission before which it is brought there is substantial new evidence available or a mistake of law or fact significantly
affected the prior denial.
B. New Grounds To Be Stated: Any such second application shall include a detailed statement of the grounds justifying consideration of such application.
C. Summary Denial With Or Without Hearing: Any such second application may be denied by the village manager summarily, and without hearing, on a
finding that no grounds appear that warrant a new hearing. In any case where such application is set for hearing, the applicant shall be required to
establish grounds warranting reconsideration of the merits of its application prior to being allowed to offer any evidence on the merits. Unless such
grounds are established, the application may be summarily dismissed for such failure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 361/524
D. Exception: Whether or not new grounds are stated, any such second application filed more than two (2) years after the final denial of a prior application
shall be heard on the merits as though no prior application had been filed. The applicant, however, shall be required to place in the record all evidence
available concerning changes of conditions or new facts that have developed since the denial of the first application. In the absence of such evidence,
it shall be presumed that no new facts exist to support the new petition that did not exist at the time of the denial of the first application. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-14-3: PUBLIC HEARINGS AND MEETINGS:
A. Setting Hearing Or Meeting; Time Limitation: When the provisions of this zoning code require a public hearing or public meeting in connection with any
application filed pursuant to this zoning code, the body charged with conducting the hearing or meeting shall, upon receipt of a properly completed
application, fix a reasonable time and place for such hearing or meeting; provided, however, that such hearing or meeting shall be commenced no later
than sixty (60) days, and shall be concluded no later than one hundred twenty (120) days, following the submission of the subject application unless the
applicant shall agree to an extension or unless the hearing or meeting agenda of the body is completely committed during that time. (Ord., 10-2004)
B. Notice:
1. Responsibility For Giving Notice: The village manager shall cause notice to be given of public hearings and public meetings as provided in
subsections B3, B4a, B4b, and B5 of this section. The applicant shall cause notice to be given of public hearings as provided in subsection B4c of
this section, unless otherwise determined by the village.
2. Content Of Notice: All notices shall include: a) the date, time, and place of the hearing or meeting, b) a description of the matter to be heard or,
considered, c) a legal description of the subject property, and d) the address or particular location of the subject property.
3. Notice From Manager For All Hearings And Meetings: The village manager must give notice of every hearing or meeting as follows:
a. To Applicant, Owner: By mail or personal delivery to the applicant and, if a specific parcel is the subject of the application, to the owner of the
subject property.
b. Newspapers, Persons On File: By mail to any newspaper or person that shall have filed a written request, accompanied by an annual fee as
established from time to time by the village manager to cover postage and handling, for notice of all hearings or meetings held pursuant to this
zoning code. The written request shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year in which it is made unless a written request for renewal,
accompanied by the annual fee, is submitted prior to such date.
c. Within Village: By delivery to affected village boards, commissions, departments, officials, and consultants.
Notice by mail shall be mailed no fewer than seven (7) days in advance of the hearing or meeting date by regular United States mail.
4. Additional Notices For Amendments, Special Use Permits, And Variations: In addition to notice as required by subsection B3 of this section, notice of
every public hearing on an application for an amendment to this zoning code or to the zoning map, a special use permit, or a variation must be given
in the following manner:
a. Publication By Manager: The village manager must give notice by publication in a newspaper published in the village at least once no less than
fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days in advance of the hearing date.
b. Posting On Subject Property By Manager: If a specific parcel is the subject of application, then the village manager shall give notice by posting a
sign on the subject property. The sign must be at least six (6) square feet in area; must include the words "Zoning Application Pending" and a
telephone number to be called for additional information; and must be posted on the property, facing the street, at least fifteen (15) days prior to
the date set for a hearing on the application. The village manager shall remove the notice from the property only after the conclusion of the
hearing.
c. To Taxpayers By Applicant: If a specific parcel is the subject of the application, the applicant must give notice by mail or personal delivery to all
taxpayers of record of property within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject property, unless notified by the village as provided in the last two
(2) sentences of this subsection B4c. Notice as required by this paragraph shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30)
days in advance of the hearing. Not less than seven (7) days before commencement of the hearing, the applicant must provide to the village: 1) a
copy of the notice, 2) a list in Microsoft Excel or Word format of the names and addresses of every taxpayer of record to whom notice was given,
and 3) a sworn statement of the applicant that notice was given as required by this paragraph.
The village, in its discretion, may determine that it, rather than the applicant, will give notice as required by this subsection B4c. In that case, the
village shall advise the applicant in writing of that determination not less than thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the hearing.
5. Notice For Hearing On Official Comprehensive Plan: In addition to notice as required by subsection B3 of this section, the village manager shall
cause notice of every public hearing in connection with the adoption or amendment of the official comprehensive plan to be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in Lake County at least fifteen (15) days before such hearing. (Ord. 2009-05-631, 5-4-2009)
C. Referral To Village Commissions And Departments:
1. Manager To Refer Applications: The village manager, not later than the time set pursuant to subsection B of this section for giving public notice, shall
refer every application for which this zoning code requires a hearing before either the plan commission or the zoning board of appeals to all
appropriate village commissions and departments.
2. Review And Comments: Each village commission and department to which an application is referred pursuant to this subsection shall review such
application and submit its comments thereon to the staff secretary of the hearing body for presentation to that body at the hearing to be held on such
application. Whenever possible, such comments shall be submitted at least two (2) business days prior to the date set for the hearing and shall be
made available to any person on request prior to the hearing.
D. Conduct Of Hearings:
1. Rights Of All Persons: Any person may appear and testify at a public hearing, either in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney, and may
submit documentary evidence; provided, however, that the hearing body may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence. (Ord.,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 362/524
10-2004)
2. Rights Of Parties And Proximate Owners: Subject to the discretion of the hearing body, the applicant, any board, commission, department, or official
of the village, and any property owner entitled to written notice pursuant to subsection B4c of this section may be allowed, in addition to the rights
granted by subsection D1 of this section, any or all of the following rights: (Ord. 2009-05-631, 5-4-2009)
a. To present witnesses on their behalf.
b. To cross examine all witnesses testifying in opposition to their position.
c. To examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing.
d. To have subpoenas issued by the body in charge of the hearing as may be provided by state law for persons to appear at the hearings and for
examination of documents by the person requesting the subpoena either before or during the hearing, where such persons or documents are
shown to have a substantial evidentiary connection with:
(1) The property to which the request applies; or
(2) Facts that would support or negate the legal standards for granting the request.
e. To a continuance, on request, for the purpose of presenting evidence to rebut evidence introduced by any other person.
In determining whether to grant or withhold such rights, the discretion of the hearing body shall be governed by the goal of securing all information
and opinion relevant and material to its deliberations. Such rights shall not be granted, however, when undue and unwarranted delay would result,
or when to do so would tend to produce no new evidence to aid the hearing body in reaching its decision.
3. Adjournment Of Hearing: The body conducting the hearing may at any time, on its own motion or at the request of any person, adjourn the hearing
for a reasonable time and to a fixed date, time, and place, for the purpose of giving further notice, taking further evidence, gathering further
information, deliberating further, or for such other reason as the hearing body may find to be sufficient. The staff secretary of the hearing body shall
notify in writing all members of the hearing body, all parties to the hearing, and any other person designated on the vote of adjournment of the date,
time, and place of the adjourned hearing.
4. Testimony To Be Sworn: All testimony at any hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this zoning code shall be given under oath.
5. Right To Submit Written Statements: Any person may at any time prior to the commencement of a hearing hereunder, or during such hearing, or
within such time as may be allowed by the hearing body following such hearing, submit written statements in support of or in opposition to the
application being heard.
6. Board Or Commission Rules To Govern: All other matters pertaining to the conduct of hearings shall be governed by the provisions of this zoning
code pertaining to, and the rules promulgated by, the body conducting the hearing.
E. Prehearing And Premeeting Examination And Copying Of Application And Other Documents: At any time after the giving of notice as required in
subsection B of this section, and on reasonable request, any person may examine the application and, subject to the exceptions set forth in the Illinois
freedom of information act, all other documents on file with the office of the village manager pertaining to the matter subject to such notice. In addition,
any person shall be entitled to copies of such application and documents on reasonable request and payment of a fee as established from time to time
by the village manager to cover the cost of such copies. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 15
INTERPRETATIONS
9-15-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Authority: The village manager, subject to the procedures, standards, and limitations of this section, may render interpretations, including use
interpretations, of the provisions of this zoning code and of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to it.
B. Purpose: The interpretation authority established by this section is intended to recognize that the provisions of this zoning code cannot possibly address
every specific situation to which they may have to be applied. Many such situations, however, can be readily addressed by an interpretation of the
specific provisions of this zoning code in light of the general and specific purposes for which those provisions have been enacted. Because the
interpretation authority herein established is an administrative rather than a legislative authority, it is not intended to add to or change the essential
content of this zoning code but rather is intended only to allow authoritative application of that content to specific cases.
C. Parties Entitled To Seek Interpretations; No Advisory Opinions: Applications for interpretations may be filed by any person having an interest in the
circumstances giving rise to the need for an interpretation; provided, however, that interpretations shall not be sought by any person based solely on
hypothetical facts or where the interpretation would have no effect other than as an advisory opinion. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-15-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Application: Applications for interpretations of this zoning code shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title.
B. Action On Application: Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a properly completed application for interpretation, the village manager shall inform the
applicant in writing of his or her interpretation, stating the specific precedent, reasons, and analysis upon which the determination is based. The failure
of the manager to act within thirty (30) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the
application rendered on the day immediately after such thirty (30) day period.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 363/524
C. Appeal: Appeals from interpretations rendered by the village manager may be taken to the zoning board of appeals as provided in chapter 16 of this
title. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-15-3: STANDARDS FOR USE INTERPRETATIONS:
The following standards shall govern the village manager, and the zoning board of appeals on appeals from the manager, in issuing use interpretations:
A. No Interpretation In Residential Districts: No use interpretation shall be given with respect to the residential districts.
B. Defined Uses: Any use defined in chapter 24 of this title shall be interpreted as therein defined.
C. No Use Where Not Authorized: No use interpretation shall permit a use listed as a permitted use or a special permit use in any district to be established
in any district in which such use is not so listed.
D. Evidence Of Compliance: No use interpretation shall permit any use in any district unless evidence shall be presented that demonstrates that it will
comply with each use limitation established for that particular district.
E. Substantial Similarity: No use interpretation shall permit any use in a particular district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses permitted in
such district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses permitted or specially permitted in a more restrictive district.
F. Special Use Permit: If the proposed use is most similar to a use permitted only as a special use in the district in which it is proposed to be located, then
any use interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned on the issuance of a special use permit for such use pursuant to chapter 19 of this title.
G. Inconsistency With Purpose: No use interpretation shall permit the establishment of any use that would be inconsistent with the statement of purpose of
the district in question.
H. SIC: Subject to the foregoing conditions and limitations, in rendering use interpretations the village manager shall be guided by the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual" and the North American industry classification system. The numerical references in the SIC manual and the NAICS system are
for organizational purposes only, and those numerical references shall not be construed or applied to expand the lists of permitted or specially
permitted uses in any district. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-15-4: EFFECT OF FAVORABLE USE INTERPRETATION:
No use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall authorize the establishment of such use or
the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and
processing of applications for any permits and approvals that may be required by the codes and ordinances of the village including, but not limited to, a
special use permit, a building permit, a certificate of zoning compliance, subdivision approval, and site plan approval. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-15-5: LIMITATIONS ON FAVORABLE USE INTERPRETATIONS:
Subject to an extension of time granted by the village manager pursuant to subsection 9-12-1J of this title, no use interpretation finding a particular use to
be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months from the date of issue unless a building
permit is issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a certificate of zoning
compliance is obtained and a use commenced within that period.
A use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use
for which it was issued, and such permit shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate use interpretation has not been
issued. Such permit shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be
discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months or more. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 16
APPEALS
9-16-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Authority: The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from, and review orders, decisions, determinations, or the failure to act of, the
village manager acting pursuant to his or her authority and duties under this zoning code. To that end the zoning board of appeals shall have the same
powers and be subject to the same standards and limitations as the village manager with respect to any order, decision, or determination being
appealed.
B. Purpose: The appeal procedure is intended to avoid the need for resorting to legal action by establishing local procedures to review and correct
administrative errors. It is not intended, however, as a means to subvert the clear purposes, meanings, or intents of this zoning code or the rightful
authority of the village manager to enforce the requirements of this zoning code. To these ends, the reviewing body should give all proper deference to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 364/524
the spirit and intent embodied in the language of this zoning code and to the reasonable interpretations of that language by those charged with the
administration of this zoning code.
C. Parties Entitled To Appeal: An application for appeal to the zoning board of appeals may be filed by any person aggrieved or adversely affected by an
order, decision, determination, or failure to act of the village manager acting pursuant to his or her authority and duties under this zoning code. (Ord.,
10-2004)
9-16-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Application: An application for appeal to the zoning board of appeals shall be filed not later than forty five (45) days after the action being appealed and
in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title.
B. Action By Village Manager: After receipt of a properly completed application for an appeal, the village manager shall forthwith transmit to the zoning
board of appeals the application together with all papers constituting the record on which the action appealed from was taken.
C. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with section 9-14-3 of this title.
D. Action By Zoning Board Of Appeals: Within forty five (45) days after the close of the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall render a decision
on the appeal in the manner and form specified in subsection 9-12-2H of this title. Such decision may reverse, affirm, or modify, in whole or in part, the
action appealed from and may include such order or determination as, in the opinion of the zoning board of appeals, is proper to be made in the
premises. The failure of the zoning board of appeals to act within thirty (30) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be
deemed to be a decision denying the appeal. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-16-3: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS:
An application for appeal properly filed pursuant to section 9-16-2 of this title shall stay all proceedings in the furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the village manager certifies to the zoning board of appeals after the application for appeal has been filed with the manager that, by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the manager's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed
other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the zoning board of appeals or by the Illinois circuit court on application, on reasonable written
notice to the manager, and on due cause shown. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-16-4: CONDITIONS AND LIMITATIONS ON RIGHTS GRANTED BY APPEAL:
In any case where this zoning code imposes conditions and limitations on any right, any such right granted by the zoning board of appeals on appeal shall
be subject to such conditions and limitations in the same manner and to the same extent as if secured without the necessity of an appeal. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 17
VARIATIONS
9-17-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Authority: The board of trustees shall have the authority to grant variations from the provisions of this zoning code, but only in compliance with the
procedures, circumstances, and standards set forth in sections 9-17-2, 9-17-3, and 9-17-4 of this chapter.
B. Purpose: The variation procedure is intended to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from unforeseen particular
applications of this zoning code that create practical difficulties or particular hardships for which no other remedy is available.
C. Parties Entitled To Seek Variations: Applications for variations may be filed by the owner of, or person having a contractual interest in, the subject
property. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-17-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Application: Applications for variations shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title.
B. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with section 9-14-3 of this title.
C. Action By Zoning Board Of Appeals: Within forty five (45) days after the close of the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall render its
recommendation in the manner and form specified by subsection 9-12-2H of this title, recommending granting the application for a variation, granting a
variation less than or different from that sought in the application, or denying the application. The failure of the zoning board of appeals to act within
such forty five (45) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a recommendation for the denial of the variation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 365/524
D. Action By Board Of Trustees: Within forty five (45) days after the receipt of the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals, or its failure to act as
above provided, the board of trustees shall either deny the application or, by ordinance duly adopted, shall grant the variation, with or without
modifications or conditions. The failure of the board of trustees to act within such forty five (45) days, or such further time to which the applicant may
agree, shall be deemed a decision denying the variation. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-17-3: AUTHORIZED VARIATIONS:
A. Permitted Variations: The board of trustees may vary the provisions of this zoning code only as provided in this subsection A. The authority of the board
of trustees to vary the provisions of this zoning code is subject to the prohibitions set forth in subsection B of this section and proof by the applicant of
each of the standards set forth in section 9-17-4 of this chapter.
Under no circumstances shall the list of permitted variations in this subsection A be construed as an entitlement, right, or claim for any applicant.
The board of trustees may vary the provisions of this zoning code in the following cases and in no others:
1. Yards; Setbacks; Spacing: To reduce the dimension of any required yard, landscaped yard, setback, or building spacing, and to allow structures and
uses to be located in any required yard in addition to, and to a greater degree than, those authorized by applicable district regulations.
2. Area; Width; Depth:
a. Except in the I district, to reduce by not more than fifteen percent (15%) the required lot area, lot width, or lot depth of any lot; provided, however,
that no such variation shall permit either the development of more than one dwelling unit in addition to the number of dwelling units that could be
developed in the absence of such a variation or any increase in the otherwise permitted maximum floor area ratio.
b. To reduce the required lot area of a lot in the I district.
3. Height:
a. To increase by not more than ten percent (10%) the maximum allowable height of a structure in a nonresidential district, but only where necessary
to accommodate variations in grade.
b. To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%), but not to exceed a maximum height of thirty eight feet (38'), the maximum allowable
height of a structure for which a special use permit has been granted pursuant to section 9-3-3 of this title authorizing the maintenance and
operation of a bed and breakfast establishment.
c. To increase the maximum number of stories of a principal structure in the B-1 local and community business district to three (3), and to increase
the maximum height of a principal structure in the B-1 district by not more than ten percent (10%), subject to the following requirements:
(1) The use of the third story of the principal structure must be the same as or similar to the use of the first and second stories of that structure, and
(2) The gross floor area of the third story of the principal structure may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total gross floor area of the first and
second stories of that structure.
4. Parking Generally: To reduce by not more than forty percent (40%) in the B-2 district or by twenty percent (20%) in every other district, or one space,
whichever is greater, the minimum number of off street parking spaces or loading spaces otherwise required.
5. Parking Change: To vary the number of parking or loading spaces required in connection with a change of use or an increase in use intensity.
6. Parking Distance: To increase by not more than fifty percent (50%) the maximum distance that required parking is permitted to be located from the
zoning lot of the use for which such parking is provided.
7. Parking Deficiency: To increase the distance which parking spaces proposed to eliminate a parking deficiency may be located from the zoning lot on
which the use to be served is located as established in subsection 9-10-1B2d of this title.
8. Recreational Facility Height: To allow an increase in height by not more than twenty percent (20%) of the maximum allowable height for the
illumination of residential recreational facilities.
9. Moving Nonconforming Structure: To allow the moving of a nonconforming structure to an extent or in a manner not permitted by subsection 9-11-4C
of this title.
10. Restoring Nonconforming Structure: To allow the otherwise prohibited restoration of a partially damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure or
structure devoted to a nonconforming use.
11. Eminent Domain: To vary the bulk, yard, and space requirements when a zoning lot, whether vacant or legally used, is reduced in size, by reason of
the exercise of the right of eminent domain by an authorized governmental body or by reason of a conveyance made under the specific threat of an
eminent domain proceeding, so that the remainder of said zoning lot, or any structure or use on said zoning lot, does not conform with one or more of
such bulk, yard, or space requirements of the district in which said zoning lot is located.
12. Storage: To allow, for a period not to extend beyond one year after the effective date of this zoning code:
a. The storage in a parking area in a residential district of more than the maximum number of class I or II vehicles specified in subsection 9-10-1D of
this title; or
b. The storage in a parking area in any required yard in a residential district of class II vehicles; or
c. The storage in a parking area in a residential district of no more than one class III vehicle.
Every variation granted pursuant to this subsection A12 shall run only to the applicant, as a personal privilege, and only with respect to the specific
vehicle that is the subject of the application.
13. Landscaping: To vary the provisions related to landscaping any area, structure, or building established in chapter 8, article A of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 366/524
14. Landscaped Surface Area; I District: To decrease to not less than twenty percent (20%) the minimum landscaped surface area in the I industrial
district for a zoning lot within a defined industrial subdivision; provided, however, that the combined total landscaped surface area for all lots within
the subdivision shall be not less than the I district minimum.
15. Landscaped Surface Area; R-6 District: To decrease to not less than fifty percent (50%) the minimum required landscaped surface area in the R-6
multiple-family residential district.
16. Landscaped Surface Area; B-3 District: To decrease to not less than twenty five percent (25%) the minimum required landscaped surface area in
the B-3 regional shopping district for a zoning lot within a defined retail subdivision; provided, however, that the combined total landscaped surface
area for all lots within the subdivision shall be not less than the B-3 district minimum.
17. Loading Space Or Dock; Location On A Lot: To allow the location of a loading space or dock opening onto a building facade facing a public street to
an extent or in a manner not permitted by subsection 9-10-2C1 of this title.
18. Lake Protection District: To allow piers to an extent or in a manner not permitted by subsection 9-7C-3A of this title. (Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-2016)
19. Floor Area Ratio; I Industrial District: To allow an increase from the floor area ratio standard in the I industrial district from 0.45 to 0.47. (Ord. 2016-
6-136, 6-6-2016)
B. Prohibited Variations: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no variation shall be granted that:
1. Temporary Only: Is intended as a temporary measure only; or
2. Minimum Required: Is greater than the minimum variation necessary to relieve the particular hardship or practical difficulty demonstrated by the
applicant. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-17-4: STANDARDS FOR VARIATIONS:
A. General Standard: No variation shall be granted pursuant to this chapter unless the applicant shall establish that carrying out the strict letter of the
provisions of this zoning code would create a particular hardship or a practical difficulty. Such a showing shall require proof that the variation being
sought satisfies each of the standards set forth in this section.
B. Unique Physical Condition: The subject property is exceptional as compared to other lots subject to the same provision by reason of a unique physical
condition, including presence of an existing use or structure, whether conforming or nonconforming; irregular or substandard shape or size; exceptional
topographical features; or other extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the subject property that amount to more than a mere
inconvenience to the owner and that relate to or arise out of the lot rather than the personal situation of the current owner of the lot.
C. Not Self-Created: The aforesaid unique physical condition is not the result of any action or inaction of the owner, or of the owner's predecessors in title
and known to the owner prior to acquisition of the subject property, and existed at the time of the enactment of the provisions from which a variation is
sought or was created by natural forces or was the result of governmental action, other than the adoption of this zoning code, for which no
compensation was paid.
D. Denied Substantial Rights: The carrying out of the strict letter of the provision from which a variation is sought would deprive the owner of the subject
property of substantial rights commonly enjoyed by owners of other lots subject to the same provision.
E. Not Merely Special Privilege: The alleged hardship or difficulty is not merely the inability of the owner or occupant to enjoy some special privilege or
additional right not available to owners or occupants of other lots subject to the same provision, nor merely an inability to make more money from the
use of the subject property; provided, however, that where the standards herein set out exist, the existence of an economic hardship shall not be a
prerequisite to the grant of an authorized variation.
F. Code And Plan Purposes: The variation would not result in a use or development of the subject property that would be not in harmony with the general
and specific purposes for which this zoning code and the provision from which a variation is sought were enacted or the general purpose and intent of
the official comprehensive plan.
G. Essential Character Of The Area: The variation would not result in a use or development on the subject property that:
1. Detrimental To Enjoyment: Would be materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to the enjoyment, use, development, or value
of property or improvements permitted in the vicinity; or
2. Light And Air: Would materially impair an adequate supply of light and air to the properties and improvements in the vicinity; or
3. Congestion: Would substantially increase congestion in the public streets due to traffic or parking; or
4. Flood Or Fire: Would unduly increase the danger of flood or fire; or
5. Tax Public Facilities: Would unduly tax public utilities and facilities in the area; or
6. Endangerment: Would endanger the public health or safety.
H. No Other Remedy: There is no means other than the requested variation by which the alleged hardship or difficulty can be avoided or remedied to a
degree sufficient to permit a reasonable use of the subject property. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-17-5: VARIATION LESS THAN REQUESTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 367/524
A variation less than or different from that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant's right to some relief but not to the relief
requested. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-17-6: CONDITIONS:
A. Authority: The zoning board of appeals may recommend and the board of trustees may impose such specific conditions and limitations concerning use,
construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this zoning code on the premises
benefited by a variation as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the
vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities and services. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the ordinance granting the variation.
Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this zoning code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the variation.
B. Affidavit Of Compliance With Conditions: Whenever any variation authorized pursuant to this chapter is made subject to conditions and limitations to be
met by the applicant, the applicant shall upon meeting such conditions file an affidavit with the village manager so stating. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-17-7: EFFECT OF GRANT OF VARIATION:
The grant of a variation shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approval that may
be required by the codes and ordinances of the village including, but not limited to, a building permit, a certificate of zoning compliance, subdivision
approval, and site plan approval. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-17-8: LIMITATIONS ON VARIATIONS:
Subject to an extension of time granted by the village manager pursuant to subsection 9-12-1J of this title, no variation from the provisions of this zoning
code shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless a building permit is issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is
thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless a certificate of zoning compliance is issued and a use is commenced within that period.
A variation shall be deemed to authorize only the particular construction or development for which it was issued and shall automatically expire and cease
to be of any force or effect if such construction or development shall be removed and not replaced within six (6) months following such removal. (Ord., 10-
2004)
Chapter 18
AMENDMENTS
9-18-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Authority: This zoning code and the zoning map may be amended from time to time by ordinance duly enacted by the board of trustees in accordance
with the procedures set out in this chapter.
B. Purpose: The amendment process established by the chapter is intended to provide a means for making changes in the text of this zoning code and in
the zoning map that have more or less general significance or application. It is not intended to relieve particular hardships nor to confer special
privileges or rights. Rather, it is intended as a tool to adjust the provisions of this zoning code and the zoning map in light of changing or newly
discovered conditions, situations, or knowledge, or conditions, situations or knowledge with heightened significance or elevated relevance.
C. Parties Entitled To Seek Amendments: An application for an amendment may be filed by the board of trustees, the plan commission, the zoning board
of appeals, the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in, any property to be affected by a proposed amendment to the zoning map, or
any person interested in a proposed amendment to the text of this zoning code. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-18-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Application: Applications for amendments shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title; provided, however, that
amendments proposed by the board of trustees, the plan commission, or the zoning board of appeals shall not be subject to said section 9-14-1 of this
title but shall be transmitted to the village manager in such form as may seem appropriate to the initiating body.
B. Preliminary Consideration By Board Of Trustees:
1. Referral To Board: Every properly filed and completed application for an amendment to this zoning code, before being processed in any other
manner, may be referred to the board of trustees for a determination as to whether the application merits a hearing and consideration by the plan
commission. Request for preliminary consideration by the board of trustees may be requested by the village board, applicant/property owner of the
concerned project, or the village manager or his designee.
2. Notice Of Applicant; Right To Be Heard: Notice of the meeting at which the issue will be considered shall be given to the applicant at least forty eight
(48) hours before such meeting and the applicant or his representative shall have, subject to the rules of the board of trustees, the right to be heard
on the issue. Notice may be made telephonically or by electronic means including, but not limited to, fax, e-mail or text message.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 368/524
3. Action By Board: The board of trustees, not later than the first meeting after the meeting at which consideration of the application first appears on its
agenda, shall refer it to the plan commission for public hearing. Any vote, or the failure to vote on the application, shall be sufficient to refer the
application for a hearing. In the case of any such referral, the date of the meeting at which the application is referred shall be deemed to be the date
of filing for computation of all time periods under this zoning code. (Ord. 2016-9-150, 9-6-2016)
C. Public Hearing: In any case where an application for amendment is referred to the plan commission for hearing, a public hearing shall be set, noticed,
and conducted by the plan commission in accordance with section 9-14-3 of this title.
D. Action By Plan Commission: Within forty five (45) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the plan commission shall transmit to the board of
trustees its recommendation in the form specified by subsection 9-12-3H of this title. The failure of the plan commission to act within such forty five (45)
days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for the approval of the proposed amendment as
submitted.
E. Action By Board Of Trustees; Protest: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission, or its failure to act as above
provided, the board of trustees either shall deny the application, or by ordinance duly adopted, shall adopt the proposed amendment, with or without
modifications; provided, however, that in the event a duly signed and acknowledged protest against a proposed amendment is filed with the village
clerk before the adoption of such amendment by the owners of: 1) twenty percent (20%) or more of the frontage to be affected by the proposed
amendment, 2) twenty percent (20%) or more of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, 3) twenty percent (20%) or more of
the frontage directly opposite the frontage to be affected, or 4) twenty percent (20%) or more of any combination of items 1, 2 and 3 of this subsection,
such amendment shall not be passed except by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the trustees then holding office.
The failure of the board of trustees to act within such sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a
decision denying the application. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-18-3: STANDARDS FOR AMENDMENTS:
Amending the zoning map or the text of this zoning code is a matter committed to the sound legislative discretion of the board of trustees and is not
dictated by any set standard. However, in determining whether a proposed amendment should be granted or denied, the board of trustees shall act in what
it reasonably believes to be in the best interest of the general public, and may consider, among other factors, the following factors as they may be relevant
to a particular application:
A. The consistency of the proposed amendment with the purposes of this zoning code.
B. The community need for the proposed amendment and for the uses and development it would allow.
C. If a specific parcel of property is the subject of the proposed amendment, then the following factors:
1. Existing Uses And Classifications: The existing uses and zoning classifications for properties in the immediate vicinity of the subject property.
2. Trend Of Development: The trend of development in the immediate vicinity of the subject property, including changes, if any, in such trend since the
subject property was placed in its present zoning classification.
3. Diminution Of Values: The extent to which the value of the subject property is diminished by the existing zoning classification applicable to it.
4. Increase In Health, Safety, And Welfare: The extent, to which any such diminution in value is offset by an increase in the public health, safety, and
welfare.
5. Effects On Adjacent Properties: The extent to which the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
6. Value Of Adjacent Properties: The extent to which the value of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
7. Future Development: The extent to which the future orderly development of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
8. Suitability Of Text Amendment: The suitability of the proposed text amendment for the zoning district in which the amendment is being proposed.
9. Ingress And Egress: The availability, where relevant, of adequate ingress to and egress from the subject property and the extent to which traffic
conditions in the immediate vicinity of the subject property would be affected by the proposed amendment.
10. Utilities And Services: The availability, where relevant, of adequate utilities and essential public services to the subject property to accommodate
the uses permitted or permissible under its present zoning classification.
11. Length Of Vacancy: The length of time that the subject property has been vacant, considered in the context of the pace of development in the
vicinity of the subject property.
12. Positive Effect: The proposed amendment creating a positive effect for the zoning district, its purposes, and adjacent properties shall be placed
before the benefits of the petitioner. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
Chapter 19
SPECIAL USE PERMITS
9-19-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 369/524
A. Authority: The board of trustees, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this chapter and by ordinance duly adopted, may grant
special use permits authorizing the development of uses listed as special uses in the regulations applicable to the district in which the subject property
is located.
B. Purpose: Special uses are those uses having some special impact or uniqueness that requires a careful review of their location, design, configuration,
and special impact to determine, against fixed standards, the desirability of permitting their establishment on any given site. They are uses that may or
may not be appropriate in a particular location depending on a weighing, in each case, of the public need and benefit against the local impact and
effect.
C. Parties Entitled To Seek Special Use Permits: An application for a special use permit may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual
interest in, the subject property. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-19-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Application: Applications for special use permits shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title.
B. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the plan commission in accordance with section 9-14-3 of this title.
C. Action By Plan Commission: Within forty five (45) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the plan commission shall transmit to the board of
trustees its recommendation in the form specified by subsection 9-12-3H of this title, recommending either granting the application for a special use
permit; granting the application subject to conditions, as specified in section 9-19-4 of this chapter; or denying the application. The failure of the plan
commission to act within such forty five (45) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation to deny
the proposed special use permit.
D. Action By Board Of Trustees: Within sixty (60) days after the receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission, or its failure to act as above
provided, the board of trustees either shall deny the application or, by ordinance duly adopted, shall grant the special use permit, with or without
modifications or conditions. The failure of the board of trustees to act within such sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree,
shall be deemed to be a decision denying the special use permit. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-19-3: STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
A. General Standards: No special use permit shall be recommended or granted pursuant to this chapter unless the applicant shall establish that:
1. Zoning Code And Plan Purposes: The proposed use and development will be in harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this
zoning code was enacted and for which the regulations of the district in question were established and with the general purpose and intent of the
official comprehensive plan.
2. No Undue Adverse Impact: The proposed use and development will not have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the
character of the area, or the public health, safety, and general welfare.
3. No Interference With Surrounding Development: The proposed use and development will be constructed, arranged, and operated so as not to
dominate the immediate vicinity or to interfere with the use and development of neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district
regulations.
4. Adequate Public Facilities: The proposed use and development will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as streets,
public utilities, drainage structures, police and fire protection, refuse disposal, parks, libraries, and schools, or the applicant will provide adequately
for such services.
5. No Traffic Congestion: The proposed use and development will not cause undue traffic congestion nor draw significant amounts of traffic through the
surrounding streets.
6. No Destruction Of Significant Features: The proposed use and development will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of any natural, scenic,
or historic feature of significant importance.
7. Compliance With Standards: The proposed use and development complies with all additional standards imposed on it by the particular provision of
this zoning code authorizing such use.
8. Positive Effect: The proposed special use creating a positive effect for the zoning district, its purpose, and adjacent properties shall be placed before
the benefits of the petitioner.
B. Special Standards For Specified Special Uses: When the district regulations authorizing any special use in a particular district impose special standards
to be met by such use in such district, a permit for such use in such district shall not be recommended or granted unless the applicant shall establish
compliance with such special standards.
C. Considerations: In determining whether the applicant's evidence establishes that the foregoing standards have been met, the plan commission and the
board of trustees shall consider:
1. Benefit: Whether and to what extent the proposed use and development at the particular location requested is necessary or desirable to provide a
service or a facility that is in the interest of the public convenience or that will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or community.
2. Alternative Locations: Whether the purposes of the zoning code can be met by the location of the proposed use and development in some other area
or zoning district that may be more appropriate than the proposed site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 370/524
3. Mitigation Of Adverse Impacts: Whether all steps possible have been taken to minimize any substantial or undue adverse effects of the proposed
use and development on the immediate vicinity through building design, site design, landscaping, and screening. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-19-4: CONDITIONS:
A. Authority: The plan commission may recommend and the board of trustees may impose such conditions and limitations concerning use, construction,
character, location, landscaping, screening, and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this zoning code upon the premises benefited
by a special use permit as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the
vicinity of the subject property, the zoning district of the subject property, or upon public facilities and services. Such conditions shall be expressly set
forth in the ordinance granting the special use, and the board of trustees may require the unconditional consent of the applicant to such conditions.
Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this zoning code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the special use permit.
B. Affidavit Of Compliance With Conditions: Whenever any special use permit granted pursuant to this chapter is made subject to conditions or limitations
to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an affidavit with the village manager so stating. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-
6-2014)
9-19-5: EFFECT OF ISSUANCE OF A SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
The grant of a special use permit shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any other permits or
approvals that may be required by the codes and ordinances of the village, including, but not limited to, building permit, a certificate of zoning compliance,
subdivision approval, and site plan approval. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-19-6: LIMITATIONS ON SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
Subject to an extension of time granted by the village manager pursuant to subsection 9-12-1J of this title, no special use permit shall be valid for a period
longer than two (2) years unless a building permit is issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion or unless a certificate of zoning compliance is issued and a use commenced within that period.
A. A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which it was issued, and such permit shall automatically expire and cease
to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months or more. Except when otherwise
provided in the ordinance granting a special use permit, a special use permit shall be deemed to relate to, and be for the benefit of, the use and lot in
question rather than the owner or operator of such use or lot. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
9-19-7: AMENDMENTS TO SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
A special use permit may be amended, varied, or altered only pursuant to the procedures and subject to the standards and limitations provided in this
chapter for its original approval. (Ord. 2013-12-944, 1-6-2014)
Chapter 20
SITE PLAN REVIEW
9-20-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Authority: The Village Manager or the Board of Trustees, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this chapter and by ordinance duly
adopted, may grant site plan approval to uses and developments requiring such approval pursuant to subsection C of this section.
B. Purpose: The site plan review process recognizes that even those uses and developments that have been determined to be generally suitable for
location in a particular district are capable of adversely affecting the purposes for which this Zoning Code was enacted unless careful consideration is
given to critical design elements. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a vehicle for the review of the developer's attention to such elements.
C. Site Plan Review Required: Site plan review shall be by the Board of Trustees in accordance with this chapter, as provided at subsection C2 of this
section. All other site plan reviews provided for below shall be conducted by the Village Manager, or his/her designee.
1. Any development or redevelopment for which the regulations of the base district or an overlay district require site plan review.
2. Site plan review by the Board of Trustees in accordance with this chapter shall be required when any development or redevelopment for which this
Zoning Code requires a public hearing including, but not limited to, a zoning map amendment, special use permit, variation, or planned development
approval, or for which subdivision plat or condominium plat approval is required pursuant to the Lake Zurich Municipal Code.
3. Any development or redevelopment of any structure, other than for one single-family detached or two-family dwelling units; provided, however, that
this subsection C3 does not require site plan review for remodeling that does not involve the creation of any new floor space or the change of any
use.
4. Any development or redevelopment involving the creation or expansion of a parking lot or garage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 371/524
5. Any development or redevelopment involving a recreational vehicle storage area or an antenna or antenna support structure subject to subsection 9-
9-1C7 or C8 of this title. (Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-7-263, 7-2-2018)
D. Parties Entitled To Seek Site Plan Approval: Applications for site plan review may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest
in, the subject property. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-20-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Application: Applications for site plan approval shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title.
B. Public Meeting: A public meeting shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the Plan Commission in accordance with section 9-14-3 of this title.
C. Action By Plan Commission: Within forty five (45) days after the conclusion of the public meeting, the Plan Commission shall transmit to the Board of
Trustees its recommendation, in the form specified in subsection 9-12-3H of this title, recommending either approval of the site plan or disapproval
based on one or more of the standards set forth in subsection 9-20-3A of this chapter. In the case of any recommendation for disapproval, the plan
commission shall make suggestions as required by subsection 9-20-3B of this chapter. The failure of the plan commission to act within such forty five
(45) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a recommendation for the approval of the site plan as
submitted.
D. Action By Board Of Trustees: Within sixty (60) days after the receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission, or its failure to act as above
provided, the board of trustees, by ordinance duly adopted, shall approve the site plan as submitted, or shall make modifications acceptable to the
applicant and approve such modified site plan, or shall disapprove it in the manner specified in section 9-20-3 of this chapter either with or without a
remand to the plan commission for further consideration. The failure of the board of trustees to act within such sixty (60) days, or such further time to
which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision granting site plan approval. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-20-3: STANDARDS FOR SITE PLAN DISAPPROVAL:
A. Standards: The village manager or the board of trustees shall not disapprove, and the plan commission shall not recommend disapproval of, a site plan
submitted pursuant to this chapter except on the basis of specific written findings directed to one or more of the following standards: (Ord. 2016-6-137,
6-6-2016)
1. Application Improper: The application is incomplete in specified particulars or contains or reveals violations of this zoning code or other applicable
regulations that the applicant has failed or refused to supply or correct.
2. Failure Of Condition Precedent: The application is submitted in connection with another application, the approval of which is a condition precedent to
the necessity for site plan review, and the applicant has failed to secure approval of that application.
3. Failure To Meet Standards: The site plan fails to adequately meet specified standards required by this zoning code with respect to the proposed use
or development, including special use standards where applicable.
4. Interference With Right Of Way: The proposed site plan interferes with easements or rights of way.
5. Interference With Features: The proposed site plan unreasonably destroys, damages, detrimentally modifies, or interferes with the enjoyment of
significant natural, topographical, or physical features of the site.
6. Traffic Problems: The proposed site plan creates undue traffic congestion or hazards in the public streets, or the circulation elements of the proposed
site plan unreasonably create hazards to safety on or off site or disjointed, inefficient pedestrian or vehicular circulation paths on or off site.
7. Inadequate Screening: The screening of the site does not provide adequate shielding from or for nearby uses.
8. Lacking Amenity: The proposed structures or landscaping are unreasonably lacking amenity in relation to, or are incompatible with, nearby
structures and uses.
9. Lack Of Open Space: In the case of site plans submitted in connection with an application for a special use permit, the proposed site plan makes
inadequate provision for the creation or preservation of open space or for its continued maintenance.
10. Drainage Or Erosion Problems: The proposed site plan creates unreasonable drainage or erosion problems or fails to fully and satisfactorily
integrate the site into the overall existing and planned drainage system serving the village.
11. Burdens On Utilities: The proposed site plan places unwarranted or unreasonable burdens on specified utility systems serving the site or area or
fails to fully and satisfactorily integrate the site's utilities into the overall existing and planned utility systems serving the village.
12. Lack Of Public Uses: The proposed site plan does not provide for required public uses designated on the official map.
13. Other Adverse Effects: The proposed site plan otherwise adversely affects the public health, safety, or general welfare. (Ord., 10-2004)
B. Alternative Approaches: In citing any of the foregoing standards, other than those of subsections A1 and A2 of this section, as the basis for
disapproving a site plan, the village manager, plan commission or the board of trustees shall suggest alternate site plan approaches that could be
developed to avoid the specified deficiency or shall state the reasons why such deficiency cannot be avoided consistent with the applicant's objectives.
(Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-2016)
9-20-4: EFFECT OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 372/524
Approval of a site plan shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits or approvals that may
be required by the codes and ordinances of the village including, but not limited to, a building permit, a certificate of zoning compliance, and subdivision
approval.
A copy of every approved site plan shall be filed with the village manager and the development of the site shall be in substantial conformity with such
approved and filed plan. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-20-5: LIMITATIONS ON SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
Subject to an extension of time granted by the village manager pursuant to subsection 9-12-1J of this title, no site plan approval shall be valid for a period
longer than one year unless a building permit is issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion or unless a certificate of zoning compliance is issued and a use commenced within that period. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-20-6: ADJUSTMENTS TO SITE PLAN DURING DEVELOPMENT:
A. Minor Adjustments: During the development of the site, the village manager may authorize minor adjustments to a site plan that was previously
approved by the village manager or by the board of trustees when such adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or engineering
considerations first discovered during actual development. Such minor adjustments shall be limited to the following:
1. Altering Locations Of Structures: Altering the location of any one structure or group of structures by not more than twenty feet (20') or one-fourth (1/4)
of the distance shown on the approved site plan between such structure or structures and any other structure or any vehicular circulation element or
any boundary of the site plan, whichever is less.
2. Circulation: Altering the location of any circulation element by not more than twenty feet (20') or one-fourth (1/4) of the distance shown on the
approved site plan between such circulation element and any structure, whichever is less.
3. Open Space: Altering the location of any open space by not more than fifty feet (50').
4. Landscaping: Altering the location or type of landscaping elements.
Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this zoning code and the site plan as approved, shall be the minimum
necessary to overcome the particular difficulty, and shall not be approved if they would result in a violation of any standard or requirement of this
zoning code.
B. Major Adjustments: Any adjustment to a site plan approved by the village manager or by the board of trustees that is not authorized by subsection A of
this section shall be considered to be a major adjustment and shall be granted only upon application to and approval by the board of trustees. The
board of trustees, by ordinance duly adopted, may grant approval for a major adjustment without referral to the plan commission if the board of trustees
finds that any changes in the site plan as approved will be in substantial conformity with said site plan. If the board of trustees determines that a major
adjustment is not in substantial conformity with the site plan as approved, then the board of trustees shall refer the request to the plan commission for
further consideration and review as provided in section 9-20-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-2016)
9-20-7: AMENDMENTS TO SITE PLAN AFTER COMPLETION OF DEVELOPMENT:
After a site is developed in accordance with an approved site plan, the approved site plan may be amended, varied, or altered in the same manner and
subject to the same limitations as provided for original approval of site plans. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 21
EXTERIOR APPEARANCE REVIEW
9-21-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Authority: The village manager or the board of trustees, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this chapter, may grant exterior
appearance approval pursuant to sections 9-3-10, 9-7A-9, and 9-7B-9, and subsections 9-4-9A, 9-5-9A, 9-6-9A, 9-7C-4C, and 9-7D-7C of this title and
subsection 9-21-2C of this chapter.
B. Purpose: The exterior appearance review process is intended to protect, preserve, and enhance the character and architectural heritage and quality of
the village, to protect, preserve, and enhance property values, and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the village and its residents. The board
of trustees hereby finds that the exterior appearance review process furthers the following public purposes and is therefore in the best interests of the
health, prosperity, and welfare of the village and its residents.
1. Special Character: To effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of improvements and areas of special character or
special historic and aesthetic interest or value which represent or reflect elements of the village's cultural, social, economic, political, and
architectural history or distinction. (Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-2016)
2. Local Atmosphere: To maintain the local, "small town" atmosphere of various residential and business areas within the village.
3. Compatibility: To ensure compatibility of new development with the existing characteristics of the area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 373/524
4. Transitional Areas: To protect sensitive areas of transition from one land use to another.
5. Attractiveness: To protect and enhance the village's attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to local business provided thereby.
6. Strong Economy: To strengthen the economy of the village.
7. Education, Pleasure, And Welfare: To promote the use of areas within the village for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the residents of the
village.
C. Parties Entitled To Seek Exterior Appearance Review: Applications for building permits requiring exterior appearance review and approval pursuant to
this zoning code may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in, the subject property. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-21-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Application: Applications for exterior appearance approval shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title. In addition to
the requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title, every such application for approval in the B-2 central business district shall include a statement of
proposed improvements which shall detail how the proposed improvements meet the applicable standards and consideration for exterior appearance
review.
B. Other Approvals Required Prior To Approval: In any case where the proposed work requires the issuance of a special use permit, variation, or other
approval, no exterior appearance approval shall be granted unless and until such special use permit, variation, or other approval has been issued. The
issuance of any such other approval shall not be deemed to establish any right to exterior appearance approval.
C. Administrative Review: Exterior appearance review for any development or redevelopment which requires a public hearing pursuant to this zoning code
including, but not limited to, a zoning map amendment, special use permit, variation, or planned development approval, or for which subdivision plat or
condominium plat approval is required pursuant to the Lake Zurich municipal code, shall be conducted by the board of trustees. All other exterior
appearance reviews under this chapter shall be conducted by the village manager or his/her designee. Within fourteen (14) days after a properly
completed application has been filed, the village manager shall review the application to determine whether the proposed improvements will
substantially alter the existing design and appearance of the subject structure. If the village manager determines that there shall be no such substantial
alteration, then the village manager shall approve the application, subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section and sections 9-21-5 and 9-
21-6 of this chapter. If the village manager determines that a public hearing is required, or that there will, or may be, such substantial alteration, then
the village manager shall forward the application for review in accordance with subsections D through F of this section.
D. Public Meeting: A public meeting shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the plan commission in accordance with section 9-14-3 of this title.
E. Action By Plan Commission: Within forty five (45) days after the conclusion of the public meeting, the plan commission shall transmit to the board of
trustees its recommendation, in the form specified in subsection 9-12-3H of this title, recommending either granting exterior appearance approval,
granting the approval subject to conditions, or denying the approval. In reaching its recommendation, the plan commission shall be guided by the
purposes for which the exterior appearance review process has been created and by the particular standards and considerations set forth in section 9-
21-3 of this chapter. The failure of the plan commission to act within such forty five (45) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree,
shall be deemed to be a recommendation for approval of the application.
F. Action By Board Of Trustees: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission, or its failure to act as above provided,
the board of trustees shall, by ordinance duly adopted, grant exterior appearance approval, or shall make modifications acceptable to the applicant and
approve such modified application, or shall disapprove the application. In reaching its decision, the board of trustees shall be guided by the purposes
for which the exterior appearance review process has been created and the particular standards and considerations set forth in section 9-21-3 of this
chapter. The failure of the board of trustees to act within such sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to
be a decision denying the application. (Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-2016)
9-21-3: STANDARDS AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR EXTERIOR APPEARANCE APPROVAL:
In their consideration of applications for exterior appearance approval, the village manager, the plan commission and the board of trustees shall consider
and evaluate the propriety of granting the approval in terms of the effect of the application on the purposes for which exterior appearance approval is
required. In addition, the plan commission and the board of trustees shall be guided by the following standards and considerations: (Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-
2016)
A. General Quality Of Design And Site Development: New and existing buildings and structures and appurtenances thereof which are constructed,
reconstructed, materially altered, repaired, or moved shall be evaluated under the following quality of design and site development guidelines:
1. Open Spaces: The quality of the open spaces between buildings and in setback spaces between street and facade.
2. Materials: The quality of materials and their relationship to those in existing adjacent structures.
3. General Design: The quality of the design in general and its relationship to the overall character of neighborhood.
4. General Site Development: The quality of the site development in terms of landscaping, recreation, pedestrian access, automobile access, parking,
servicing of the property, and impact on vehicular traffic patterns and conditions on site and in the vicinity of the site, and the retention of trees and
shrubs to the maximum extent possible.
B. General Standards For Visual Compatibility: New and existing buildings and structures, and appurtenances thereof, which are constructed,
reconstructed, materially altered, repaired, or moved shall be visually compatible in terms of the following guidelines:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 374/524
1. Height: The height of the proposed buildings and structures shall be visually compatible with adjacent buildings.
2. Proportion Of Front Facade: The relationship of the width to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways,
and places to which it is visually related.
3. Proportion Of Openings: The relationship of the width to height of windows shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to
which the building is visually related.
4. Rhythm Of Solids To Voids In Front Facades: The relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually compatible with
buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
5. Rhythm Of Spacing And Buildings On Streets: The relationship of a building or structure to the open space between it and adjoining buildings or
structures shall be visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
6. Rhythm Of Entrance, Porch, And Other Projections: The relationship of entrances and other projections to sidewalks shall be visually compatible
with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
7. Relationship Of Materials And Texture: The relationship of the materials and texture of the facade shall be visually compatible with the predominant
materials used in the buildings and structures to which it is visually related.
8. Roof Shapes: The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related.
9. Walls Of Continuity: Building facades and appurtenances such as walls, fences, and landscape masses shall, when it is a characteristic of the area,
form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to ensure visual compatibility with the buildings, public ways, and places to which such elements are
visually related.
10. Scale Of Building: The size and mass of buildings and structures in relation to open spaces, windows, door openings, porches, and balconies shall
be visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which they are visually related.
11. Directional Expression Of Front Elevation: A building shall be visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually
related in its directional character, whether this be vertical character, horizontal character, or nondirectional character.
C. Additional Standards Applicable To Development In The B-2 Central Business District: New and existing buildings and structures and appurtenances
thereof in the B-2 central business district which are constructed, reconstructed, materially altered, or moved shall be evaluated under the following
quality of design and site development guidelines in addition to the standards set in subsections A and B of this section:
1. Overall Compatibility: The proposed improvements should be compatible with adjacent structures and with the overall redevelopment strategy for the
B-2 district set forth in the official comprehensive plan.
2. Building Frontage Lines: Buildings along Main Street and Old Rand Road should have frontage directly adjacent to the sidewalk right of way line.
Building setbacks may be permitted if the area between the building face and the sidewalk is used for outdoor retailing, seating, or usable public
access open space and is compatible with adjacent properties.
3. Principal Entrance: Buildings along Main Street and Old Rand Road should have the principal store entrance accessible directly from the public
sidewalk. A short private walkway to the entrance may be permissible if it is consistent with the character of the building and adjacent properties.
4. Entrance Highlights: Store entrances should be highlighted with architectural features compatible with the overall building design.
5. Windows: Windows should be subdivided to emphasize vertical proportions.
6. Story Distinctions: The first story of the building should be distinguished from the second story by means of a horizontal lintel, second floor overhang
or setback, or similar detail.
7. Building Materials: Exterior building materials should be any of the following: brick, masonry, stucco, cementacious products, woodlike vinyl siding,
and/or natural wood siding.
8. Signs: Sign materials, forms, and designs shall be integral with the building architecture. Custom designed individual letters, carved wood, or etched
metal signs will be strongly encouraged. Perpendicular signs extending over the sidewalk may be permitted if limited in size and if compatible with
adjacent properties and safety concerns. Backlighted fluorescent box signs shall be prohibited.
D. Additional Standards Applicable To Development In The LP Lake Protection District: New and existing buildings and structures and appurtenances
thereof in the LP lake protection district which are constructed, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired, or moved shall be evaluated under the
following development guidelines in addition to the standards set in subsections A, B, and, if applicable, C of this section:
1. No Adverse Impact On Views: The proposed development should create no undue adverse impact on existing views of the lake, subject to the other
guidelines in this subsection D.
2. Diminution Of Value: Impacts on existing views of the lake may be offset by the degree to which the value of the subject property would be
diminished by avoidance or elimination of such impacts on existing views.
3. Protection Of Lake Features: Such diminution in value may be offset, however, by the protection of a valuable existing feature of the lake.
4. Value Of Adjacent Properties: The use and enjoyment, or value, of adjacent properties should not be adversely affected by the proposed use or
development. (Ord., 10-2004)
E. Special Considerations For Existing Buildings: For existing buildings, the village manager, the plan commission and the board of trustees shall consider
the availability of materials, technology, and craftsmanship to duplicate existing styles, patterns, textures, and overall detailing. (Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-
2016)
9-21-4: MODIFICATIONS AND CONDITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 375/524
A. Authority: In approving an application for an exterior appearance approval, the village manager or the board of trustees may approve the plans as
submitted, or on condition that specified modifications in such plans be made, or on any other condition deemed necessary to achieving the purposes
and objectives of this section. Such conditions and modifications shall be set forth in the village manager's written approval or in the ordinance granting
approval by the board of trustees. The violation of any such condition or modification shall be a violation of this zoning code. (Ord. 2016-6-137, 6-6-
2016)
B. Affidavit Of Compliance With Conditions: Whenever an approval issued pursuant to this chapter is made subject to conditions to be met by the
applicant, the applicant, upon meeting such conditions, shall file an affidavit with the village manager stating such compliance. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-21-5: LIMITATION ON APPROVALS:
Subject to an extension of time granted by the village manager pursuant to subsection 9-12-1J of this title, no exterior appearance approval shall be valid
for a period longer than six (6) months unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within such period. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deviate from plans approved at the time of exterior appearance approval without obtaining an amended permit in the same manner as herein provided for
obtaining original permits. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-21-6: NO SUPERSEDER:
This chapter shall not be construed to limit the application or effect of the village's building codes and ordinances or to relieve the applicant from the
responsibility of complying with all such codes and ordinances. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 22
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
9-22-1: AUTHORITY:
The board of trustees, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this chapter and by ordinance duly adopted, may grant special use
permits authorizing the development of planned unit developments, but only in the districts where such developments are listed as an authorized special
use. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-22-2: PURPOSES:
Planned unit developments are included in this zoning code as a distinct category of special use. As such, they are authorized for the same general
purposes as all other special uses. In particular, however, the planned unit development technique is intended to allow the modification of otherwise
applicable substantive requirements based on procedural protections providing for detailed review of individual proposals for significant developments.
This special regulatory technique is included in this zoning code in recognition of the fact that traditional bulk, space, and yard regulations that may be
useful in protecting the character of substantially developed and stable areas may impose rigidities on the development or redevelopment of parcels or
areas that lend themselves to an individual, planned approach. This technique is intended to be applied to further only those applications which provide
special, compensating amenities to the village. Through the flexibility of the planned unit development technique, the village seeks to achieve the following
specific objectives:
A. More Desirable Environment: Creation of a more desirable environment than would be possible through strict application of other village land use
regulations.
B. Creative Approaches: Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities resulting in better design and development,
including aesthetic amenities.
C. Coordination Of Features: Combination and coordination of architectural styles, building forms, and building relationships.
D. Preservation Of Characteristics: Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as natural topography, vegetation, and geologic
features, and the prevention of soil erosion.
E. Use Of Open Space: Provision for the preservation and beneficial use of open space.
F. Creation Of Open Space: An increase in the amount of open space over that which would result from the application of conventional subdivision and
zoning regulations.
G. General Health, Safety, And Welfare: Encouragement of land uses that promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-22-3: PARTIES ENTITLED TO SEEK PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL:
An application for a special use permit to permit a planned unit development may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 376/524
the subject property. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-22-4: PROCEDURE:
A. Development Concept Plan:
1. Purpose: The development concept plan is intended to provide the applicant an opportunity to submit a plan showing the basic scope, character, and
nature of the entire proposed planned unit development without incurring the costs associated with preparation of detailed, final development plans.
The development concept plan is the basis on which the required public hearing is held. To permit the village and the applicant to proceed with some
assurance, approval of the development concept plan binds the applicant and the village with respect to the following basic elements of
development:
a. Categories of uses to be permitted; and
b. General location of residential and nonresidential land uses; and
c. Overall maximum density of residential uses and intensity of nonresidential uses; and
d. The general architectural style of the proposed development; and
e. General location and extent of public and private open space including recreational amenities; and
f. General location of vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems; and
g. Staging of development; and
h. Nature, scope, and extent of public dedications, improvements, or contributions to be provided by the applicant.
2. Application: Applications for approval of a development concept plan shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title.
3. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the plan commission in accordance with section 9-14-3 of this title.
4. Action By Plan Commission: Within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the plan commission shall transmit to the board of
trustees its recommendation, in the form specified by subsection 9-12-3H of this title, that the development concept plan either be approved, be
approved subject to modifications, or not be approved. The failure of the plan commission to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which
the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for the approval of the development concept plan as submitted.
5. Action By Board Of Trustees: Within sixty (60) days after the receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission, or its failure to act as above
provided, the board of trustees shall deny the application for approval of the development concept plan, or shall refer it back to the plan commission
for further consideration of specified matters, or, by ordinance duly adopted, shall approve the development concept plan, with or without
modifications and conditions to be accepted by the applicant as a condition of such approval, and shall grant a special use permit authorizing the
proposed planned unit development and such additional approvals as may be necessary to permit development of the planned unit development as
approved; provided, however, that every such ordinance and special use permit shall be expressly conditioned upon approval of the final plan in
accordance with subsections C5 and C6 of this section and upon the applicant's compliance with all provisions of this zoning code and the ordinance
granting the special use permit.
The failure of the board of trustees to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a
decision denying approval of the development concept plan.
6. Effect Of Development Concept Plan Approval: Unless the applicant shall fail to meet time schedules for filing a final plan or shall fail to proceed with
development in accordance with the plans as approved or shall in any other manner fail to comply with any condition of this zoning code or any
approval granted pursuant to it, the village shall not, without the consent of the applicant, take any action to modify, revoke, or otherwise impair an
approved development concept plan with respect to the elements of development set forth in subsection A1 of this section pending the application for
approval of the final plan. In submitting the final plan, the applicant shall be bound by the approved development concept plan with respect to each
such element.
7. Limitation On Development Concept Plan Approval: Subject to an extension of time granted by the village manager pursuant to subsection 9-12-1J
of this title, unless a final plan has been filed within two (2) years after the date the board of trustees grants development concept plan approval, or in
any case where the applicant fails to file a final plan and to proceed with development in accordance with the provisions of this zoning code and the
approved development concept plan, the approval shall automatically expire and be rendered void and the village manager shall, without further
direction, initiate an appropriate application to revoke the special use permit for all portions of the planned unit development area that have not yet
been completed.
8. Coordination With Subdivision Ordinance: When a subdivision of land subject to the Lake Zurich subdivision ordinance is proposed in connection
with a planned unit development, no development concept plan shall be approved until after a preliminary plan of the proposed subdivision has been
prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Lake Zurich municipal code and submitted to the village.
B. Optional Concurrent Submission Of A Final Plan: The applicant may submit a final plan for the proposed planned unit development pursuant to the
requirements of subsection C of this section simultaneously with the submission of the development concept plan. In such case, the applicant shall
comply with all provisions of this zoning code applicable to submission of the development concept plan and to submission of the final plan. The plan
commission and the board of trustees shall consider such plans simultaneously and shall grant or deny final plan approval in accordance with the
provisions of subsections C5 and C6 of this section.
C. Final Plan:
1. Purpose: The final plan is intended to particularize, refine, and implement the development concept plan and to serve as a complete, thorough, and
permanent public record of the planned unit development and the manner in which it is to be developed.
2. Application: Upon approval of the development concept plan, the applicant shall file an application for final plan approval in accordance with the
requirements of section 9-14-1 of this title. The application shall refine, implement, and be in substantial conformity with the approved development
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 377/524
concept plan.
3. Public Meeting: A public meeting shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the plan commission in accordance with section 9-14-3 of this title.
4. Coordination With Subdivision Ordinance: When a subdivision of land subject to the Lake Zurich subdivision ordinance is proposed in connection
with a planned unit development, review of the final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be carried out simultaneously with review of the final plan.
5. Action By Plan Commission:
a. Evaluation: Within sixty (60) days after the filing of an application for approval of a final plan, the plan commission shall, with such aid and advice
of the village staff and consultants as may be appropriate, review and act on the plan. Such review shall consider:
(1) Whether the final plan is in substantial conformity with the approved development concept plan; and
(2) The merit or lack of merit of any departure of the final plan from substantial conformity with the approved development concept plan; and
(3) Whether the final plan complies with any and all conditions imposed by approval of the development concept plan; and
(4) Whether the final plan complies with the provisions of this zoning code and all other applicable federal, state, and village codes, ordinances,
and regulations.
b. Approval Based On Substantial Conformity: If the plan commission finds substantial conformity between the final plan and the approved
development concept plan and further finds the final plan to be in all other respects complete and in compliance with any and all conditions
imposed by approval of the development concept plan and with the provisions of this zoning code and all other applicable federal, state, and
village codes, ordinances, and regulations, it shall transmit the final plan to the board of trustees with its recommendation, in the form specified in
subsection 9-12-3H of this title, that the board of trustees approve the final plan, with or without modifications and conditions to be accepted by the
applicant as a condition of approval; provided, however, that in no event shall such conditions of approval impair the rights granted by the
development concept plan approval. See chapter 24 of this title for the definition of "substantial conformity".
c. Recommendation Of Approval Without Substantial Conformity: If the plan commission finds that the final plan lacks substantial conformity to the
development concept plan but merits approval notwithstanding such lack of conformity and otherwise conforms to the requirements of this zoning
code, it shall transmit the final plan to the board of trustees with its recommendation, in the form specified in subsection 9-12-3H of this title, that
the final plan be approved, with or without modifications and conditions to be accepted by the applicant as a condition of approval.
d. Recommendation Of Denial: If the plan commission finds that the final plan is not in substantial conformity with the approved development concept
plan and does not merit approval, or if the plan commission requires modifications of a plan that are not accepted by the applicant, then the plan
commission shall transmit the plan to the board of trustees together with its recommendation, in the form specified in subsection 9-12-3H of this
title, that the final plan not be approved.
e. Failure To Act: The failure of the plan commission to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be
deemed to be a recommendation to the board of trustees to approve the final plan as submitted.
6. Action By Board Of Trustees: Within sixty (60) days after the receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission, or its failure to act as above
provided, the board of trustees shall act on the plan as follows:
a. Approval Based On Substantial Conformity: If the plan commission has recommended approval of a final plan pursuant to subsection C5b of this
section, the board of trustees, unless it specifically rejects one or more of the findings of the plan commission on the basis of expressly stated
reasons, shall approve the final plan by a duly adopted ordinance.
b. Approval Without Substantial Conformity: In any case other than that specified in subsection C6a of this section, the board of trustees, if it finds
that the final plan merits approval and otherwise conforms to the requirements of this zoning code, may approve the final plan by a duly adopted
ordinance.
c. Referral Back To Plan Commission: In any case other than that specified in subsection C6a of this section, the board of trustees may refer the final
plan back to the plan commission for further consideration of specified matters.
d. Conditions On Final Plan Approval: The approval of any final plan may be granted with or without modifications and conditions to be accepted by
the applicant as a condition of approval; provided, however, that in no event shall such conditions of approval impair the rights granted by the
development concept plan approval.
e. Failure To Act: The failure of the board of trustees to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be
deemed to be a decision denying approval of the final plan.
7. Recording Of Final Plan: When a final plan is approved, the village manager shall cause the final plan, or the portions thereof as are appropriate, to
be recorded with the recorder of deeds of Lake County.
8. Limitation On Final Plan Approval: Construction shall commence in accordance with the approved final plan within two (2) years after the approval of
such plan, or such other time as may be approved by the board of trustees. Failure to commence construction within such period shall, unless an
extension of time shall have been granted by the village manager pursuant to subsection 9-12-1J of this title, automatically render void the final plan
approval and all approvals of the planned unit development and all permits based on such approvals, and the manager shall, without further
direction, initiate an appropriate application to revoke the special use permit for all portions of the planned unit development that have not yet been
completed. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-22-5: STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Special Use Permit Standards: No special use permit for a planned unit development shall be recommended or granted pursuant to this chapter unless
the applicant shall establish that the proposed development will meet each of the standards made applicable to special use permits pursuant to chapter
19 of this title.
B. Additional Standards For All Planned Unit Developments: No special use permit for a planned unit development shall be recommended or granted
unless the applicant shall establish that the proposed development will meet each of the following additional standards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 378/524
1. Unified Ownership Required: The entire property proposed for planned unit development treatment shall be in single ownership or under such unified
control as to ensure that the entire property will be developed as a unified whole. All owners of the property shall be included as joint applicants on all
applications and all approvals shall bind all owners. The violation of any owner as to any tract shall be deemed a violation as to all owners and all
tracts.
2. Minimum Area: The applicant shall have the burden of establishing that the subject property is of sufficient size and shape to be planned and
developed as a unified whole capable of meeting the objectives for which planned unit developments may be established pursuant to this section.
3. Covenants And Restrictions To Be Enforceable By Village: All covenants, deed restrictions, easements, and similar restrictions to be recorded in
connection with the planned unit development shall provide that they may not be modified, removed, or released without the express consent of the
board of trustees and that they may be enforced by the village as well as by future landowners within the proposed development.
4. Public Open Space And Contributions: Whenever the official comprehensive plan, zoning map, or official map indicates that development of a
planned unit development will create a need for land for public purposes of the village within the proposed planned unit development, the board of
trustees may require that such area be designated and to the extent such need is specifically and uniquely attributable to the proposed development,
dedicated to the village for such use. In addition, the board of trustees may require evidence that all requirements of village ordinances pertaining to
the dedication of land or the contribution of cash in connection with subdivisions or developments of land have been met as respects the proposed
planned unit development.
5. Common Open Space:
a. Amount, Location, And Use: The failure of a planned unit development to provide common open space shall be considered to be an indication that
it has not satisfied the objectives for which such developments may be approved pursuant to this zoning code. When common open space is
provided in a planned unit development, the amount and location of such open space shall be consistent with its intended function as set forth in
the application and planned unit development plans. No such open space shall be used for the construction of any structure or improvement
except such structures and improvements as may be approved in the final plan as appropriate to the intended leisure and recreational uses for
which such open space is intended.
b. Preservation: Adequate safeguards, including recorded covenants or dedication of development rights, shall be provided to prevent the
subsequent use of common open space for any use, structure, improvement, or development other than that shown on the approved final plan.
The restrictions must be permanent and not for a given period of years and must run with the land. Such covenants and dedications may provide
that they may be released, but only with the express written consent of the board of trustees.
c. Ownership And Maintenance: The final plan shall include such provisions for the ownership and maintenance of such open space and
improvements as are reasonably necessary to ensure their continuity, care, conservation, maintenance, and operation in accordance with
predetermined standards and to ensure that remedial measures will be available to the village if such open space or improvements are permitted
to deteriorate or are not maintained in a condition consistent with the best interests of the planned unit development or the village.
d. Property Owners' Association: When the requirements of subsection B5c of this section are to be satisfied by the ownership or maintenance of
such open space or improvements by a property owners' association, such association shall meet each of the following standards:
(1) The bylaws and rules of the association and all declarations, covenants, and restrictions to be recorded must be approved as part of the final
plan prior to becoming effective. Each such document shall provide that it shall not be amended in any manner that would result in it being in
violation of the requirements of this subsection B5d(1); and
(2) The association must be established and all covenants and restrictions must be recorded prior to the sale of any property within the area of the
planned unit development designated to have the exclusive use of the proposed open space or improvements; and
(3) The association must be responsible for casualty and liability insurance, taxes, and the maintenance of the open space and improvements to
be deeded to it; and
(4) Membership in the association must be mandatory for each property owner and any successive owner having a right to the use or enjoyment of
such open space or improvements; and
(5) Every property owner having a right to the use or enjoyment of such open space or improvements must pay its pro rata share of the cost of the
association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association that meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property in
accordance with state statutes; and
(6) The association must have the right to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs. The membership vote required to authorize such
adjustment shall not be fixed at more than two-thirds (2/3) of the members voting on the issue; and
(7) The village must be given the right to enforce the covenants; and
(8) The village must be given the right, after ten (10) days' written notice to the association, to perform any maintenance or repair work that the
association has neglected to perform, to assess the membership for such work and to have a lien against the property of any member failing to
pay such assessment. For this purpose alone, the village shall have all the rights and powers of the association and its governing body under
the agreements and declarations creating the association.
6. Landscaping And Perimeter Treatment: Any area of a planned unit development not used for structures or circulation elements shall be landscaped
or otherwise improved. The perimeter of the planned unit development shall be treated so as to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses by means
such as provision of compatible uses and structures, setbacks, screening, or natural or manmade buffers.
7. Private Streets: Private streets are prohibited unless expressly approved by the board of trustees. If so approved, they shall meet all construction
standards applicable to public streets. No such streets shall be approved except upon the condition that they shall be owned and maintained by a
property owners' association meeting the requirements set forth in subsection B5d of this section.
8. Sidewalks: A sidewalk meeting the standards of the Lake Zurich subdivision ordinance shall be provided along at least one side of every street in or
abutting a planned unit development; provided, however, that such sidewalk may be constructed in a street right of way or as a specific element of
the design of the planned unit development.
9. Utilities: All utility lines shall be installed underground.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 379/524
C. Additional Standards For Specific Planned Unit Developments: When the district regulations authorizing any planned unit development use in a
particular district impose standards to be met by such planned unit development in such district, a special use permit for such development shall not be
recommended or granted unless the applicant shall establish compliance with such standards. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-22-6: CONDITIONS ON PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS:
The approval of either a development concept plan or a final plan may be conditioned on such matters as the approving body may find necessary to
prevent or minimize any possible adverse effects of the proposed planned unit development, or to ensure its compatibility with surrounding uses and
development and its consistency with the general purposes, goals, and objectives of this zoning code, the Lake Zurich subdivision ordinance, and the
official comprehensive plan; provided, however, that no such condition of final plan approval shall impair the rights granted by development concept plan
approval. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the ordinance granting the approval in question. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall
be a violation of this zoning code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of all approvals granted for the planned unit development. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-22-7: AFFIDAVIT OF COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS:
Whenever any planned unit development approval granted pursuant to this chapter is made subject to conditions or limitations to be met by the applicant,
the applicant, upon meeting such conditions, shall file an affidavit with the village manager so stating. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-22-8: AUTHORITY TO MODIFY REGULATIONS:
A. Authority: Subject to the standards and limitations hereinafter set forth, the board of trustees shall have the authority, in connection with the granting of
any planned unit development approval pursuant to this chapter, to change, alter, vary, modify, or waive (collectively "modify") any provisions of this
zoning code or of the Lake Zurich subdivision ordinance as they apply to an approved planned unit development.
B. Standards: No such modification shall be approved unless the board of trustees shall find that the proposed planned unit development:
1. Achieve Purposes: Will achieve the purposes for which planned unit developments may be approved pursuant to section 9-22-2 of this chapter; and
2. No Violations: Will not violate the general purposes, goals, and objectives of this zoning code and the official comprehensive plan; and
3. Compensating Amenities: Will result in a development providing compensating amenities to the village.
C. Limitations: Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no such modification shall be permitted with respect to the uses permitted in any district
or with respect to any standard established by section 9-22-5 of this chapter or with respect to any standard made specifically applicable to planned
unit developments by the regulations of any particular district unless such regulations expressly authorize such a change, alteration, variation,
modification, or waiver.
D. Cumulative Authority: The modification authority created by this section shall be in addition to the variation authority created by chapter 17 of this title.
(Ord., 10-2004)
9-22-9: REGULATION DURING AND AFTER COMPLETION OF DEVELOPMENT:
After final plan approval, the final plan, rather than any other provision of this zoning code, shall constitute the use, parking, loading, sign, bulk, space, and
yard regulations applicable to the subject property, and no use or development, other than home occupations and temporary uses, not allowed by the final
plan shall be permitted within the area of the planned unit development pursuant to the zoning district regulations otherwise applicable to such area. (Ord.,
10-2004)
9-22-10: INSPECTIONS DURING DEVELOPMENT:
A. Inspections By Village Manager: After approval of the final plan of a planned unit development or any stage thereof, the village manager, at least
annually until the completion of development, shall review all permits issued and construction undertaken and compare actual development with the
approved plans for development and with the approved development schedule.
B. Action By Village Manager: If the village manager finds that development is not proceeding in accordance with the approved schedule, or that it fails in
any other respect to comply with the final plan, then the village manager shall immediately notify the board of trustees of such fact and may, if
necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare or to prevent further violation of this zoning code and the final plan, issue an order stopping
any, and all work on the planned unit development until such time as any noncompliance is cured.
C. Action By Board Of Trustees: Within sixty (60) days after notification by the village manager, the board of trustees shall either:
1. Compel Compliance: Take such steps as it deems necessary to compel compliance with the final plan; or
2. Require Adjustment: Require the owner or applicant to seek an adjustment to the final plan during development as provided in section 9-22-11 of this
chapter.
D. Revocation: Failure of the board of trustees to act within the aforesaid sixty (60) days shall, unless the owner or applicant shall have cured the
noncompliance within such period, render void the final plan approval of all uncompleted portions of the planned unit development, all prior plan
approvals on which such final plan approval depends, and all permits based upon such approvals, and the village manager shall, without further
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 380/524
direction, initiate an appropriate action to revoke the special permit for all portions of the planned unit development that have not yet been completed.
The manager shall, in addition, take such other action as may be appropriate to abate the violation. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-22-11: ADJUSTMENTS TO FINAL PLAN DURING DEVELOPMENT:
A. Minor Adjustments: During the development of a planned unit development, the village manager may authorize minor adjustments to the final plan when
such adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or engineering considerations first discovered during actual development. Such minor
adjustments shall be limited to the following:
1. Altering Location Of Structures: Altering the location of any one structure or group of structures by not more than twenty feet (20') or one-fourth (1/4)
of the distance shown on the approved final plan between such structure or structures and any other structure or any vehicular circulation element or
any boundary of the planned unit development, whichever is less; and
2. Circulation: Altering the location of any circulation element by not more than twenty feet (20') or one-fourth (1/4) of the distance shown on the
approved final plan between such circulation element and any structure, whichever is less; and
3. Open Space: Altering the location of any open space by not more than fifty feet (50'); and
4. Final Grade: Altering any final grade by not more than twenty percent (20%) of the originally planned grade; and
5. Landscaping: Altering the location or type of landscaping elements.
Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this zoning code and the final plan, as approved, shall be the minimum
necessary to overcome the particular difficulty, and shall not be approved if they would result in a violation of any standard or requirement of this
zoning code.
B. Major Adjustments: Any adjustment to the final plan not authorized by subsection A of this section shall be considered to be a major adjustment and
shall be granted only upon application to, and approval by, the board of trustees. The board of trustees, by ordinance duly adopted, may grant approval
for a major adjustment without a hearing upon finding that any changes in the final plan as approved will be in substantial conformity with said final
plan. If the board of trustees determines that a major adjustment is not in substantial conformity with the final plan as approved, then the board of
trustees shall refer the request to the plan commission for further hearing and review as provided in subsection 9-22-4C of this chapter. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-22-12: AMENDMENTS TO FINAL PLAN AFTER COMPLETION OF DEVELOPMENT:
After completion of a planned unit development, an approved final plan may be amended, varied, or altered in the same manner and subject to the same
limitations, as provided for major adjustments in subsection 9-22-11B of this chapter. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 23
APPLICABILITY, SCOPE, AND ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE A. APPLICABILITY
9-23A-1: GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
A. Territorial Application: This zoning code shall apply to all land, structures, and uses within the corporate limits of the village.
B. General Application:
1. Code Compliance Required: No structure, no use of any structure or land, and no lot of record or zoning lot, now or hereafter existing, shall be
established, enlarged, extended, altered, moved, divided, or maintained in any manner after the effective date of this zoning code, except as
authorized by the provisions of this zoning code and except in compliance with the regulations of this zoning code. Without limiting the foregoing, any
such activity that would cause any existing structure or lot not to comply with this zoning code or that would create any parcel of land that could not
be developed in compliance with this zoning code shall be prohibited and no parcel of land created as a result of any such activity shall be used or
developed for any purpose.
2. Street Frontage Required: No vacant lot of record or zoning lot shall be developed with a building after the effective date of this zoning code unless
such vacant lot of record or zoning lot shall have frontage on an improved public street.
C. General Prohibition: No structure, no use of any structure or land, and no lot of record or zoning lot, now or hereafter existing, shall hereafter be
established, enlarged, extended, altered, moved, divided, or maintained in any manner, except as authorized by the provisions of this zoning code and
except in compliance with the regulations of this zoning code. Without limiting the foregoing, any such activity that would cause any existing structure
not to comply with this zoning code or that would create any parcel of land that could not be developed in compliance with this zoning code shall be
prohibited.
D. Special Prohibition; Multiple Uses On Residential Zoning Lot: No zoning lot zoned in any residential district in the village shall be used for more than
one principal use or one principal structure.
E. Exempt Uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 381/524
1. Utility Lines: The following utility uses are exempt from the provisions of this zoning code: poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes,
mains, and valves, but not including substations located on or above the surface of the ground, for the distribution to consumers of telephone, cable
television or other communications, electricity, gas or water, or for the collection of sewage or surface water. All such uses shall, however, comply
with the subdivision and other applicable ordinances of the village.
2. Railroad Uses: All railroad rights of way used for railroad purposes, trackage, and passenger stations existing on the effective date of this zoning
code shall be exempt from its provisions. Any other railroad rights of way, facilities, or uses, or any change of such existing facilities or uses, shall be
subject to all provisions of this zoning code.
F. Private Agreements: This zoning code is not intended to abrogate, annul, or otherwise interfere with any platted building line, easement, covenant, or
other private agreement or legal relationship; provided, however, that where the regulations of this zoning code are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or requirements than such platted building line, easement, covenant, or other private agreement or legal relationship, the regulations of this
zoning code shall govern. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23A-2: APPLICATION TO VARIATIONS, SPECIAL USES, AND DEVELOPMENT PLANS:
A. Existing Variations, Special Uses, And Development Plan Approvals: Any variation, special use permit, or planned development or comprehensive
development plan approval lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this zoning code, or any amendment to it, shall be deemed to be and continue
valid after such effective date subject to any conditions placed thereon at the time of issuance; provided, however, that any such variation, special use
permit, or planned development or comprehensive development plan approval shall be subject to all of the terms and provisions of this zoning code
unless work pursuant to such approval is actually commenced within three (3) months after the effective date of this zoning code. Any structure or use
lawfully authorized by any such variation, special use permit, or planned development or comprehensive development plan approval that could not be
so issued after such effective date shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 11 of this title dealing with nonconformities.
B. Existing Uses And Structures Newly Requiring Special Use Permit: The owners of any use or structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this
zoning code, or any amendment to it, that did not, prior to such effective date, require a special use permit but which, after such effective date, does
require a special use permit, may continue such use or maintain such structure by securing therefor a certificate of zoning compliance pursuant to the
standards and procedures of chapter 13 of this title. Unless and until such a permit is so secured, such use shall be subject to the provisions of chapter
11 of this title dealing with nonconformities. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23A-3: BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE:
A. When New Code Shall Apply: All work, structures, and uses authorized by building permits issued prior to the effective date of this zoning code or any
amendment to it shall not be affected by this zoning code. Except as provided in subsections B and C of this section, no certificate of zoning
compliance shall be issued following the effective date of this zoning code or any amendment to it unless the work, structure, or use for which the
certificate is sought is made to fully comply with the applicable provisions of this zoning code or any such amendment.
B. Right To Complete Construction Pursuant To Approved Plans: Nothing in this zoning code, or any amendment to it, shall be deemed to require any
change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any structure if a building permit for such structure was lawfully and properly issued prior to the
effective date of this zoning code or any such amendment to it, such permit had not by its own terms expired prior to such effective date, and
construction pursuant to such permit is commenced prior to the expiration of such permit.
C. Right To Occupy As Nonconformity: After completion pursuant to subsection B of this section, such structure may be occupied by, and a certificate of
zoning compliance shall be issued for, the use designated on such permit, subject thereafter, to the extent applicable, to the provisions of chapter 11 of
this title relating to nonconformities. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23A-4: PENDING APPLICATIONS:
A. When New Code Shall Apply: This zoning code, and any amendment to it, shall apply to all applications pending and not yet finally decided on the
effective date thereof to which it would apply if such applications were filed on or after such effective date; provided, however, that nothing in this
zoning code shall be deemed to require any change in any proposed plat of subdivision that has been granted preliminary plat approval by the board of
trustees prior to such effective date, and provided further, however, that this zoning code shall not apply to any zoning variation application that was on
file with the village and complete in all material respects prior to such effective date, which zoning variation application shall be processed in
accordance with the standards and requirements that were in effect on the date such application was filed.
B. Duty Of Village Manager: Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this zoning code, or any amendment to it, the village manager shall inform
each applicant to which this zoning code applies that said application is subject to the provisions of this zoning code, as amended, and will be
processed in accordance therewith; that the applicant may within thirty (30) days after the mailing of such notice refile, without additional fee, its
application on the basis of this zoning code, as amended; and that if the applicant does not so refile, its application may be denied for noncompliance
with the provisions of this zoning code, as amended.
C. Duty Of Applicant: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, it shall be the responsibility of each applicant having an application
pending on the effective date of this zoning code, or any amendment to it, to modify such application in accordance with the terms and provisions of
this zoning code, as amended, and the failure to do so, whether or not the procedures of said subsection have been followed, may result in denial of
such application for failure to comply with this zoning code, as amended. Any modification or refiling of an application pending on such effective date in
order to comply with the provisions of this zoning code, as amended, shall be permitted at any time prior to the final disposition of such application and
shall be permitted without payment of any additional fee.
D. Processing Of Pending Applications: After the refiling of any pending application as herein provided, or after notification from the applicant that it will not
refile or modify its application, or after the expiration of sixty (60) days after the effective date of this zoning code or any amendment to it, whichever
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 382/524
occurs first, such pending application shall be processed in accordance with the terms of this zoning code, as amended; provided, however, that the
application requirements, hearing requirements, and procedural requirements set forth in chapter 14 of this title shall not apply to any such pending
application and each such application shall be processed in accordance with the application, hearing, and procedural requirements that were in effect
on the date such application was filed. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the village manager shall have the authority to request
additional data, information, or documentation for pending applications when, in his or her judgment, such additional data, information, or
documentation is necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of such pending application. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23A-5: REPEAL OF PRIOR PROVISIONS:
This title is the Lake Zurich zoning ordinance as amended from time to time thereafter. All prior zoning ordinances and regulations and prior related
provisions of the Lake Zurich municipal code shall be, and they are hereby, repealed in their entirety. Except as expressly provided in this zoning code,
such repeals shall not affect or impair any act done, offense committed, or right accruing, accrued, or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal takes effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted, or inflicted as fully and to the
same extent as if such repeal had not been effected. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23A-6: SEVERABILITY:
A. Intent As To Severability: The several provisions of this zoning code shall be severable in accordance with the following rules:
1. Provisions Declared Invalid: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this zoning code to be invalid, such judgment shall
not affect any other provisions of this zoning code.
2. Applications Declared Invalid: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this zoning code to a
particular parcel of land, a particular structure or a particular use, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provisions to any other land,
structure, or use.
B. Applicable Regulations Following Declaration Of Invalidity: Whenever the provisions of this zoning code are declared invalid in their application to any
particular parcel of land, the zoning map provided for in section 9-2-4 of this title shall continue to show such parcel in the zoning district applicable to it
pursuant to this zoning code unless and until such district is changed by an amendment adopted by the board of trustees pursuant to chapter 18 of this
title; provided, however, that the parcel in question shall also be marked with a star or other distinctive marking to direct attention to the court decree
affecting said parcel. The village manager shall maintain a file of any such decrees. The provisions of any such decree shall be deemed to modify the
otherwise applicable provisions of this zoning code as they apply to said parcel to the extent provided in said decree but said parcel shall otherwise
remain subject to the provisions of this zoning code. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23A-7: EFFECTIVE DATE AND PUBLICATION:
This zoning code shall take effect immediately after, and its effective date shall be the date of, its passage by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the corporate
authorities then holding office and its approval by the village president, the corporate authorities hereby finding that the immediate implementation of this
zoning code is a matter of urgency. The village manager is hereby authorized and directed to publish this zoning code in pamphlet form and to publish an
appropriate notice of its adoption and availability in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. (Ord., 10-2004)
ARTICLE B. SCOPE
9-23B-1: PROVISIONS ARE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this zoning code shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, morals, and general welfare, as set forth in the provisions hereof establishing the intent and purpose of this zoning code in general
and its various sections in particular. When the provisions of this zoning code impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance, or
regulation, the provisions of this zoning code shall be controlling. When the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, or regulation impose greater
restrictions than this zoning code, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, or regulation shall be controlling. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23B-2: PROVISIONS ARE CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this zoning code shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other codes, laws, and ordinances in
existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this zoning code. The several provisions of this zoning code shall also be interpreted to
be cumulative of each other. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this zoning code shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict
with, the provisions of such other codes, laws, and ordinances, and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest
application. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23B-3: PROVISIONS ARE NOT A CONSENT, LICENSE, OR PERMIT:
The provisions of this zoning code shall not be interpreted to be, or to grant, a consent, license, or permit to use any property or to establish, locate,
construct, or maintain any structure or use, or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23B-4: UNLAWFUL USES AND STRUCTURES ARE NOT VALIDATED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 383/524
This zoning code shall not be interpreted to validate or make lawful any unlawful use or structure existing upon the effective date of this zoning code. Any
such unlawful use or structure shall remain unlawful to the extent that said use or structure is in conflict with the provisions of this zoning code. (Ord., 10-
2004)
ARTICLE C. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
9-23C-1: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND DUTY:
On finding the existence of any violation of this Zoning Code, the Village Manager shall have the authority and duty to take or direct all actions necessary
or appropriate to abate and redress such violation. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23C-2: CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT:
A. Stop And Cease And Desist Orders: On finding the existence of any violation of this Zoning Code, the Village Manager shall notify, in writing, the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it; specifically, the Manager shall order
the discontinuance of any illegal use of land or structures, the removal of illegal structures, additions, or alterations, and the discontinuance of illegal
work being done.
B. Legal Actions: In the enforcement of this Zoning Code, the Village Manager shall exercise all the powers authorized by the Statutes of the State of
Illinois and Village codes and ordinances to ensure compliance with, or to prevent or abate any violation of, the provisions of this Zoning Code, and in
particular shall, where necessary or appropriate, institute or cause to be instituted by the Village Attorney in the name of the Village of Lake Zurich any
and all actions, legal or equitable, including appeals, that may be required for the enforcement of this Zoning Code.
C. Abatement; Liens: Where authorized by State Statute, the Village Manager may order any work necessary to abate any violation of this Zoning Code
and shall assess the cost of such work to the property owner. Upon the failure of the owner to pay such cost, the Manager shall file a lien for such costs
and for all costs of collection against the property in question.
D. Revocation Of Rezonings, Permits, Variations, Or Approvals: The violation of any provision of this Zoning Code, or of any permit or approval granted
pursuant to this Zoning Code, or of any condition imposed pursuant to this Zoning Code shall be grounds for the revocation of any rezoning, permit,
variation, or approval granted pursuant to this Zoning Code and affecting the property involved in the violation. The Village Manager may recommend
and the Board of Trustees may order such revocation; provided, however, that where the original rezoning, permit, variation, or approval was granted
following a public hearing required pursuant to this Zoning Code, the revocation shall be preceded by a similar public hearing.
E. Fines: In the enforcement of this Zoning Code, the Village Manager shall, where necessary and appropriate, order the issuance and enforcement of
citations to recover fines and penalties for the violation of this Zoning Code as authorized by State law and this Zoning Code. (Ord., 10-2004)
9-23C-3: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate, disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply with, or who shall resist enforcement of, any provision of this Zoning Code shall
be subject to a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code for each offense; provided, however, that, if service
of summons is made by certified mail pursuant to section 1-2-9.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-9.1, as amended, then
the maximum fine shall be pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code. Each day a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord., 10-2004; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
9-23C-4: PRIVATE REMEDIES PRESERVED:
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to prevent any person entitled to relief in law or equity by reason of a violation of the provisions of this Zoning
Code from bringing an appropriate action to secure such relief. (Ord., 10-2004)
Chapter 24
USAGE AND DEFINITIONS
9-24-1: WORD USAGE:
A. Tense And Form: Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
B. Number: Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
C. Gender: The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter gender
shall include the masculine and feminine.
D. Shall And May: The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 384/524
E. Time: The time within which any act required by this zoning code is to be performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last
day, unless the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a holiday declared by the United States congress or the Illinois general assembly, in which event it
shall also be excluded.
F. Person: The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, joint ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations, and any other
similar entities.
G. Used For: The phrase "used for" shall include intended for, designed for, occupied for, maintained for, and arranged to be used or occupied for
whenever that interpretation would result in the regulation being more restrictive in its application to any use or structure.
H. Village: The word "village" means the village of Lake Zurich, Lake County, Illinois.
I. County: The word "county" means the county of Lake, Illinois.
J. Undefined Terms: Any word not defined in section 9-24-2 of this chapter shall have the meaning given in any applicable village code or ordinance or, if
none, in the "Merriam-Webster Dictionary, Eleventh Edition", 2004, except for words employed to refer to the permitted uses and special uses of this
zoning code, which shall be interpreted, insofar as applicable, in accordance with the meaning established in the "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual", 1987, as amended through the effective date of this zoning code.
K. Captions, Illustrations, And Tables: In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this zoning code and any caption, illustration,
or table, the text shall control.
L. Chapter, Article, Section, And Subsection Headings: This zoning code is divided into chapters, articles, sections, and subsections that shall be
numbered according to the following format:
9-7A-1A1a(1)(A)(i)
and that shall be referred to in accordance with the following example:
9 Title
9-7 Chapter
9-7A Article
9-7A-1 Section
9-7A-1A Subsection
9-7A-1A1 Subsection
9-7A-1A1a Subsection
9-7A-1A1a(1) Subsection
9-7A-1A1a(1)(A) Subsection
9-7A-1A1a(1)(A)(i) Subsection
(Ord., 10-2004)
9-24-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Zoning Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ABUT: To touch, to lie immediately next to, to share a common wall or lot line, or to be separated by only a street, alley, or drainage course.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE: See section 9-9-1 of this title.
ADJACENT: To lie near, close to, or in the vicinity.
ADULT BOOTH: Any area of an adult entertainment establishment set off from the remainder of such establishment by one or more walls or other dividers
or partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
ADULT CABARET: Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides any of the following:
A. Persons who appear seminude.
B. Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas
or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 385/524
C. Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation
of specified sexual activities.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: An "adult cabaret", "adult store", or "adult theater", as defined in this section.
ADULT MATERIAL: Any of the following, whether new or used:
A. 1. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or digitally stored materials; or
2. Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind,
that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or
simulation of specified sexual activities.
B. Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or describe
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT STORE: Any commercial establishment: a) that contains one or more adult booths; b) that as a substantial or significant portion of its business
offers for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials; or c) that has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of adult materials.
ADULT THEATER: Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides films, motion pictures,
video or audio cassettes, slides, or other visual representations or recordings that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure,
depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
ALLEY: A public right-of-way that affords only a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.
ALTERATION: Any change in the size, shape, character, occupancy, or use of a structure.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL: See definition of structural alteration.
AMENDMENT: See chapter 18 of this title.
ANTENNA: Any structure designed for transmitting signals to a receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data, or other signals from satellites or
other services.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any structure used for the principal purpose of supporting an antenna.
ANTENNA SURFACE AREA: See definition of surface area, antenna.
APPEAL: See chapter 16 of this title.
ATTACHED, DWELLING: See definition of dwelling, single-family attached.
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE: An automated device that performs banking or financial functions.
AWNING: A rooflike covering, temporary in nature, that projects from the wall of a building.
BASEMENT: A portion of a structure located partly underground having an average ceiling height above grade of more than 3.5 feet but less than six feet
(6').
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: A single-family detached dwelling that provides sleeping accommodations for charge to the public. See
subsection 9-3-3F of this title for requirements and standards applicable to bed and breakfast establishments.
BERM: A hill or contour of land that acts as a visual barrier between a lot and adjacent properties, alleys, or streets.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or boundary lines of the Village.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village. See section 9-12-2 of this title.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Lake Zurich.
BOAT LAUNCH RAMP: An inclined, hard surface slab or slipway on the shore of a water body that extends into the water, upon which trailered boats can
be launched and retrieved; such ramp may consist of one or more launch lanes. Such definition of boat launch ramp shall only be applicable to such
structures directly associated with and on the premises of an authorized marina, as defined in this chapter. An existing "boat launch ramp" shall be
pursuant to the provisions of chapter 11, "Nonconformities", of this title.
BUFFERING: Any means of protecting a parcel from the visual or auditory effects of an adjacent use. Buffering may include, but is not limited to, berming,
fencing, landscaping, setbacks, or open spaces.
BUILDING: See definition of structure. References to "building" shall in all cases be deemed to refer to both buildings and structures.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: See section 9-9-1 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 386/524
BUILDING CODE: The Building Code of the Village of Lake Zurich.
BUILDING DEPTH: The longest straight line that can be drawn through a structure substantially parallel to the side or corner side lot lines of the lot on
which it is located.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded entirely by open space.
BUILDING HEIGHT: See definition of height.
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE FRONT: That exterior wall of a building or structure facing the front line of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use or uses of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUILDING WIDTH: The longest straight line that can be drawn through a structure parallel to the front lot line.
BULK AND SPACE REGULATIONS: The regulations of this Zoning Code pertaining to the permissible or required height, volume, area, floor area, floor
area ratio, open space ratio, minimum lot area and dimensions, building coverage, lot coverage, usable open space, and density standards applicable to
uses and structures. The term does not include yard requirements.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: Any district whose designation begins with the letter "B", as set forth in section 9-2-1 of this title.
BUSINESS USE OR PURPOSE: Any use permitted in a business or shopping district.
CALIPER: The diameter of a tree trunk measured at six inches (6") above ground level for trees less than four inches (4") in diameter at ground level and
measured twelve inches (12") above ground level for all other trees.
CANOPY: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature that projects from the wall of a building.
CARDHOLDER: A qualifying patient or a designated caregiver who has been issued and possesses a valid registry identification card by the Department
of Public Health.
CARRYOUT EATING PLACE: See definition of eating place, carryout.
CELLAR: A portion of a structure located partly or wholly underground having an average ceiling height above grade of not more than 3.5 feet.
CEMETERY: A burial ground including structures such as mausoleums, columbariums, incidental management offices, and maintenance facilities.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE: See chapter 13 of this title.
CIRCULATION AISLE: The means of access to a parking or loading space for a motor vehicle.
CIVIC OR CIVIC USE OR PURPOSE: An undertaking in which the citizens of a community, by their cooperative action and as their central goal, seek to
promote the general welfare and common good of the community; in other words, a community movement to accomplish community goals.
CLASSIFICATION OR ZONING CLASSIFICATION: The district into which a parcel of land is placed and the body of regulations to which it is subjected by
this Zoning Code and the zoning map.
CLEAR SITE AREA: See section 4-2-1-3 of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code.
CODE: See definition of Zoning Code.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING: A building the principal use of which is a commercial use.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where admission, services, performances, or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of
consideration.
COMMERCIAL USE OR PURPOSE: Any use permitted in a business district.
COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open area, or from other buildings or structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows or doors normally provided for the accommodation of persons, goods or
vehicles. However, a parking structure that has less than fifty percent (50%) of its outer wall space open but that does not allow any parked vehicle within
said structure to be seen from the exterior thereof shall be considered a completely enclosed building.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: See section 9-2-5 of this title.
CORNER LOT: See definition of lot, corner.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one end open and one end permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
CURB LEVEL: The street curb height at the midpoint of a lot line. Where no curb exists, the elevation of the crown of the street at the midpoint of the lot
line shall be deemed to be the curb level.
CUTOFF: A device used to completely eliminate all light rays emitted by a lamp, luminaire, or other light source at a specific angle above the ground.
CUTOFF ANGLE: The angle formed by the intersection of a straight line drawn perpendicular to the ground at the source of light and a straight line drawn
from the light source along the path above which no light is emitted.
DAYCARE: Daytime care or instruction of children away from their own homes by a person other than a relative, whether or not for compensation or
reward.
DAYCARE HOME: A dwelling unit in which daycare for children is being provided as a home occupation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 387/524
DECK: A structure attached to or closely adjacent to any dwelling unit that is designed and intended for the support of persons; that is made of wood; that
has no permanent or temporary cover or canopy; that is constructed on piers and without continuous foundation or footings; and that has no part extending
above the floor level of the first story of such dwelling, excluding any cellar or basement; provided, however, that protective, decorative, or ornamental
appurtenances such as handrailings, benches, and the like may extend to a height of forty two inches (42") above such floor level.
DEDICATION: The designation of land for a public use by the owner thereof.
DEPTH OF LOT: See definition of lot depth.
DESIGNATED CAREGIVER: A person who: a) is at least twenty one (21) years of age; b) has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of cannabis; c)
has not been convicted of an excluded offense; and d) assists no more than one registered qualifying patient with his or her medical use of cannabis.
DETENTION: Temporary on site storage of stormwater to be released at a predetermined rate by means of facilities engineered for that purpose.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change, other than maintenance of existing structures, paved areas, or utilities, to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, without limitation, the construction or installation of new, or enlargement of existing, structures, streets, or utilities; dredging, filling, drilling,
mining, grading, paving, or excavating operations; and open storage of materials.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): The diameter of a tree trunk measured at fifty four inches (54") above ground level.
DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND ZONING: The Lake Zurich Director of Building and Zoning. Also known as the Manager of Building and Zoning.
DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE: A line on the zoning map separating one district from another. See also subsection 9-2-4C of this title.
DISTRICT BOUNDARY LOT: Any lot or parcel of land any lot line of which coincides with a district boundary line or which is contiguous to any public or
private right-of-way containing a district boundary line.
DISTRICT OR DISTRICT, ZONING: See definition of zoning district.
DRAINAGEWAY: Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, swale, or similar depression or topographic feature into which surface water flows.
DRIVE-IN EATING PLACE: See definition of eating place, drive-in.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT OR FACILITY: An establishment or facility that by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures
encourages or permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product that may be used or consumed in a motor vehicle on or off the premises or to be
entertained while remaining in a motor vehicle.
DRIVEWAY: A private accessway that provides direct access from a street to not more than one lot or one principal building or use.
DWELLING: Any structure or portion thereof designed or used for habitation by one or more families.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling, other than a townhouse dwelling, containing more than two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: See definition of dwelling, townhouse.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A dwelling containing only one dwelling unit, situated on a separate subdivision lot or being a separate
condominium unit capable of individual sale and completely surrounded by open space.
DWELLING, STAFF: A dwelling where lodging is provided in rooming units exclusively for the administrators, employees, vocational students, or other
personnel of a hospital, and their families.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling composed of a row of two (2) or more adjoining dwelling units, each situated on a separate subdivision lot or being
a separate condominium unit capable of individual sale, and each of which is separated from the others by one or more unpierced walls extending from
ground to roof, and each of which is provided with garage space sufficient for at least two (2) vehicles.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling, other than a townhouse dwelling, containing two (2) dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the
other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or intended to be used
for general living by one family, including any such unit in which food or drink is stored on a regular basis, or in which a bed is placed at any time, or in
which kitchen or cooking facilities are installed or used at any time.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated area of his or her property. The term
also refers to such a designated area.
EATING PLACE: An establishment where food is available to the general public primarily for consumption within a structure on the premises, where at
least fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the establishment is devoted to patron seating, and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on
the premises is neither encouraged nor permitted.
EATING PLACE, CARRYOUT: An establishment which by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the
purchase of prepared, ready to eat foods intended to be consumed off the premises, and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on the premises
is neither permitted nor encouraged.
EATING PLACE, DRIVE-IN: A drive-in establishment, as defined as "drive-in establishment or facility" in this section, where food is prepared and served
for consumption in motor vehicles.
EFFECTIVE DATE: See section 9-23A-7 of this title.
ENLARGEMENT: An addition to the floor area of, or any other increase in the size of, any existing structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 388/524
EXTENSION: An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an existing use within an existing structure or an increase in that portion of a tract of
land occupied by an existing use.
EXTERIOR WALL: Any wall of a building or structure one side of which is exposed to the outdoors.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or guardianship, or not more than four (4) persons not so related, together with
gratuitous guests and domestic servants, living together as a single housekeeping unit.
FENCE: A barrier structure used as a boundary or as a means of protection, confinement, or screening.
FINANCIAL SERVICES: Any commercial or office establishment or business that primarily performs central banking functions (such as issuing currency,
managing national money supply and international reserves, and acting as fiscal agent for the central government) and accepts deposits (or share
deposits) and lends funds from these deposits, and which establishment may include these services to patrons and customers through an accessory,
drive-through, as a special use. Uses include banks; savings associations; savings and loan institutions; investment banking; brokerage securities or
commodities; credit reporting services; certified financial planning; accounting; auditing bookkeeping; credit services offices, including credit unions;
holdings and investment services; savings and loans association officers; and consumer and mercantile credit reporting services. Financial services does
not include pawnshops, businesses primarily engaged in check cashing or issuing money orders or title loan establishments or other businesses offering
short term consumer loans secured by personal property, certificates of title to such property, estimated tax refunds or other such collateral (all of which
are prohibited money changing/money brokering uses).
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: Except as hereinafter provided, the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of all stories of a building or of such area
devoted to a specific use, measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings or uses. Gross floor
area shall include areas such as elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor; floor spaces and shafts used for mechanical, electrical, and plumbing
equipment, except as indicated below or when located on the roof; penthouses; interior balconies and mezzanines; atria; enclosed porches; and floor
space used for accessory uses. Gross floor area shall include one-half (1/2) of the floor area of basement floors; one-half (1/2) of the floor area located in
the uppermost story of a structure when said uppermost story has a ceiling height of seven feet (7') or more over a floor area that is one-third (1/3) or more
but less than one-half (1/2) of the floor area of the next lower story; and all of the floor area located in the uppermost story of a structure when said
uppermost story has a ceiling height of seven feet (7') or more over a floor area that is one-half (1/2) or more of the floor area of the next lower story. Gross
floor area shall include one-half (1/2) of the floor area of the uppermost level of a multilevel parking structure and all of the floor area of all other levels of all
parking structures except basement and cellar levels, which shall be treated like basement and cellar stories. Gross floor area shall not include the floor
area of the uppermost story of a structure when said uppermost story has a ceiling height of seven feet (7') or more over a floor area than is less than onethird
(1/3) of the floor area of the next lower story; or cellar floor area. Where any space has a floor to ceiling height of more than sixteen feet (16'), each
sixteen feet (16') of height or major fraction thereof shall be treated as a separate floor.
FLOOR AREA, NET: The gross floor area of a building minus floor space devoted to washrooms intended for general public use; elevator shafts and
stairwells at each floor; floor space and shafts used for mechanical, electrical, and plumbing equipment; public foyers and atria intended for general public
use; exterior building walls; floor space devoted to off street parking and loading; and basement floor space used only for bulk storage.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The gross floor area of a building divided by the lot area of the zoning lot on which it is located. For purpose of calculating
the FAR, "lot area" shall not include areas permanently covered by water or areas subject to natural resource restrictions, including floodplains, wetlands,
and lowland conservancy soils.
FOOT-CANDLE: The illumination of a surface one foot (1') distant from a source of one candle power, equal to one lumen per square foot.
FOOT-CANDLE, MAXIMUM: The maximum permitted illumination, measured in foot-candles both horizontally and vertically, at the lot line of the lot on
which the light source is located.
FRONT LOT LINE: See definition of lot line, front.
FRONT YARD: See definition of yard: front.
FRONT YARD LINE: See definition of yard line, front.
FRONTAGE: All of the property fronting on one side of a street, measured along such street, between an intersecting or intercepting street and another
intersecting or intercepting street, a right-of-way in excess of thirty feet (30'), an end of a dead end street, or a Village boundary.
FRONTAGE, ZONING LOT: All of the property of a zoning lot fronting on a street, measured between side or corner side lot lines.
GARAGE, PARKING: A structure, or part thereof, designed or used for the parking and storage of vehicles at one or more levels.
GLARE, DIRECT: Light visible directly from the source thereof.
GRADE: The average level of the ground existing prior to any reshaping of the natural contours at the four (4) principal corners of a structure or proposed
structure that are closest to the lot lines. When the existing natural ground level slopes away from any such corner, then the level of the ground at such
corner shall be measured at the lowest point lying within six feet (6') of such corner.
GRADING: Reshaping natural land contours using natural land materials.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, or to the deck line for mansard roofs, or to the mean
height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, or to the highest point of a structure without a roof. When a parapet wall, a penthouse,
or any similar structure is located on the roof of a building, the building height shall be measured to the highest point of said structure if any part of it
extends above the height as measured pursuant to the first sentence of this definition. Notwithstanding the foregoing, mechanical equipment and any wall
or similar structure designed exclusively for the purpose of screening such mechanical equipment from view shall not be considered in determining the
height of a building. Chimneys shall not be considered in determining the height of a building.
HOME OCCUPATION: See section 9-9-3 of this title.
HOTEL: An establishment that is designed for transient guests, that is commonly known as a hotel in the community in which it is located, that does not
have individual entrances from the outside of the building for the dwelling or rooming units located therein, and that provides customary hotel services
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 389/524
such as maid service, furnishing and laundry of linen, telephone service, desk service, bellboy service, and the use and upkeep of furniture.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Buildings, sidewalks, paved areas, routinely used storage areas, or any other material or surface area that prevents the
absorption of water into the ground.
IMPROVEMENT OR FACILITY, PUBLIC: A sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage appurtenance, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, planting strip,
or other facility for which the Village or any other government agency may assume maintenance or operational responsibility.
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING: Any building the principal use of which is an institutional use.
INSTITUTIONAL USE OR PURPOSE: Any use permitted in the Institutional Buildings District.
INTERIOR LOT: See definition of lot, interior.
INTERPRETATION: See chapter 15 and chapter 23, article B of this title.
LAND BANKING: The setting aside of land area for future use. See also subsection 9-10-1E of this title.
LANDSCAPED SURFACE: The area of a lot maintained as a natural, landscaped area, undisturbed or with the addition of lawns, trees, or other plant life.
LANDSCAPED SURFACE AREA: The percent of total lot that is maintained as landscaped surface.
LAUNCH LANE: A designated/delineated area within a boat launch ramp for use by one vehicle/boat at a time.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD: See definition of nonconforming lot of record, legal.
LESS RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT: See section 9-2-2 of this title.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT: A public performance intended to be diverting or engaging with or without the use of instrumental, electronic, or mechanical
accompaniment.
LOADING DOCK: An off street area and facility that opens onto a building facade, within which one or more loading spaces are located.
LOADING SPACE: An off street area used for the standing, loading, or unloading of one truck or trailer. See section 9-10-2 of this title.
LOT: See definitions of lot of record and lot, zoning. Unless the context indicates otherwise, all references in this Zoning Code to a "lot" shall be deemed to
mean a "zoning lot".
LOT AREA PER UNIT: That portion of the total lot area allocated for each dwelling unit located on a lot.
LOT AREA, TOTAL: The total land and water area included within lot lines, excluding, however, land areas subject to easements for public or private
access or egress.
LOT, BUILDABLE AREA OF A: That portion of a lot bounded by the required yards.
LOT, BUILDABLE WIDTH OF A: The width of a lot remaining as buildable after side yards and corner side yards are provided.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or junction or a lot bounded on two (2) sides by a curving street where it is
possible to draw two (2) intersecting tangents, one each commencing at each of the two (2) points of intersection of the lot lines and street line, which
intersect with each other to form an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The maximum straight line distance between the front and rear lot lines or, in the case of a through lot, the distance between the two (2) front
lot lines located along the nonintersecting streets.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE: Any street line of a corner lot other than its front lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot abutting upon only one street, the line separating such lot from such street; in the case of a through lot,
each line separating such lot from a street shall be considered a front lot line; in the case of a corner lot, the shorter lot line separating such lot from a
street shall be considered to be the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR: That lot line that is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line of the lot; provided, however, that in any case where no lot line of at
least twenty feet (20') in length is parallel to the front lot line, an imaginary line twenty feet (20') in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to, and at the
maximum possible distance from, the front lot line shall be considered to be the rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than a front, corner side, or rear lot line.
LOT LINES: The property lines bounding a lot; provided, however, that when a lot includes land subject to a public right-of-way easement for street
purposes, the line separating such right-of-way from the rest of the lot shall be deemed to be the lot line.
LOT, MINIMUM TOTAL AREA OF: The smallest lot on which a particular use or structure may be located in a particular district. The areas of a lot
permanently covered by water or subject to natural resource restrictions, including floodplains, wetlands, or lowland conservancy soils, shall not be
included in the calculation of minimum total lot area. (Such areas of the lot shall be included, however, in calculating the total land area of a lot for other
purposes.)
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the Office of the Lake County Recorder of Deeds, or a parcel
of land separately described in a recorded deed.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontages on two (2) nonintersecting streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 390/524
LOT, WIDTH OF: The shortest distance between side lot lines measured by a line passing through the point of the required front yard line equidistant from
the points where the front yard line intersects the side yard lines (measured along the front yard line); provided, however, that the length of the front lot line
shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the required minimum lot width.
LOT, ZONING: A tract of land consisting of one or more lots of record, or parts thereof, under single ownership or control, located entirely within a block
and occupied by, or designated by its owner or developer at the time of filing for any zoning approval or building permit as a tract to be developed for, a
principal building and its accessory buildings, or a principal use, together with such open spaces and yards as are designed and arranged, or required
under this Zoning Code, to be used with such building or use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, sale of individual lots of record underlying individual dwelling
units in a townhouse or two-family dwelling, following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such dwelling, shall not prevent treatment of the tract of
land underlying such dwelling as a zoning lot and all applicable bulk, space, and yard requirements shall be applied with respect to such dwelling and such
zoning lot rather than with respect to individually owned dwelling units and lots of record.
LUMINAIRE: A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts.
MARINA: A "commercial use or purpose", operating as a "commercial establishment", as further defined within this section, located on waterfront property
containing one or more of the following facilities: secure moorings/slips for pleasure boats, boat rental, a boat dock, a boat launch ramp, boat livery, boat
sales, maintenance shops, marine supplies, boat storage or restrooms. An existing "marina" shall be pursuant to the provisions of chapter 11,
"Nonconformities", of this title.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature that projects from the wall of a building.
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility authorized by Illinois law and operated by an organization or business registered by the
Department of Agriculture to grow, and/or cultivate, and/or perform necessary activities to provide registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations
with usable medical cannabis, in accordance with all Illinois and Village Statutes, ordinances, and regulations.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY: A facility authorized by Illinois law and operated by an organization or business registered by the Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire, and/or sell, and/or dispense medical cannabis from a registered medical cannabis cultivation facility, in
accordance with all Illinois and Village Statutes, ordinances, and regulations.
MINIMUM LOT AREA: See definition of lot, minimum total area of.
MORE RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT: See section 9-2-2 of this title.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: See definition of dwelling, multiple-family.
NET FLOOR AREA: See definition of floor area, net.
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD: A lot of record that does not comply with the lot requirements for any use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD, LEGAL: A nonconforming lot of record that:
A. Was created by a plat or deed recorded at a time when, and came into ownership separate from adjoining tracts of land at a time when, the creation
of a lot of such size, shape, depth, and width at such location would not have been prohibited by any ordinance or other regulation; and
B. Has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the creation of such a lot
has been prohibited by any applicable ordinance or other regulation.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any building or structure, other than a sign, lawfully existing on the effective date of this Zoning Code, or any
amendment to it rendering such building or structure nonconforming, that:
A. Does not comply with all of the regulations of this Zoning Code, or any such amendment thereto, governing parking, loading, or bulk and space
requirements for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or
B. Is located on a lot that does not, or is so located on a lot as not to, comply with the yard or setback requirements for the zoning district in which such
building or structure is located; or
C. Both subsections A and B of this definition; except
D. Any building containing more than one dwelling unit in addition to the number permitted by the district regulations in the district where it is located
shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use rather than a nonconforming structure.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any use lawfully being made of any land, building, or structure, other than a sign, on the effective date of this Zoning Code, or
any amendment to it rendering such use nonconforming, that does not comply with all of the regulations of this Zoning Code, or any such amendment
hereto, governing use for the zoning district in which such land, building, or structure is located.
NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS): The 2002 edition of the publication prepared by the Office of Management and
Budget, executive office of the President of the United States, available from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. government printing office,
Washington, D.C., as amended through the effective date of this Zoning Code.
NURSING AND PERSONAL CARE FACILITY: An establishment that provides full time nursing and health related personal care, but not hospital services,
with inpatient beds for three (3) or more individuals who are not related by blood or marriage to the operator and who, by reason of advanced age, chronic
illness, or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. No care for the acutely ill or surgical or obstetrical services shall be provided in such an
establishment; a hospital shall not be construed to be included in this definition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 391/524
OFFICE BUILDING: Any building the principal use of which is an office use.
OFFICE DISTRICT: Any district, except the Open Space District, whose designation begins with the letter "O" as set forth in section 9-2-1 of this title.
OFFICE USE OR PURPOSE: Any use permitted in an office district.
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: See section 9-2-5 of this title.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, or renting merchandise out of doors.
OPEN SPACE AND USABLE OPEN SPACE: An area or areas of a lot, including required yards, that is:
A. Open and unobstructed from ground to sky except by facilities specifically designed, arranged, and intended for use in conjunction with passive or
active outdoor recreation or relaxation; and
B. Landscaped, maintained, or otherwise treated to create a setting appropriate to recreation or relaxation; and
C. Usable by the residents of all dwellings, or the users of all nonresidential buildings, it is intended or required to serve.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Open space held in private ownership, regularly available for use by the occupants of more than one dwelling or the users of
more than one nonresidential building.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE: Open space held in private ownership, the use of which is normally limited to the occupants of one dwelling or the users of one
nonresidential building.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC: Open space dedicated to or owned by any government or governmental agency or authority.
OPEN SPACE RATIO (OSR): The total open space, common, public, or private, on a lot divided by the total lot area of the zoning lot on which such total
open space is located.
OWNER: Includes the holder of legal title as well as holders of any equitable interest, such as trust beneficiaries, contract purchasers, option holders,
lessees under leases having an unexpired term of at least ten (10) years, and the like.
PARKING AREA: Any land area, not located in a garage, designed and used for the parking of not more than four (4) vehicles.
PARKING GARAGE OR STRUCTURE: See definition of garage, parking.
PARKING LOT: Any land area designed or used for the parking, and associated circulation, of more than four (4) vehicles.
PARKING SPACE: An area for the parking of a vehicle.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material other than water that is suspended or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid.
PASSIVE RECREATION: Recreational uses or activities that are noncompetitive in nature and that require no special equipment, such as picnicking,
hiking, bicycling, bird watching, jogging, and the like.
PERIMETER LANDSCAPED OPEN SPACE: A landscaped open space intended to enhance the appearance of, or screen from view, parking lots and
other outdoor aesthetically unpleasant uses or areas or to create a transition between incompatible uses by means of appropriate buffering, landscaping,
or screening primarily along lot lines.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Plan Commission of the Village of Lake Zurich. See section 9-12-3 of this title.
PLAY FIELD: An area of active recreation such as a baseball diamond, a football field, a soccer field, or the like.
PREMISES: A lot, plot, or parcel of land, together with the buildings and structures thereon.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR BUILDING: A structure or building on a zoning lot intended to be utilized for a principal use and to which any other structure
on such lot must be accessory.
PRINCIPAL USE: The use of a zoning lot, whether a permitted or specially permitted use, designated by the owner of such lot as the primary or main use
of such lot and to which any other use on such lot must be accessory.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY: See definition of right-of-way, private.
PROPERTY LINE: See definition of lot lines.
PROTECTED USES: A. A church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship.
B. A public or private nursery, elementary, or secondary school.
C. A childcare facility, licensed by the Illinois Department Of Children and Family Services.
D. A public park, playground, playing field, or forest preserve.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 392/524
E. A public or private cemetery.
F. A public housing facility.
G. A youth oriented gymnasium or sports training facility.
PUBLIC HEARING: A meeting conducted pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act at which members of the general public must be
permitted to give testimony, evidence, or opinions relevant to the subject matter.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT OR FACILITY: See definition of improvement or facility, public.
PUBLIC MEETING: A meeting conducted pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act at which members of the general public, as opposed
to members of the committee, board, or commission and as opposed to the applicant for relief, have no right (but may be given the opportunity) to offer
testimony, evidence, or opinions.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OR PUBLIC WAY: See definition of right-of-way, public.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, or corporation under public regulation furnishing franchised services such as cable television, electricity, gas,
telephone, water, or sewage service.
RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
REAR LOT LINE: See definition of lot line, rear.
REAR YARD: See definition of yard: rear.
REAR YARD LINE: See definition of yard line, rear.
RECEIPT OF THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE PLAN COMMISSION OR ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS: The convening of the first regularly
scheduled meeting of the standing committee of the Board of Trustees having jurisdiction over the matter in question or, if there is no such standing
committee, the convening of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Trustees after the approval by the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of
Appeals of its written findings and recommendations.
RECREATIONAL DEVICE: A structure or outdoor facility not attached to the principal structure on a lot and intended principally for recreational use by
children such as, but not limited to, a play house, a swing set, a trampoline, a sandbox, or a freestanding basketball standard.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, RESIDENTIAL: An area, court, pool, or facility, other than a recreational device, intended for active recreational or athletic use
such as game courts, swimming pools, or ball fields established as an accessory use to a residential dwelling.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle or boat originally designed for living quarters, recreation, or human habitation and not used as a commercial
vehicle, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. Boat: Any vessel used for water travel. A boat mounted on a trailer shall be considered one vehicle.
B. Camper Trailer: A folding or collapsible vehicle without its own motive power, designed as temporary living quarters for travel, camping, recreation or
vacation use.
C. Motorized Home: A temporary dwelling designed and constructed for travel, camping, recreational or vacation uses as an integral part of a selfpropelled
vehicle.
D. Off The Road Vehicle: A vehicle intended principally for recreational use off of roads where State vehicle licenses are required, such as a dune
buggy, go-cart, or snowmobile.
E. Racing Car Or Cycle: A vehicle intended to be used in racing competition, such as a race car, stock car, or racing cycle.
F. Travel Trailer: A vehicle without its own motive power, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreational, or vacation
uses.
G. Truck Camper: A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for
travel, camping, recreational, or vacation uses. When mounted on a truck, such a structure and the truck shall together be considered one vehicle.
H. Van: A general term applied to a noncommercial motor vehicle licensed by the State of Illinois as a recreational vehicle.
I. Vehicle Trailer: A vehicle without its own motive power that is designed to transport another vehicle, such as a boat, motorcycle or snowmobile for
recreational or vacation use and that is eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use. A vehicle trailer with another vehicle
mounted on it shall be considered one vehicle.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: Any district the designation of which begins with the letter "R" as set forth in section 9-2-1 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 393/524
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Any lot or other tract of land used for residential purposes, or any lot or other tract of land zoned in any of the residential
districts or zones under chapter 3 of this title, or, for land outside the corporate limits of the Village, in any of the residential districts of the zoning
regulations of the government with jurisdiction.
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: A structure containing one or more dwelling units.
RESIDENTIAL USE OR PURPOSE: Any use permitted in a residential district.
RETENTION BASIN: An area containing a permanent pool of water as well as capacity to detain additional stormwater for long periods of time.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE: A strip of land designated for use for vehicular or pedestrian access or passage, or for utility lines or similar facilities, that has
not been dedicated to or accepted by any government agency.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC: A strip of land designated for use for vehicular or pedestrian access or passage, or for utility lines or similar facilities, that has
been dedicated to and accepted by a government agency.
ROOMING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of not more than two (2) habitable rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for
living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
SIC: The "Standard Industrial Classification Manual".
SCREENING: A structure erected or vegetation planted that conceals an area from view at all times during the year.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor accessory apparel such as hats, gloves, and socks.
SENIOR HOUSING: Dwelling units designed and built for, and occupied by, persons fifty five (55) years of age or older. Senior housing may take the form
of independent retirement housing providing meals, activities, housekeeping, and maintenance; or assisted living providing supportive services such as
personal care; or nursing and personal care facilities providing longer term healthcare services, or facilities providing any combination of these services.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a specified lot line, measured along a straight line and at a right angle to such lot line, and the
nearest point of a building or structure.
SIDE DOCKS (BOARDING FLOAT): A platform-type floating structure located within a boat launch ramp that provides pedestrian access to and from a
boat in the water.
SIDE LOT LINE: See definition of lot line, side.
SIDE YARD: See definition of yard: side.
SIDE YARD LINE: See definition of yard line, side.
SIGHT TRIANGLE: See definition of clear site area.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING: See definition of dwelling, single-family attached.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING: See definition of dwelling, single-family detached.
SITE PLAN: A graphic rendering of a proposed use, construction, or development that complies with the provisions of chapter 20 of this title.
SITE PLAN REVIEW: See chapter 20 of this title.
SMOKE: Small gasborne particles other than water that form a visible plume in the air.
SPECIAL USE: A use that has some special impact or uniqueness that requires careful review of its location, design, configuration, and impact. See
chapter 19 of this title.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: See chapter 19 of this title.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following:
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed.
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
A. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts.
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 394/524
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual simulation, arousal or tumescence.
E. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsection A, B, C, or D of this definition.
STACKING SPACE: An area, measuring at least eight feet (8') in width and twenty feet (20') in length, for the temporary storage of a vehicle awaiting
access to a drive-in establishment or facility. See section 9-9-1 of this title.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION MANUAL (SIC): The 1987 edition of the publication prepared by the Office of Management and Budget,
executive office of the President of the United States, available from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. government printing office, Washington, D.C.,
as amended through the effective date of this Zoning Code.
STORY: Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Zoning Code, that portion of a building included between the surface on any floor and the surface
of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. The floor of a story may split levels
provided that there is not more than four feet (4') difference in elevation between the different levels of the floor. When the uppermost story of a structure
has a ceiling height of seven feet (7') or more over a floor area that is less than one-third (1/3) of the floor area of the next lower story, then said uppermost
story shall not be counted as a story; and when the uppermost story of a structure has a ceiling height of seven feet (7') or more over a floor area that is
one-third (1/3) or more but less than one-half (1/2) of the floor area of the next lower story, then said uppermost story shall be counted as one-half (1/2)
story. A basement shall be counted as one-half (1/2) story. A cellar shall not be counted as a story. Any area in which the distance from one floor to the
floor or ceiling above it is more than sixteen feet (16') shall be deemed to consist of one story for each sixteen feet (16') of height or major fraction thereof.
STREET: The paved portion of a public or private right-of-way, other than a driveway, that affords the principal means of vehicular access to abutting
property.
STREET LINE: A lot line separating a street right-of-way from other land.
STREET, PRIVATE: Any street other than a public street.
STREET, PUBLIC: A street that has been dedicated to and accepted by, or otherwise acquired by, a government body or agency.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, that would prolong the life of the supporting members of a structure such as
bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations or that would alter the dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls of a structure or that
would increase either the gross or net floor area of a structure.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or anything attached to
something having a permanent location on the ground, but not including paving or surfacing of the ground. "Structure" shall in all cases be deemed to refer
to both structures and buildings.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY: See section 9-9-1 of this title.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING: See definition of nonconforming structure.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL: See definition of principal structure or building.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE: The Lake Zurich subdivision ordinance.
SUBSTANTIAL CONFORMITY: For the purposes of granting plan approvals relating to site plans, a newly submitted plan shall be deemed to be in
substantial conformity with a previously approved plan if, but only if, the newly submitted plan:
A. Does not increase the number of dwelling units, the gross floor area of the development, or the gross floor area devoted to any particular use; and
B. Does not increase building coverage by more than five percent (5%) of the percentage of the previously approved plan; and
C. Does not change the orientation of any building; and
D. Does not decrease open space; and
E. Does not change the general location of any open space in any manner to detract from its intended function in the previously approved plan; and
F. Does not change the general location and arrangement of land uses within the development as shown on the previously approved plan; and
G. Does not change or relocate rights-of-way shown on the previously approved plan in any manner or to any extent that would decrease their
functionability, adversely affect their relation to surrounding land use and rights-of-way elements, or reduce their effectiveness as buffers or
amenities; and
H. Does not alter the percentage of any land use in any stage of the development by more than ten (10) percentage points as compared to its
percentage in the previously approved plan; and
I. Does not delay any stage of the previously approved development schedule by more than twelve (12) months; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 395/524
J. Does not violate any applicable law or ordinance; and
K. Does not depart from the previously approved plan in any other manner determined by the reviewing body or official, based on stated findings and
conclusions, to be a material deviation from the previously approved plan.
SURFACE AREA, ANTENNA: An area determined by adding together the actual surface area of each solid element or part of an antenna or its support
structure, where "solid" is defined to include all air spaces that are fully bounded by solid elements.
TEMPORARY USES: See section 9-9-2 of this title.
TERRACE: A level plane or surfaced patio, abutting a principal building at grade with no railings or other vertical structural elements and not covered by
any permanent structure.
TOWNHOUSE: See definition of dwelling, townhouse.
TRANSITIONAL SERVICE FACILITY: An authorized and licensed dwelling operated by a public or private agency duly authorized and licensed by any
State agency having authority to license and approve said facility that houses individuals being cared for by the agency and deemed by the agency to be
capable of living and functioning in the community and that provides continuous professional guidance.
TRANSITIONAL SERVICE FACILITY RESIDENT: A person receiving care or treatment at a transitional service facility.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING: See definition of dwelling, two-family.
USABLE OPEN SPACE: See definition of open space and usable open space.
USE: The purpose or activity for which a structure or land is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: See section 9-9-1 of this title.
USE INTERPRETATION: An interpretation of the permitted use or special use lists established by this Zoning Code for the purpose of allowing a use not
expressly mentioned in those lists to be established in a zoning district found to be appropriate for such use by application of the standards established in
chapter 15 of this title.
USE, NONCONFORMING: See definition of nonconforming use.
USE, PERMITTED: A use that appears on the permitted use list of a particular zoning district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: See definition of principal use.
USE, SPECIAL: A use that appears on the special use list in a particular district.
USE, TEMPORARY: See section 9-9-2 of this title.
VACANT: Not developed with any building, structure, or paving or surfacing of the ground.
VARIATION: See chapter 17 of this title.
VEHICLE: Any device for carrying passengers, goods, or equipment including, but not limited to, passenger automobiles, vans, trucks, buses, recreational
vehicles, and vehicles used for commercial, business, or governmental purposes.
VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL: See definition of recreational vehicle.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The head of the Engineering Department of the Village.
VILLAGE MANAGER: See title 1, chapter 6, article A of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code. The chief administrative official of the Village, subject to the
superior right and power of the Board of Trustees to supervise and administer the government and affairs of the Village. When used in this Zoning Code,
the term Village Manager shall refer either to such official or to his or her duly authorized delegate.
WHOLESALE TRADE: A business engaged in the sale of commodities in quantity, usually for resale or business use chiefly to retailers, other businesses,
industries, and institutions rather than to the ultimate consumer.
WIDTH OF LOT: See definition of lot, width of.
YARD: A required open space on a lot between a lot line and a yard line that is, except as otherwise expressly authorized by this Zoning Code,
unoccupied and unobstructed from grade to the sky.
Corner Side: A yard extending from the front yard line to the rear lot line between the corner side lot line of the lot and the corner side yard line.
Front: A yard extending across the entire front of a lot between the front lot line of the lot and the front yard line.
Rear: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and between the rear lot line and the rear yard line, except
that in the case of a corner lot the rear yard shall extend from the inner side lot line to the corner side yard line.
Side: A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and the side yard line.
YARD LINE, CORNER SIDE: A line drawn parallel to a corner side lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required corner side yard.
YARD LINE, FRONT: A line drawn parallel to a front lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard. If the front lot line is not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 396/524
straight, then the front yard line shall be drawn as nearly parallel to such front lot line as possible but shall in no case be drawn closer to any point on such
front lot line than the depth of the required front yard.
YARD LINE, REAR: A line drawn parallel to a rear lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required rear yard.
YARD LINE, SIDE: A line drawn parallel to a side lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required side yard.
YARD REQUIRED: The minimum yard depth designated in the regulations of this Zoning Code establishing minimum front, corner side, side, and rear
yard requirements for various uses, structures, and districts.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Lake Zurich. See section 9-12-2 of this title.
ZONING CLASSIFICATION: See definition of classification or zoning classification.
ZONING CODE: The Lake Zurich Zoning Code, title 9 of the Lake Zurich Municipal Code. Unless the context specifically requires otherwise, all references
to this Zoning Code shall be deemed to refer to any certificate, permit, approval, resolution, or ordinance granted or adopted pursuant to this Zoning Code.
ZONING DISTRICT: A part of the corporate area of the Village wherein regulations of this Zoning Code are uniform. See also section 9-2-1 of this title.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP OR ZONING MAP: See section 9-2-4 of this title.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: The Village Manager of the Village.
ZONING LOT: See definition of lot, zoning. (Ord. 2018-09-269, 9-4-2018)
Title 10
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Chapter 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
10-1-1:TITLE:
This shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Land Development Code for the Village of Lake Zurich, Illinois", and is adopted pursuant to
the authorization of chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
While it is obvious that regulations are needed to assure orderly extension of Village streets, the other purposes of these regulations are:
A. To insure sound, harmonious land development, including subdivisions, planned unit developments (PUD's) and community growth, and to safeguard
the interests of the homeowner, the subdivider, the developer of the PUD, the investor and the Village.
B. To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the Village.
C. To prevent development beyond available public utilities, and to prevent excessive development costs to the community.
D. To assure the development of land for optimum use with necessary protection against deterioration and obsolescence.
E. To limit and control the pollution of the environment that can be caused by inadequate or incomplete urban development.
F. To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working relationship between the Village and the subdivider.
G. To lessen congestion in the streets and highways.
H. To provide for adequate light and air.
I. To facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools and other public necessities.
J. To ensure proper legal description and proper monumenting of subdivided land.
The regulations are established with reasonable consideration of the character of the Village with a view toward conserving the value of buildings upon
the land and providing the best possible environment for human habitation. It is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions and development standards contained in the Building Code, Official Map, Regulations, Zoning Ordinance and the Official
Village Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 397/524
10-1-3: APPLICATION OF DEVELOPMENT CODE:
Except as provided in Section 10-7-8 of this Code, the provisions of this Title 10 shall apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the
Village and within or partially within unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the Village, in accordance with the
Illinois Municipal Code, Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 24, sections 1 et seq. (Ord. 92-03-507, 3-2-92)
10-1-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out within the incorporated limits of the Village, or within contiguous territory not more than one
and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the incorporated boundaries of the Village, the subdivider thereof or his agent shall submit both a preliminary and a
final subdivision plat to the Village for its approval. The subdivision plats and all procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance
with these regulations.
B. Until preliminary plats and plans for the subdivision are approved:
1. No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any improvements made to the natural land.
2. No lot, tract or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be offered for sale, nor shall any sale, contract for sale or option be made or given.
3. No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water drainage, sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service, lighting, grading,
paving or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be made by any owner or owners of his or their agent, or by any public service corporation at the
request of such owner or owners or his or their agent. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
4. Conservancy District1; Storm Water Management: All development shall comply with the regulations applicable to conservancy districts and storm
water management established in the Lake Zurich Zoning Code and the Lake Zurich Stormwater Management Ordinance. (Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
C. All offerings or dedications of land to the Village for use as streets, highways, alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses shall be referred
to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation before being accepted by the Village Board or by any other governing authority of the Village.
D. Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the Village as a whole, the Plan Commission shall,
before approval, cause to be prepared plan for the entire area or neighborhood, such plan to be used by the Plan Commission as an aid in judging the
proposed plat. The Village Engineer shall cooperate with the Plan Commission in the preparation of this plan and shall furnish such surveys and data
as may be necessary. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
10-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
A. Minimum Standards Established: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Higher Standards Govern: Where the conditions imposed by and provisions of this Code upon the subdivision of land are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this Code or of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
C. Easements or Covenants Not Abrogated: This Code is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement, provided that
where the regulations of this Code are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private
agreement, the requirements of this Title shall govern.
D. Existing Subdivisions: No subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this Code shall be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of this Title and to the extent that the subdivision of land is in conflict in any manner with the requirements of this Code, it still
remains lawful. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
10-1-6: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village Board that the several provisions of this Code be separable in accordance with the following:
A. Separability of Parts: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Code to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any
other provision of this Code not specifically included in said judgment.
B. Separability of Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this Code to a particular
subdivision of land, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other subdivision of land, not specifically included in the
judgment. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
Footnote 1: See subsection 10-4-1C of this Title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 398/524
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
10-2-1: APPLICATION OF RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
In the interpretation of this Code, the rules and definitions contained in this Chapter shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
10-2-2: RULES:
The language set forth in the text of this Title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural the
singular.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot" and "piece" and "parcel".
E. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases: "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
10-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
ALLEY: A public right of way primarily for vehicular traffic along the side or in the rear of properties which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting properties.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines
of waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the Village.
BORINGS, SOIL: Examination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific parcel of land by drilling.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is designed or intended for shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals or chattels.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village of Lake Zurich for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street line at a distance from it, regulated by the front yard requirements of the Lake Zurich Zoning
Ordinance.1
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The composite of the functional and geographic elements of the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Lake Zurich and
environs or any segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, text of reports, implementing ordinances and the Official Map.
CORINGS, PAVEMENT: Examinations and analysis of the completed surface and/or subsurface of a finished pavement by removing a core by drilling.
CROSSWALK: A public right of way located across a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent streets or alleys.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
CURB: The permanent edge of a paved surface designed to separate the vehicular travel way from the landscaped parkway.
DATUM PLANE: A reference point from which elevations are measured. The datum plane is a mean sea level as established by the United States
Geodetic Survey (U.S.G.S.).
DETENTION BASIN: A covered or uncovered reservoir designed to hold an excessive accumulation of storm water so as to reduce peak flow in a storm
water drainage system.
DRAINAGE SWALE: A turf drainage ditch of shallow depth with side slopes not exceeding one to twelve (1 to 12).
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
ELEVATION: The vertical distance measured from a point on the ground to the datum plane.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand,gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 399/524
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by man to
a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
GRADE: The slope of the land, road, street or other public way expressed in percent.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GROSS LAND AREA: The entire area of a development including lots, streets and alleys, measured to the center line of any bounding streets.
LOT: A parcel of land legally described as distinct portion or piece of land of record.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines
shall be deemed front lines.
OFFICIAL MAP: The Map showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments or additions
thereto resulting from the Board of Trustees' action or the approval of subdivision plats.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PARKWAY: A route intended to be used primarily by passenger vehicles and whose right of way is or is intended to be developed in a park-like character.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America,
its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing.
PLAN COMMISSION: The words "Plan Commission"2 as used herein, refer to the Plan Commission of the Village of Lake Zurich, Illinois.
PLAN, FINAL: The drawings and documents presented for final approval as described in Section 10-5-9.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY: The drawings and documents presented for tentative approval as described in Section 10-5-3 of this Title.
PLAN, SKETCH: A general map or drawing on which the subdivider's design for the subdivision of land is presented for discussion purposes prior to the
preparation of the preliminary plan.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel or tract of land, initially under single ownership or control, which contains two (2) or more principal buildings and one
or more principal uses, planned and constructed as a unified development where specific regulations of a given zoning district are modified through the
issuance of a special use permit.
PLAT: A plan, map, drainage or chart on which the subdivider's plan for the subdivision of land is presented and which he submits for approval and intends
to record in final form.
RESIDUE AREA: A residue area is that portion of a planned development not platted as residential lots or designed for dedication as streets or alleys.
ROADWAY: The paved area within a street right of way intended for vehicular traffic, including all curb and gutter facilities.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or a vegetation and constructing driveways.
SOIL TESTING: Determination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific land area by use of soil borings.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE: Lake Zurich Ordinance No. 92-11-560, as it may be amended from time to time.
STREET, APPROVED: Any streets, whether public or private, meeting standards and specifications of the Village of Lake Zurich.
STREET, HALF: A street of less than the total required width along one or more property lines of a subdivision.
STREET, MAJOR: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic artery connecting various sections of Lake
Zurich.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel andadjacent to highways and major streets and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection to local traffic from fast, through moving traffic on the highways and major streets.
STREET, MINOR: A street primarily as access to abutting properties.
STREET, PUBLIC: Any major or secondary street or minor street which is shown on the subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated to public use.
STREET, SECONDARY OR COLLECTOR: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major street system, including the principal entrance
streets of residential development and streets for circulation within such development.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the public street.
SUBDIVIDER: The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording the plats of the subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements
relating thereto as outlined in this Code.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more tracts of five (5) acres or less in an area. See current edition of Illinois Compiled Statutes for
exemptions. In addition, any multiple-family, commercial or industrial planned unit development shall be deemed a subdivision regardless of whether the
land is divided into separate parcels and shall be subject to improvement and design requirements of this Code.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The person or firm charged with the responsibility of Municipal engineering matters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 400/524
WATER LEVEL, CONSTANT: The minimum depth of water designed to be contained at all times within a retention basin.
WATER LEVEL, OCCASIONAL: The maximum depth of water designed to be continued within a retention or detention basin during periods of peak storm
water flow. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89; amd. Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
10-2-4: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATION:
All sections of the Lake Zurich Zoning Code which regulate PUDs excluding those sections which pertain solely to zoning regulations,3 are hereby
incorporated into the Lake Zurich Land Development Code by this Section and are of full force and effect as though set out fully herein. (Ord. 89-08-335,
8-21-89)
Footnote 1: See Title 9 of this Code.
Footnote 2: See Title 2, Chapter 1 of this Code.
Footnote 3: See Title 9 of this Code.
Chapter 3
GENERAL GUIDELINES
10-3-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
Any owner of land which is within the corporate limits of the Village or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of such corporate limits on unincorporated land,
wishing to divide the same into lots or to resubdivide for the purpose of sale or assessment, or both, or wishing to dedicate streets, alleys or other lands for
public use shall follow the procedures and requirements of this Title.
10-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
A. Meet With Staff: The subdivider shall meet with the Village staff prior to any Village Board or Plan Commission appearance. Every effort should be
made by the developer to abide by the regulations of both this Title and the Zoning Title.1 This shall be an ongoing process in which the staff provides
technical support to the developer.
B. Plan and Application: The subdivider prepares a preliminary plan, including a proposal for the installation of improvements, a school demographic study,
and intended dedication or reservation of public lands, and submits an application and ten (10) copies of the proposed plat, through the Village Clerk,
to the Plan Commission.
C. Action by Plan Commission: The Plan Commission obtains the required recommendations from the Village Engineer, the affected school districts and
other Village officers and then, after applying the provisions of this Title, it approves the preliminary plan, or it approves the preliminary plan subject to
modification, or it rejects the preliminary plan. Findings are reported to the subdivider, and the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
D. Action by Village Board: When the preliminary plan meets the requirements of this Title, as determined by the Plan Commission, it is given tentative
approval, and then referred to the Village Board for tentative approval. Upon approval by the Board, the preliminary plan is returned to the subdivider
for compliance with final approval requirements.
10-3-3: FINAL PLAT:
A. Plat and Documents: After complying with the above requirements, the subdivider prepares and submits to the Village Clerk the original mylar and four
(4) copies of the final plat incorporating all required modifications into the preliminary plan.
B. Action by Plan Commission: The Plan Commission determines whether or not the final plat is in conformance with the approved preliminary plan and
forwards the plat, with its recommendation, to the Village Board.
C. Action by the Village Board: The Village Board approves or rejects the final plat.
D. Action by the Subdivider: After the Village Board has approved the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall enter into a contract with the Village, before the
plat is recorded, agreeing to install the required improvements and provide an irrevocable letter of credit.
E. Recording of Plat: After the approval of the final plat, the Village records the plat with the Recorder of Deeds of Lake County, and the subdivider may
then proceed to develop and sell lots of his subdivision. The final plat shall be drawn in ink, on mylar, not to exceed thirty inches by thirty six inches (30"
x 36") in size. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
Footnote 1: See Title 9 of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 401/524
Chapter 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
10-4-1: PLAN COMMISSION GUIDELINES:
A. Particular Attention of the Plan Commission: The Plan Commission, in the examination of the subdivision plans for approval, and in the application of
this Title, shall take into consideration the requirements of the community and the best use of the land being subdivided. Particular attention shall be
given to width and location of streets, suitable sanitary utilities, storm water drainage, lot sizes and arrangements, as well as local requirements such
as parks and playgrounds, schools and recreation sites and other public uses.
B. Conformity with Comprehensive Plan: The Plan Commission shall especially require that all subdivisions conform to the provisions and conditions of the
Comprehensive Plan. Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision does not conform to the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan.
C. Conformity with Conservancy Districts1: No building shall be constructed on any site in the Village which lies in the Conservancy Districts. The
conservancy area is based on soil types and flood-prone areas.
D. Area Plan Required: Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the Village as a whole, the
Plan Commission may, before recommending approval, cause to be prepared a plan for the entire area or neighborhood, such plan to be used by the
Plan Commission as an aid in judging the proposed plat.
E. Storm Water Detention Required: The Plan Commission shall not recommend for approval by the Village Board any plat of subdivision which does not
make adequate provision for storm or floodwater runoff channels, basins and detentions.
F. Preservation of Natural Features: In all subdivisions, due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural features such as large trees, watercourses,
historical sites or structures, and similar features.2 (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
10-4-2: UNSUITABLE LAND:
No land shall be subdivided for any use which is determined by the Plan Commission, after investigation by the Village Engineer, to be unsuitable for such
use by reason of flooding or bad drainage, adverse earth or rock formation or topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or
welfare of the future residents in the proposed subdivision or of the community. However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the
opinion of the Village Engineer, make the area safe for occupancy and provide adequate lot and street drainage and storm water detention facilities, the
subdivision may thereby be approved.
In addition, no building or land alteration may take place within a wetlands. A twenty five foot (25') development-free area surrounding the wetlands shall
be maintained. The integrity of the wetlands must be preserved at all times. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
10-4-3: DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE:
A. Acceptance of Designated Land: When a final plat of a subdivision has been approved by the Village Board and all other required approvals are
obtained and the plat is recorded, that approval after improvements are complete in accordance with the approved documents shall constitute an
acceptance for the purposes designated on the plat.
B. Refusal of Designated Land: Whenever a preliminary plan includes a proposed dedication of land to public use and the Plan Commission finds that
such land is not required or not suitable for public use, the Plan Commission may either refuse to approve such dedication or require the
rearrangement of lots in the proposed subdivision to include such land.
C. Minimum Dedication: A minimum of five percent (5%) of land shall be dedicated for public use exclusive of publicly dedicated roads as determined by
the Mayor and Board of Trustees and the Plan Commission. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
10-4-4: RESERVATION OF PUBLIC SPACES AND SITES:
A. Plan to Show Public Land: Whenever a tract to be subdividedincludes a proposed street, highway or parkway, or proposed site for a park, playground,
school or other public use as indicated on the Official Map of the Village, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the developer into his subdivision
plat after proper determination of its necessity by the Plan Commission and the appropriate Village office or other public agency involved in the
acquisition and use of each such site. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
B. Acquisition of Land for Public Use: The Plan Commission shall consider all preliminary plans and adopted or proposed studies related thereto, to
determine the need for acquisition for public use of any of the land included in the preliminary plan. Land may be acquired for parks, playgrounds or
other public recreation areas, or other public purposes as provided by law.
1. Referral to Public Body: The Plan Commission shall refer the plat to the public body concerned with acquisition for its consideration and report. The
Plan Commission may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency thirty (30) days for reply. The agency's
recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time
required to complete the acquisition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 402/524
2. Notice to Property Owner: Upon receipt of an affirmative report from an acquiring agency, the Plan Commission shall notify the property owner and
shall designate on the preliminary plan and final plat that area proposed to be acquired by the public body.
3. Duration of Land Reservation: The acquisition of land reserved by a public agency on the preliminary plan or final plat shall be initiated within twelve
(12) months of notification, in writing, from the owner that he intends to develop the land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a sketch plan
of the proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the part of the public agency to initiate acquisition within the
prescribed twelve (12) months shall result in the removal of the "reserved" designation from the property involved and the freeing of the property for
private development. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89; amd. Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
10-4-5: CONTRIBUTION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL SITES, PARK PURPOSES, OPEN SPACE OR OF FUNDS IN LIEU
THEREOF:
It is hereby found and determined that, in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8, it is necessary to establish park and school donations
and standards therefor as a condition of approval of final plats of planned unit development and final plats of subdivision, to the end that adequate
provision be made for the establishment of school and park sites and to insure that expenses incurred as a result ofdevelopment of residential real estate
are borne by such real estate and do not become an additional burden upon the existing taxpayers of the Municipality.
A. School Contributions: The developer contribution policy adopted by the Lake Zurich Community Unit School District No. 95 shall be the developer
contribution requirements required by the Village in connection with all new land development, including subdivisions and annexations. The Village
reserves the right to amend this policy from time to time and, upon showing of hardship, to vary this contribution policy from time to time. Because the
School District experiences a financial burden resulting from an increase in students due to residential development substantially before tax monies are
received by the School District to finance the cost of educating these additional students, it is the intention of the Board of Education to more accurately
equate in monetary terms the impact on the School District which is directly, specifically, and uniquely attributable to the following contribution formula
per home be established (with the contribution to be paid at time of issuance of building permit):
((AxB) x C x D) - E = F
Where:
A
=
School district operating expense.
B
=
Percentage of revenue provided by property taxes.
C
=
Number of children expected to enter the school system per home.
D
=
Average lag in time from the entry of the students into the school system to the receipt by the school district of the first tax monies on the
improved property.
E
=
Credit for taxes paid to school district since purchase of land.
F
=
Developer contribution amount. The amounts to be inserted into the formula are to be periodically updated.
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
B. Dedication Of Park Lands Or Payment In Lieu Thereof: No final plat of subdivision or planned unit development final plan shall be approved until after
the subdivider or developer shall have dedicated land to the village for park purposes, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the
development, or, after approval thereof of the village, shall have made a payment of a cash contribution in lieu of such land dedication, or shall have
made a combination of a cash contribution and a land dedication, in accordance with this code and the following provisions: (Ord. 94-06-671, 6-6-1994)
1. Minimum Park Land Dedication: Except as provided in thelast sentence of this subsection B1 for certain types of senior and assisted living housing,
every subdivider or developer shall dedicate fifteen (15) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) persons of ultimate population, computed as
provided herein. The amount of land required for any fraction of one thousand (1,000) persons of ultimate population shall be calculated
proportionately. Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this subsection B1: a) no dedication of park land shall be required for development of
housing that is devoted and restricted to assisted living, memory care, Alzheimer's care, and similar facilities, or facilities where nursing or medical
staff will be available continuously to residents and b) the required dedication of park land shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%) for housing
developments designed and marketed for residents older than seventy (70) years. (Ord. 2005-03-335, 3-7-2005)
2. Location Of Land: The location of the land to be dedicated shall be determined by the board of trustees, in consideration of the suitability of such
land for park purposes or development, the relationship of such land to population concentrations, and the proximity of such land to other park or
recreational lands. In making its determination, the board of trustees shall consider that the principal need of village residents is for park land in such
location and of such size as to be suitable not only for passive and playground recreational purposes, but also as playing fields for baseball, soccer,
and similar activities. To this end, park land to be dedicated should be consolidated or, when possible, combined with existing park land, rather than
fragmented parcels.
3. Minimum Size Of Land: No land to be dedicated for park purposes shall be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area or have a frontage of
less than one hundred feet (100') in length, except that the board of trustees may approve dedications of a smaller parcel of land if, but only if, the
board of trustees, in the exercise of its discretion, determines that such smaller parcel of land would be useful for the purposes for which it is
intended. In making its decision, the board of trustees shall consider the circumstances described in subsection B2 of this section.
4. No Dedication Of Detention Or Conservation Areas: Storm water detention areas, areas subject to natural resource protections, areas in the
floodway or floodplain, and wetland shall not be acceptable for dedication for park purposes, and no subdivider or developer shall use such areas to
satisfy the requirements of this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 403/524
5. Payment In Lieu Of Dedication:
a. Criteria: The board of trustees may, but shall not be required to, approve a payment in lieu of dedication of some or all of the park land required
herein if the board of trustees determines that one of the following criteria is met.In making its determination, the board of trustees shall be guided
by the principal consideration that park land should be dedicated under possible circumstances and fees in lieu of such dedication should be made
only when such dedication cannot be accomplished.
(1) When the board of trustees determines that, because a development is small, the resulting required land dedication is too small to be of any
practical use to the village for park purposes; or
(2) When the board of trustees determines that the available land is inappropriate and unusable for any practical park purpose; or
(3) When the board of trustees determines that existing park property nearby is adequate to serve the needs of the proposed development if it is
expanded or enhanced by use of funds paid in lieu of dedication of additional park land.
b. Contribution To Be Used For Park Purposes: Every cash contribution in lieu of park land dedication shall be held in trust by the village solely for
the acquisition of park land or the development or enhancement of park facilities. Funds so held in trust shall be kept separate from all other funds
and shall be accounted for in the appropriate manner.
c. Amount Of Required Contribution: All cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of the land that may be acquired by
the village for park purposes. The board of trustees finds and determines that the present fair market value of land that may be acquired by the
village for park purposes is one hundred twenty thousand dollars ($120,000.00) per acre.
6. Combination Dedication And Payment In Lieu Of Dedication: The board of trustees, in the exercise of its discretion, may approve a combination of
land dedication and payment of a cash contribution in lieu of a land dedication under the following circumstances:
a. The subdivision or development does not have sufficient or adequate land to meet the dedication requirements hereunder. That portion of the land
within the subdivision or development that is adequate or sufficient for park purposes shall be dedicated as a site, and a cash contribution in lieu
thereof shall be required for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated. The required cash contribution shall be calculated
proportionately based on the one hundred twenty thousand dollar ($120,000.00) per acre value established herein.
b. A major part of a local park site already has been acquired and only a small parcel of land is needed from the subdivider or developer to complete
the park site. Such small parcel of land shall be dedicated, and a cash contribution in lieu ofall additional land that would have been required to be
dedicated shall be made. The required cash contribution shall be calculated proportionately based on the one hundred twenty thousand dollar
($120,000.00) per acre value established herein.
7. Calculation Of Ultimate Population: The table of estimated ultimate population, incorporated herein as exhibit A, is indicative of current and short
range projected trends in family size for new construction, and such table shall be used to calculate the amount of the required dedication of park
land, unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer. If such an objection is filed, then the objecting party shall submit a
demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated by the subdivision or development. The board of trustees shall
make the final determination as to the density formula that shall be applied to the subdivision or development in question, basing its decision on the
table of estimated ultimate population, the demographic study submitted by the objecting party and any other information relevant to the issue.
8. Reservation Of Additional Land: When the Lake Zurich official comprehensive plan3 or any other standard of the village requires a larger amount of
park land in a particular subdivision or development than the subdivider or developer is required to dedicate hereunder, then the land required in
excess of the dedication required hereunder shall be reserved by the subdivider or developer for subsequent purchase by the village or other public
body designated by the Village; provided, however, that such acquisition shall be commenced within one year after the date of approval of the final
plat of subdivision or the planned unit development final plan.
9. Topography And Grading: The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated park land and the land abutting the dedicated park land must be
suitable for the intended purposes of the park land. The subdivider or developer shall grade the park land to be dedicated, as necessary in the
determination of the village engineer, so that it is in a condition suitable for the use for which it is intended.
10. Accessible Sites: All park land to be dedicated shall be accessible directly from a public right of way.
11. Land Free Of All Encumbrances: All land dedicated to the village shall be free and clear, and shall be warranted by the subdivider or developer to
be free and clear, of all taxes, special assessments, special taxes, liens, and other encumbrances of all kinds. The subdivider or developer shall be
responsible for proper, timely, and complete payment of all such taxes, special assessments, special taxes, lien and encumbrances.
12. Dedication Required As Part Of Annexation Agreement: The dedication of park land, or cash contributions in lieu thereof, required by this code also
shall be required as a condition of the annexation of any land to the village.
13. Dedication At Time Of Approval Of Final Plat Or Plan: The dedication of land, or the payment of a cash contribution in lieu thereof, shall be
completed as required by this code at the time of final plat of subdivision approval or planned unit development final plan approval.
14. No Use By Developer After Dedication; Completion Of Work: The subdivider or developer shall make no use, including without limitation no use for
storage, of any land after such land has been dedicated to the village. The subdivider or developer shall complete all grading and other required work
on the dedicated land within one year after the approval of the final plat of subdivision or planned unit development final plan.
Section 10-4-5 (cont.)
EXHIBIT A
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
Children Per Unit
Type of unit
Pre-School
0-4 Years
Elementary
Grades K-5
5-10 Years
Junior High
Grades 6-8
11-13 Years
Total
Grades K-8
5-13 Years
High School
Grades 9-12
14-17 Years
Adults
(18 and up)
Total Per
Unit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 404/524
Detached Single-Family
3 Bedroom .435 .69 .33 1.02 .39 2.00 3.845
4 Bedroom .470 .76 .48 1.24 .54 2.26 4.510
5 Bedroom .510 1.04 .86 1.90 .73 2.44 5.580
Attached Single-Family (Townhouse, Row House, Quadriplex, etc.)
1 Bedroom ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 1.50 1.500
2 Bedroom .680 .18 .03 .210 .050 1.93 2.870
3 Bedroom .716 .56 .17 .730 .210 2.01 3.666
4 Bedroom 1.000 1.11 .45 1.560 .540 2.20 5.300
Low Density Apartment (to 15/acre)
Efficiency ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 1.00 1.000
1 Bedroom .070 .052 .028 .080 .013 1.42 1.583
2 Bedroom .343 .116 .073 .189 .043 1.85 2.425
3 Bedroom .457 .390 .210 .600 .240 2.00 3.297
4 Bedroom .500 .670 .250 .920 .330 2.10 3.850
High Density Apartments (16+/acre)
Efficiency ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 1.00 1.000
1 Bedroom .05 .026 .014 .040 .007 1.26 1.357
2 Bedroom .21 .065 .035 .100 .029 1.43 1.769
3 Bedroom .43 .150 .080 .230 .092 2.00 2.752
(Ord. 94-06-671, 6-6-94)
10-4-6: DETENTION FACILITIES:
All development of detention ponds and related facilities shall be undertaken in compliance with the requirements of the Lake Zurich Storm Water
Management Ordinance. No final plat shall be approved until after such compliance. All plans and specifications for all detention ponds and related
facilities, including location, size, and other features, shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village Engineer. (Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
10-4-7: VACATION OF A PLAT OF SUBDIVISION:
A. Any plat or any part of a plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to
which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated.
B. Such an instrument shall be approved by the Village Board in like manner as plats of subdivisions. The Village Board may reject any such instrument
which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its streets or dedicated easements. Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or
approved, and recorded, or filed, in the like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly recorded, or filed, shall operate to destroy the force and
effect of the streets, public grounds and all dedications laid out or described in the plat.
C. When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by all owners of lots in such plat joining the execution of such writing.
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
10-4-8: SUBDIVISIONS NOT REQUIRING THE INSTALLATION OF A STREET OR AN EASEMENT OF ACCESS:
A. Interpretation and Scope: Any subdivision of five (5) acres or less not requiring new street installation and/or an easement of access is subject to the
conditions of this Section.
B. Meet with Staff: Prior to a preliminary hearing with the Plan Commission, the subdivider shall meet with the Village staff in order to review the plat.
C. Procedure for Approval: After having met with the Village staff and having followed their recommendation, the owner or subdivider shall file with the
Village Clerk twenty five (25) contact prints of a certified plat of survey showing the proposed division of such lots, blocks, parcels or tracts of land.
Twenty five (25) prints of the plat of survey shall beforwarded to the Plan Commission at least ten (10) days before the next meeting of the Plan
Commission. Not more than fifteen (15) days after the meeting at which the plat of survey is referred to the Plan Commission, the chairman of the Plan
Commission shall notify the owner or subdivider whether a new street or easement of access is required. In the event that a new street or easement of
access is required, the notice shall stipulate that an application for final plat approval containing such maps, certifications and supporting documents as
required by the Plan Commission shall be filed with the Village Clerk for processing as herein set forth in this Title.
The Plan Commission shall, within forty (40) days, approve, approve conditionally or reject the proposal. The Village Board shall be notified in writing of
any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection.
D. Requirements for Approval:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 405/524
1. Compliance with this Title: To the extent reasonably practicable, the division of land shall comply with the provisions of this Title governing general
requirements, design standards and required improvements.
2. Survey: The survey shall be performed and the map prepared by a registered Illinois land surveyor.
3. Monuments: All corners shall be monumented as follows:
a. All lot corners shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at least twenty four inches (24") long and one inch (1") in diameter, or by round or
square iron bars at least twenty four inches (24") long.
b. The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at least thirty inches (30") long and one inch (1") in
diameter or by round or square iron bars at least thirty inches (30") long. These monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river
or stream lot line with a meander line established not less than twenty feet (20') back from the bank of the river or stream.
E. Certificates and Affidavits:
1. Affidavits Required: The survey map shall include the affidavit of the surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel, typed, lettered or reproduced
legibly with nonfading black ink, giving a clear and concise description of the land surveyed by bearings and distances, commencing with some
corner marked and established in the U.S. Public Land Survey or some corner providing reference to a corner marked and established in the U.S.
Public Land Survey. The affidavit shall include the statement of the surveyor to the effect that he has fully complied with the requirements of this
Section.
2. Certificates Required: The certificate of approval of the Plan Commission shall be typed, lettered or reproduced legibly with nonfading black ink on
the face of the survey map.
F. Filing of the Survey Map: The survey map shall be filed by the Village Clerk and recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Lake County. (Ord. 89-08-335,
8-21-89)
Chapter 5
PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
10-5-1: PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION:
Prior to the submission of the preliminary plan of any proposed subdivision within the jurisdiction of this Title, the subdivider shall make known his
intentions to the Village Board. During this preliminary or pre-application stage, the following actions shall be taken:
The subdivider shall meet with the Village Board for the purpose of presenting a general outline of his proposal, including, but not necessarily limited to,
the following:
A. Written Notification: Written notification in the form of a letter of intent from the subdivider to the Village Board establishing the subdivider's intent to
develop the land.
B. General Subdivision Information: General subdivision information that shall describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed
development as necessary to supplement the submitted plans. This information shall include data on existing covenants, land characteristics and
available community facilities and utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal, such as number of residential lots and units broken
down by type and bedroom count, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas, school, playground and park areas, and other public areas,
traffic study, proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities, street improvements and soil bearing test results.
C. Sketch Plan: A plan or topographic survey that shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to
existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a free-hand sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey. The sketch plan shall include the
existing topographic data and contours of not less than five foot (5') intervals. This may be attached to U.S.G.S. topographic data.
D. Tentative Engineering Proposals: Tentative engineering proposals outlining the proposed developments impact on water supply, sewage disposal, storm
water drainage, street improvements and environment.
10-5-2: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN:
A. Action by the Subdivider: The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plan, which shall include all of the property owned or controlled by the
applicant, which properties are adjacent to or considered to be contiguous to the proposed subdivision, together with improvement plans and other
supplementary material as specified, which shall be submitted to the Village Clerk, with written application for approval. Accompanying this preliminary
plan shall be a School Demographic Study, prepared in accordance with Section 10-5-3 of this Chapter. Twenty five (25) copies of the preliminary plan
and all accompanying documentations including the School Demographic Study, as well as the required filing fee, shall accompany the application.
B. Action by the Plan Commission: The Village Board of Trustees shall, by motion, refer the preliminary plan to the Lake Zurich Plan Commission at least
ten (10) days prior to a preliminary hearing of the Plan Commission, and shall, at the same time, instruct the Village Engineer to collaborate with the
Plan Commission in assembling plans for the design and construction of streets and other such public improvements as are required by this Title or
any other ordinances. The Plan Commission and the Village Engineer shall review the preliminary plan for compliance with these regulations and other
ordinances of the Village, and the Plan Commission shall, within two (2) months from the first regular meeting following referral:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 406/524
1. Make Recommendations: Approve or disapprove the proposed preliminary subdivision plan and submit its written recommendations, which shall
include the recommendations of the Village Engineer, to the Village Board of Trustees; or
2. Advise Subdivider: If the Plan Commission finds that changes, additions or corrections are required on the preliminary plan, the Plan Commission
shall so advise the subdivider in writing. The subdivider may resubmit the preliminary plan to the Plan Commission without paying an additional fee
for its consideration at the public hearing of the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall at that meeting approve or disapprove the preliminary
plan and submit its recommendations in writing, which shall include the recommendations of the Village Engineer, to the Village Board of Trustees
and the subdivider.
3. Notification to Subdivider: The Plan Commission shall notify the owner or subdivider in writing as to the time and place of the Plan Commission
meeting at which he will be afforded an opportunity of being heard.
C. Action by the Village Board: If the plan is approved by the Plan Commission, the Village Board of Trustees shall accept or reject the plan within one
month after its next regular meeting following the action of the Plan Commission. The applicant and the Village Board of Trustees may mutually agree
to extend the one month period.
1. Qualifications of Approval: The following qualifications shall govern approval of the preliminary plan:
a. Approval of a preliminary plan by the Lake Zurich Plan Commission and the Village Board of Trustees is tentative only, involving merely the
general acceptability of the layout as submitted.
b. The Lake Zurich Plan Commission and Village Board of Trustees may require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest
of the needs of the community.
c. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be effective for a maximum period of one year, unless upon application of the developer, the Village Board of
Trustees grants an extension. The application for the extension shall not require an additional filing fee, or the submittal of additional copies of the
plan of the subdivision.
2. Notice of Approval Required: Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the Board of Trustees, the following notice of approval shall be stamped upon
four (4) prints thereof, and required signatures affixed.
10-5-3: NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN:
Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plan of a subdivision shown hereon has received approval by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Lake
Zurich, Illinois, and upon compliance by the subdivider with requirements of qualifications governing the approval of preliminary plan and with other
revisions and stipulations that may be required, the Board of Trustees will receive the final plat for consideration when submitted by the subdivider in such
form and within such time as required by this ordinance.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Lake Zurich, Illinois
Date 19
By
Mayor
Attest
Village Clerk
10-5-4: PRELIMINARY PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
The purpose of the preliminary plan is to allow the Plan Commission, the Board of Trustees and other public bodies to determine whether the proposed
layout of the land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public's interest. The preliminary plan shall be prepared by a qualified professional,
trained and experienced in the layout of the subdivisions.
The following graphic and descriptive items are normally required to be shown on the preliminary plan and the accompanying application for approval. The
lack of information under any item specified herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plan.
A. Application for Approval: Written application by the owner or his agent for approval, on forms furnished by the Plan Commission, shall accompany each
preliminary plan and contain the following information:
1. Name for File Identification:
a. Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision.
b. Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in
Lake County.
c. Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
2. Location and Description of Property: Location of property by government lot, section, township, range and county.
3. Basic Facts and Proposals Pertaining to the Property:
a. Size of tract in acres or of existing lots, if any, in square feet.
b. Existing zoning classification of property and any rezoning proposed to be requested.
c. Number of lots proposed in subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 407/524
d. Area of lots proposed; minimum, average and maximum.
e. Proposed linkage with water and sewer facilities.
f. Any other proposals, such as parcels of land intended to be dedicated, conveyed or reserved for public use, and the conditions proposed for such
disposal and use.
4. Information as to Ownership, Preparation of Plat and Submission:
a. Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner or agent of property and citation of last instrument conveying title to each parcel of
property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor, grantee, date and land records reference.
b. Citation of any existing legal rights of way or easement affecting the property.
c. Existing covenants on the property, if any.
d. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the professional persons or firms responsible for the subdivision design. Such professionals
shall include, but are not limited to, registered Illinois professional engineer, registered Illinois land surveyor and/or Illinois registered
architect/planner.
B. Accompanying Documentation Required: The preliminary plan of subdivision shall be accompanied by:
1. Annexation Statement: A statement that the proposed subdivision (where contiguous) is or is not to be annexed to the Village.
2. Preliminary Plan for Sewer and Water: Either a preliminary engineering plan for sewer, water and storm sewers or a written statement setting forth
general plans for such improvements and indicating the method to be employed to overcome particular problems that may be encountered with the
development of the proposed subdivision.
3. Soil Analysis: A soils' analysis for each proposed subdivision shall be completed by an engineer registered in the State of Illinois and shall be of
sufficient scope to point out potential ground absorption, runoff, flooding deficiencies, the presence of unstable soil or of soils of such low bearing
capacity as to constitute problems for conventional construction, or the presence of subsurface rock that would affect the installation of underground
improvements on the provisions of aboveground improvements.
If the subdivision contains questionable soil and, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, additional soil investigations, borings or other soil tests are
necessary to determine the nature and extent of such questionable material, the owner or developer shall retain or cause to be retained the services
of a competent testing laboratory and geotechnical engineer to perform the needed investigations and analysis.
a. Copies of the completed report prepared by the testing laboratory and geotechnical engineer shall be filed with the Village Engineer and Plan
Commission.
b. Neither the Village Engineer nor the Village shall have any liability for costs connected with the tests, borings or interpretations of results of such
work.
4. Protective Covenants: Draft of protective covenants whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect
the proposed development. Where a home association or a not-for-profit corporation is part of the developer's proposal, specific documents shall be
furnished in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney, including the technical phases acceptable to the Village Engineer.
C. Drawings and Data Required: The preliminary plan and required accompanying maps shall be drawn on reproducible medium in a manner that is clear
and firm which legible prints can be made therefrom, and shall be at a scale of two hundred feet to the inch (1" = 200'). It shall show all existing
conditions required below and shall show all proposals including the following:
1. Identification and Description: Identification and description shall be as follows:
a. Name of the Subdivision: Not a duplication of a name of any plat heretofore recorded in the Village or in Lake County, Illinois.
b. Location of the Subdivision: Location by section, township and range, or by other approved legal description, including present tract designation
according to official County records.
c. Survey of the Subdivision: Boundary line survey on an accompanying map which is prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor.
d. Designer of the Subdivision: Name and address of the site planner and/or engineer.
e. Owner of the Subdivision: Name and address of the owner and/or subdivider.
2. Existing Conditions: Data required as a basis for the preliminary plan shall include existing conditions as follows, except when otherwise specified by
the Plan Commission:
a. Boundary Lines: In accordance with subsection C1c above.
b. Total Acreage: Within the boundary lines.
c. Existing Zoning District: Both in proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts.
d. Existing Improvements: Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other rights of way showing type of improvement
(if any), railroad and utility rights of way, park and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures and their street address numbers,
easements and section and corporate lines within the tract and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract.
e. Utilities on and Adjacent to the Tract: Location and size of existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract
and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract, also including such data as locations and surface and invert grade elevations of
catchbasins, manholes and fire hydrants. If water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and distance to, and
the size of nearest usable facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 408/524
f. Location Map: Drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000') or larger, showing boundary lines of adjoining
unsubdivided or subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or their natural boundaries, but not less than one-half (1/2) mile
beyond the subdivision boundaries in subdivisions located beyond the Village limits, identifying type of use and ownership of surrounding land and
showing alignments of existing streets.
g. Topographic Data: Data including existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2'), except in unusual topographical conditions,
such vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined by the Village Engineer (topographic data shall refer to United States Geodetic
Survey Datum).
h. Soils Map: Map indicating lowland and upland Conservancy District soils. Any soil falling in this classification will by ordinance, disallowed to be
built upon1.
i. Landscape Plan: Showing existing tree survey. See Section 10-6-18 on landscaping.
j. Other Conditions on the Tract: Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in caliper at
one foot (1') above ground level, houses, barns, shacks and other significant features.
k. Reference to Monuments: Locations of or reference to locations of existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of survey and grade
elevation of each monument and marker.
l. Proposed Public Improvements: Highway or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
m. Easements: Location, width and purpose.
n. Other Conditions on Adjacent Land: Approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls, character
and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; and owner of adjacent
unplatted land (for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name, recording date, and number and show approximate percent built-up,
typical lot size and dwelling type).
3. Subdivision Design Features: Subdivision design features shall be as follows:
a. Accord with Comprehensive Plan: The preliminary plan shall be in substantial accord with the Comprehensive Plan as amended from time to time.
b. Accord with Conservancy Districts: See Section 10-6-17 on Conservancy Districts.
c. Proposed Zoning Changes: The Village zoning districts proposed for the subdivision shall be shown.
d. Layout of Streets: Showing right-of-way widths and street names (no duplication of the name of any street theretofore used in the Village or its
environs will be allowed unless such street is an extension of, or in line with an already named street, in which event, that name shall be used) and
showing proposed through streets extended to the boundaries of the subdivision and approximate grades and gradients. The street numbering
system as adopted by the Village shall be adhered to.
e. Other Rights of Way: Location and width of pedestrianways and utility easements.
f. Location of Utilities: If not shown on other exhibits.
g. Lotting: Layout, total number of lots and dimensions on the lot containing the minimum width and depth and on the lot containing the maximum
width and depth, lot numbers and block numbers.
h. Sites to be Reserved or Dedicated: Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses. Such sites shall
be designated by letter or number.
i. Setback Lines: Minimum front and side street building lines, indicating dimensions.
j. Sewers and Drainage: Proposed location of sewer lines and storm water drains or drainage and proposed method of sewage and waste disposal
including sufficient information to show the extent of surface drainage and detention and/or retention facilities conforming to minimum standards of
the Village. Such layout shall show the storm and sanitary sewers, stubs, valves, line hydrants and water mains including size, capacity and
location. Included with this shall be specifications for the storm and sanitary sewers, water mains, streets, sidewalks and other public works
improvements as well as a written statements by the subdivider or his engineer describing the adequacy of these proposed facilities as well as the
effect they will have on existing or future facilities.
k. Grading: The subdivider shall submit proposed detailed grading plans of blocks and lots. No land will be approved for subdivision which is subject
to periodic flooding or which contains inadequate drainage facilities or other topographic conditions which may increase danger to health, life or
property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the Village Engineer
and Plan Commission, make such land safe for development and occupancy, including construction of adequate storm water detention facilities.
l. Land Use Intent: Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family
dwellings.
m. Landscape Plan: See paragraph i hereof on landscaping.
10-5-5: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Engineering Plans Required: After the approval of the preliminary plan and prior to filing an application for approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall
submit to the Village Clerk ten (10) complete sets of engineering plans and specifications for the land improvements required by this Title along with a
single estimate of the cost of the proposed improvements. The plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Illinois, bear the seal and signature of the design engineer and shall include the following documents:
1. Plan Preparation: Plan originals shall be prepared on a reproducible medium, twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24"x36") in size. All
reproductions shall be twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24"x36") in size.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 409/524
2. Cover Sheet: The cover sheet shall contain the following information:
a. Project name.
b. Location plan showing location of project within the general confines of the Village and/or surrounding environs.
c. Name of the developer.
d. Names of all professionals involved in the preparation of said construction documents.
e. Index of all sheets contained in said set of plans.
f. Legend of all symbols used.
g. Date of plans including all revisions.
3. Topographic Master Utility and Street Plan: A topographic map of the subdivision at a minimum scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1"=200')
showing all proposed street and utility locations as well as individual lot lines.
4. Grading Plan: The grading plan shall be prepared to a minimum scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1"=50') and shall contain the following
information:
a. Top of foundation grade of all proposed structures.
b. Contours of existing ground surface at one foot (1') intervals (dashed, light).
c. Contours of proposed finished grade at one foot (1') intervals (solid, heavy).
d. Location of all proposed or existing drainage structures.
e. Individual lot lines.
5. Construction Drawings: Construction drawings shall contain the existing and proposed plan and/or profile information necessary for the construction
of the required improvements. These drawings shall be prepared to a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') horizontal and one inch equals five
feet (1" = 5') vertical.
6. Detail Sheets: Detail sheets shall show specific details and sections the design engineer may deem necessary to clarify the construction or
installation of particular items.
7. Standard Detail Sheet(s): These sheets shall show specific details and sections of various Village standards for streets, manholes, catch basins,
valve boxes, valve vaults, sewer and water main installation, trench backfilling, sewer and water services, and other items designated by the Village.
These sheets will also contain all specifications relating to the materials, installation and/or construction of the items (details) shown.
8. Specifications: Complete set of specifications covering the work to be done. Such specifications will be printed on the standard detail sheets. (Ord.
89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
B. Engineering Plan Approval: The Village Engineer and his or her designees shall review and, after all required changes have been incorporated, approve
all engineering plans and specifications. All final plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in Illinois. (Ord. 93-
10-615, 10-4-1993; amd. Ord. 97-06-859, 6-16-1997)
10-5-6: CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Installation Required: After approval of the final plan by the Village Board, and after approval of the plans and specifications for required improvements
by the Village Engineer and Board of Trustees, the subdivider shall install street and utility improvements, and other improvements indicated on the
plan, in accordance with specifications hereinafter provided. If such improvements are not installed as required at the time the final plat is submitted for
approval, the subdivider shall, before the recording of his plat, enter into a contract with the Village agreeing to install the required improvements. Such
contract shall be in such form as required by Section 10-5-5 of this Chapter.
B. Deeding Of Improvements: All underground public improvements up to the property line shall be deeded over to the Village and become the property of
the Village after approval by the Village Engineer and when accepted by resolution of the Village Board. All labor and material for installing
underground public improvements shall be furnished by the subdivider. All testing required for acceptance shall be done by the subdivider under the
supervision of the Village Engineer. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
10-5-7: AGREEMENTS AND GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The requirements of this Section shall be complied with prior to the approval and recording of a final plat of subdivision.
A. Action By The Subdivider: Prior to the filing of an application for a final plat, the subdivider shall submit the following to the Village Clerk:
1. Statement Of Agreement: A statement of agreement that:
a. The land improvements, required by this Title, shall be completed by the owner or subdivider in accordance with the plans and specifications
approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
b. Four (4) sets of all blueprints and one set of Mylar as-built drawings shall be submitted to the Village by the subdivider in accordance with Section
10-5-8-1 of this Code. All as-built drawings also shall be submitted to the Village by subdivider on magnetic media in a format compatible with the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 410/524
Village's Geographic Information System. All submittals required by the Lake Zurich Stormwater Management Ordinance shall be submitted to the
Village by the subdivider. (Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
c. Prior to the issuance of the grading permit, the subdivider shall pay all school contributions to the appropriate school district, pay all permit fees,
make all deposits, and submit the required letter of credit. The letter of credit must contain the legal description of the property unless it has
already been recorded. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
d. All improvements and submission of all as-built drawings shall be completed by subdivider and approved by the Village Engineer before final
acceptance by the Village. (Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
e. Prior to the issuance of any building permits, the subdivider shall install an approved roadway with curb, gutter and all utilities. No home in any
block shall be occupied for longer than nine (9) months without all sidewalks and road surfaces being completed or whenever at least seventy five
percent (75%) of a designated block has completed homes on it, then the subdivider shall have completed constructing the sidewalks and road
surfaces.
f. The roadway must be of a gravel course prior to any building.
g. All developments over one acre in size shall install a rumble strip at intersections to prevent mud and debris dispersion.
2. Letter of Credit:
Letter of Credit Number
Project
Name of Issuer Institution
Address
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
Dear Sir:
The undersigned Bank of , by (name and title), its duly authorized agent, hereby issues to the Village of Lake Zurich, 70 East Main Street, this
Irrevocable Letter of Credit in the amount of $ , which such credit may be drawn by said Village at sight on us.
Demands on the Letter of Credit must be accompanied by the certificate of the Village Clerk of the Village of Lake Zurich, certifying either: (1) that
said Letter of Credit is about to expire and has not been renewed; or (2) that work has not been completed in accordance with the plans,
specifications and agreements (including any amendments thereof) for the following project:
,
(the "Project").
This Irrevocable Letter of Credit shall expire on 19 ; provided, however, the undersigned shall notify the Village Clerk, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least 35 days prior to the expiration date that said Letter of Credit is about to expire. In no event shall this Irrevocable Letter of
Credit or the obligations contained herein expire except upon said prior written notice, it being expressly agreed by the undersigned that the above
expiration date shall be extended as shall be required to comply with this notice provision.
The undersigned further agrees that this Irrevocable Letter of Credit shall remain in full force and effect and pertain to any and all amendments or
modifications which may be made from time to time to the plans, specifications and agreements for the Project, without notice from the Village of
such amendments or modifications.
All acts, requirements and other preconditions for the issuance of the Irrevocable Letter of Credit have been completed.
The Bank of hereby undertakes and engages that all demands made in conformity with this Irrevocable Letter of Credit will be duly honored upon
presentation. If, within ten (10) days of the date any demand (made in conformity with this Irrevocable Letter of Credit) is presented, we fail to
honor the Letter, we agree to pay all attorney fees, court costs and other expenses incurred by the Village of Lake Zurich, in enforcing the terms of
this Letter of Credit.
DATED:
Issuing Bank
(SEAL)
By:
B. Action By The Village Clerk: The village clerk shall not certify the approval of the president and board of trustees on the final plat until the requirements
of this section have been completed. (Ord. 89-08-355, 8-21-1989)
C. Guarantee Of Completed Improvements: Upon completion of the improvements covered by the letter of credit, the subdivider shall notify the village
manager in writing and request inspection of the completed improvements. The subdivider shall submit, with the request for inspection, as built plans
covering the improvements to be accepted. All as built drawings shall satisfy all standards of section 10-5-8-1 of this chapter and of the Lake Zurich
stormwater management ordinance. After the improvements have been inspected by the village and found to be complete, but before acceptance by
the village board, the subdivider shall furnish a letter of credit, guaranteeing the improvements against faulty workmanship and/or materials for a period
of two (2) years after acceptance. The letter of credit shall be of an amount equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the total cost of the improvements to
be accepted.
Since a letter of credit is already on file guaranteeing completion of the same improvements, the subdivider need not furnish the letter of credit before
acceptance by the village board. However, the acceptance by the mayor and board of trustees shall release an amount equal to not more than ninety
percent (90%) of the original letter of credit to enable the subdivider to furnish a new letter of credit equal to ten percent (10%) of the cost of the
improvements for one year after acceptance. (Ord. 89-08-355, 8-21-1989; amd. correspondence dated 1-10-1990; Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-1993; Ord.
2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 411/524
10-5-8: ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Acceptance Of Improvements: All public improvements required by this title and property constructed by subdivider may be accepted by the village by,
but only by, written resolution properly adopted by the board of trustees. (Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-1993)
B. Final Plat Approval Not Acceptance Of Improvements: If any final plat of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are therein
dedicated as such, whether located within the corporate limits of the village, or all or in part outside thereof, or contains existing streets located outside
of the corporate limits, the approval of the final plat by the board of trustees or subsequent annexation of the property to the village shall not constitute
an acceptance thereon or therein, irrespective of any act or acts by an officer, agent or employee of the village with respect to such streets or
improvements. The acceptance of the streets or thoroughfares shall be made only by the adoption of a resolution by the board of trustees, after there
has been filed with the village clerk a certificate by the village engineer certifying that all improvements required to be constructed or installed in or
upon such streets or thoroughfares, in connection with the approval of the plat of subdivision by the board of trustees, have been fully completed and
the construction or installation thereof has been approved by him. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
10-5-8-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR AS BUILT DRAWINGS:
As built drawings shall conform to the requirements of this section:
A. Master utility plans shall include:
1. Rim and invert elevations for all structures.
2. Sump pump discharge locations.
B. Grading plans shall include:
1. All detention pond locations, required volumes, and volumes provided.
2. Release rates.
3. Normal and high water marks.
4. Overflow routes.
5. All supporting calculations.
6. Top of foundation elevations.
C. Drainage swales plans shall include:
1. High and low grades.
2. Driveway slopes.
D. Landscaping plans shall include all landscaping species, locations, sizes, maintenance responsibilities, and the like.
E. Drawings submitted to the village shall include: 1) four (4) sets of all blueprints, and 2) one set of mylar as-built drawings, and 3) all as-built drawings on
magnetic media in a format compatible with the village geographic information system. (Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-1993)
F. Drawings shall include two (2) concrete monuments per project unless directed otherwise by the village engineer. The monuments shall consist of fiveeighths
inch (5/8") stainless steel rod. To ensure positional stability, the rod shall be driven to refusal or when the driving rate decreases to one foot (1')
per sixty (60) seconds. Each stainless steel rod shall be installed in a plastic greased sleeve to prevent frost heave in the winter. Each monument shall
have an aluminum security cap placed in twelve inch (12") diameter concrete to protect the integrity of the monument. Horizontal and vertical positions
shall be established utilizing the global positioning system with a horizontal accuracy achieving first order or 1:100,000 (see exhibit no. 32 in section 10-
8-1 of this title). (Ord. 2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
10-5-9: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
A. Action By The Subdivider:
1. Application To Village Clerk: Application for approval of the final plat including all engineering drawings, shall be submitted in writing to the village
clerk and shall be accompanied by the fee and engineering review as required in these regulations. The application shall be submitted at least ten
(10) days prior to the regular meeting of the plan commission for its review and recommendations for approval or disapproval.
2. Conformance With Preliminary Plan: The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, it
may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plan which he proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such
portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
B. Action By The Plan Commission: Within two (2) months after the plan commission meeting at which the application for approval of the final plat is
reviewed, the plan commission shall approve or disapprove the plat. If the plan commission approves, it shall affix upon the plat the certifying signature
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 412/524
of its chairman. If it disapproves, it shall set forth its reasons in its own records and provide the applicant with a copy.
C. Action By The Board Of Trustees:
1. Plat Submitted To Board Of Trustees: After approval of the final plat by the plan commission and the fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations, one tracing of the final plat of the subdivision, drawn in ink on tracing cloth or mylar drafting film not to exceed thirty inches by thirty six
inches (30" x 36") in size, shall be submitted to the village board of trustees for approval and signature.
2. Action By Board Of Trustees: Action must be taken by the village board of trustees within two (2) months after the meeting at which the final plat and
all drawings, maps and other documents required have been submitted for its approval. The applicant and the village board of trustees may mutually
agree to extend the two (2) month period.
D. Filing Of Final Plat:
1. Filing With County: Upon approval by the village board of trustees, the village clerk shall record the plat with the Lake County recorder within three
(3) months. If construction does not begin within five (5) years from approval, the plat shall be null and void.
2. Filing For Local Record: The final plat in exact form as approved by the board of trustees, and as filed with the Lake County recorder, shall be filed
for local record by the village clerk. Such local file copy shall bear the appropriate documentation number as assigned by the Lake County recorder.
E. Drawings And Data For Final Approval: The final plat shall be accurately drawn in ink on tracing cloth or mylar drafting film, in such a manner that clear
and legible contact prints or photostatic copies can be made. The final plat shall be at a scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1"=100') on sheets not to
exceed thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x 36"). Where necessary, the plat may be drawn on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet
showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to
the plan commission. The final plat shall show the following:
1. General Information: General information shall be as follows:
a. Conservancy Districts: All unbuildable areas as classified by soil type.
b. Boundary Lines: In accordance with subsection 10-5-4C1c of this chapter.
c. Layout Of Streets: Showing right-of-way widths and street names (not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the village or its
environs unless such street is an extension of, or in line with, an already named street, in which even that name shall be used) and showing
proposed through street extended to the boundaries of the subdivision.
d. Other Rights Of Way: Location and width of alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements.
e. Sites To Be Reserved Or Dedicated: Sites to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses, or for the exclusive
use of property owners within the subdivision. The area shall be designated by letter or number and by legal description.
f. Accurate Dimensions: Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles, radii and arcs used to describe all boundaries including
perimeter survey of tract, streets, easements, areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use, and other important features. Error of closure of
boundary line surveys shall not exceed one in ten thousand (1 foot for each 10,000 feet of perimeter survey). Angular error shall not exceed plus
or minus twenty (±20) seconds. Lot lines to show dimensions in feet and hundredths, and when angle occurs in any lot line between lot corners,
the measurement of the angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. The final plat shall show accurately the location of all permanent
lot markers as actually installed.
g. Control Points: True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines and official monuments not less than three (3), which shall be
accurately described in the plat by location, size and elevation to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be
referred.
h. Identification System: An identification system for all blocks and lots using consecutive numbers for lots within a block and, where applicable, a
street address number in accord with current village policies.
i. Correlation With Existing Boundaries: Municipal, township or section lines accurately correlated to the lines of the subdivision by distances and
angles.
j. Location Of Monuments: Accurate location of all monuments which shall be placed at all block corners, angle points and at intermediate points as
shall be required by the village engineer, and installed in such a manner that they may be located by a licensed surveyor. All USGS, state, county,
village or other official bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position.
k. Covenants: Protective covenants, or filed as an accompanying document in form for recording.
l. Setback Lines: Proposed building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
m. Name: Name of subdivision.
n. Location: By section, township and range.
o. Scale, Direction: Title, scale, north arrow, date.
p. Certification: Certification by a registered land surveyor certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat.
q. Other Data: Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as may be required by the plan commission in the enforcement of
these regulations. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
2. Certification Required: The application for approval of the final plat shall be deemed incomplete and not qualified for approval until after all of the
following certificates are in full compliance with the Lake County plats guidelines for recording, and also, have been duly executed except only by the
village clerk: (Ord. 2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 413/524
a. OWNER'S CERTIFICATE*
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described in the annexed plat, and has caused the same to be surveyed and
subdivided, as indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and does hereby acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and
title thereon indicated.
The undersigned hereby dedicated for public use the lands shown on this plat for thoroughfares, streets, alleys and public services; and hereby also
reserves for the Illinois Bell Telephone Company and the Public Service Company, Division of Commonwealth Edison Company the easement
provisions which are stated on their standard form which is attached hereto.
Title
Address
Dated this day of , 19 .
*Corporate owner's certificate should be accompanied by a corporate form of acknowledgment.
b. OWNER'S SURFACE WATER
DRAINAGE CERTIFICATE*
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
This is to certify that owner of the land herein described or duly authorized attorney certify that to be best of my knowledge and belief the drainage of
surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part thereof, or that if such surface water drainage will be changed,
adequate provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or drains which the subdivider has a right to
use, and that such surface waters will not be deposited on the property of adjoining landowners in such concentrations as may cause damage to the
adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision.
Title
Address
Dated this day of , 19 .
*Corporate owner's certificate should be accompanied by a corporate form of acknowledgment.
c. ENGINEER'S SURFACE WATER
DRAINAGE CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
This is to certify that I, Registered Professional Engineer, certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that drainage of surface waters will not be
changed by construction of such subdivision or any part thereof, or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, adequate provision has been
made for collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or drains which the subdivider has the right to use, and that such surface
waters will not be deposited on the property of adjoining landowners in such concentrations as may cause damage to the adjoining property because
of the construction of the subdivision.
Dated at Lake Zurich, Lake County, Illinois, this day of , 19 .
Engineer
d. NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
I, , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State aforesaid, do hereby certify that , personally known to me to be the same person whose
names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such owners, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed the
annexed plat as their own free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and notarized Seal this day of , 19 .
Notary Public
e. SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 414/524
This is to certify that I, , Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No. , have surveyed and subdivided the following described property:
as shown by the annexed plat which is a correct representation of said survey and subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof.
I further certify that all regulations enacted by the Board of Trustees relative to plats and subdivisions have been complied with in the preparation of
this plat.
Given under my hand and seal , Illinois this day of , 19 .
Surveyor
f. VILLAGE ENGINEER
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
I, , Village Engineer of the Village of Lake Zurich, Illinois, hereby certify that the land improvements described in the annexed plat and the plans and
specifications therefor, meet the minimum requirements of said Village
Dated at Lake Zurich, Lake County, Illinois this day of , 19 .
Village Engineer
g. COUNTY CLERK CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
I, , County Clerk of Lake County, Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no redeemable
tax sales against any of the land included in the annexed plat.
Given under my hand and seal at Waukegan, Lake County, Illinois, this day of , 19
County Clerk
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
h. PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
This is to certify that the members of the Plan Commission have reviewed and approved the annexed plat.
Dated at Lake Zurich, Lake County, Illinois, this day of , 19 .
Chairman
i. CERTIFICATE AS TO
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
I, , Finance Director of the Village of Lake Zurich, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special assessments or
any deferred installments thereof that have been apportioned against the tract of land included in the plat.
Dated at Lake Zurich, Lake County Illinois, this day of , 19 .
Finance Director
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. Ord. 2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
j. VILLAGE CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
I, , Village Clerk of the Village of Lake Zurich, Illinois, hereby certify that the annexed plat was presented to and by resolution duly approved by the
Board of Trustees of said Village at its meeting held on , 19 , and that the required bond or other guarantee has been posted for the completion of the
improvements required by the regulations of said Village.
In witness whereof, I have hereto set my hand and seal of the Village of Lake Zurich, Illinois, this day of , 19 .
Village Clerk
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 415/524
k. MAYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
I, , Mayor of the Village of Lake Zurich have approved and accepted this plat by the Board of Trustees of the Village.
Dated at Lake Zurich, Lake County, Illinois, this day of , 19 .
Village Mayor
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
l. ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
Approved this day of AD, 19 .
As to Roadway Access to State Highway
also known as .
District Engineer
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. Ord. 2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
m. LAKE COUNTY DEPARTMENT
OF HIGHWAYS
(Certification Stamp by LCDOH)
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
Approved this day of , 19 , as to roadway access to County Highway .
Lake County Superintendent of Highways
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
n. SCHOOL DISTRICT CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that I , as owner of the property described as the Subdivision and legally described on the same name, have determined to the best
of my knowledge the school district in which each of the following lots lies.
Signature of Owner
LOT NUMBER(S) SCHOOL DISTRICTS
ELEMENTARY HIGH SCHOOL
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF LAKE) SS
I, , a Notary Public, do hereby certify that , owner of the property commonly known as Subdivision, appeared before me this day in person and
acknowledged the execution of this statement as his free and voluntary act.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this day of , .
Seal
Notary Public
(Ord. 2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
10-5-10: FROM CONCEPT TO BUILDING PERMIT, OUTLINE:
The following is a guide to the developer as to the typical flow of development. The steps range from the first conceptual meeting at staff level all the way
to the latter stages of development at a time when the actual building permit is issued. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
A. Preliminary Stage:
1. The developer takes a proposal to the staff development meeting. Here, the village planner and director of building and zoning work in conjunction
with the developer to put the proposal into a form agreeable with village ordinances. In most cases, one or two (2) meetings are necessary before the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 416/524
proposal is officially ready for the board's evaluation. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-1995)
2. The engineer then begins review of the preliminary plans after the appropriate fees have been paid.
3. After the proposal has met the requirements of the staff, it is sent to the board committee of the whole. The petitioner and staff identify the overall
concepts, as well as potential issues for the board members, and the board committee can either send the proposal back to staff for further changes,
or forward the proposal to the village board.
4. The proposal is then brought before the public at the village board meeting. It is again scrutinized and either sent onward to the plan commission, or
brought back to the village board with requested changes.
5. The proposal is then brought before the plan commission (PC) for a preliminary hearing. Preapplication review takes place and the zoning board of
appeals is initiated if it is needed. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
This ends the preliminary (preapplication) process. All tolled, the process takes from thirty (30) to sixty (60) days to complete.
B. Formal Application Process:
1. The proposal is then resumed at a board committee of the whole meeting. The formal requests and specific concerns of the developer and staff are
then examined. Upon the committee approval, the development is sent to the village board.
2. The village board then examines the development as a full body. They may ask for specific changes before sending the proposal to the plan
commission and a public hearing. The plan commission reviews the development only if an annexation, special use or otherwise a variation in the
zoning2 and/or subdivision ordinance is sought.
3. Formal public input then takes place at a public hearing of the plan commission. The concerns of the general public, elected officials and village staff
are then brought up, and the development is sent back to the staff and appropriate subcommittees to evaluate any concerns.
4. The staff then meets with the developer at a staff development meeting, usually, the fourth or fifth of such meetings. The staff and petitioner then
refine the proposal using the public input as guidelines.
5. If required, a second meeting of the plan commission occurs at this point. A second meeting is not usually needed. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
6. Once the project has passed the plan commission, the engineer, with a more exact development, can accurately measure the cost of the project.
The letter of credit, which is fixed at a rate of one hundred ten percent (110%) of site improvement costs (i.e., grading, sewer and water, and
sidewalks, etc.) can be obtained. Also, the remaining two percent (2%) deposit (for a total of 3.5 percent) can be figured. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989;
amd. Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-1993)
7. The development then goes before the committee of the whole where it is placed on the agenda of the next board meeting.
8. Upon the acceptance of the proposal by the committee of the whole, the board sets dates for establishing an annexation agreement and, if so
required, annexation hearing. Building permits may also be issued. After staff meetings, public discussion and board approval of both the annexation
agreement and later public hearing, the board will proceed to set a date for plat approval. At this point, the village attorney is consulted for necessary
documents and approval.
Building permits are issued after review and approval of the building department, fire department, engineer and public works. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-
1989)
Chapter 6
ENGINEERING AND LAND IMPROVEMENTS
10-6-1: ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The village engineer shall develop, maintain and, from time to time, amend a "village of Lake Zurich engineering standards and specifications" for the
design and installation of public improvements in the community. These standards and specifications are incorporated herein and are made a part of this
code by such reference.
ENGINEERING AND LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
A. Intent: The following is the intent of the engineering and land improvement standards and specifications of the village:
1. Provide for a safe, healthy and pleasant environment.
2. To maintain high property values.
3. To ensure for high quality and long lasting improvements to the land.
B. Standards And Specifications: These standards and specifications shall apply to all construction activities within the jurisdiction of the village to within
five feet (5') of any building or structure falling under the village building department.
C. Documents: The following documents are included by reference in these standards and specifications. The revision or edition in effect at the time of
preliminary plan approval shall apply for a given development.
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" by Illinois department of transportation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 417/524
2. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items" by Illinois department of transportation.
3. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions" by Illinois department of transportation.
4. "Design Manual" by Illinois department of transportation.
5. "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" by Illinois Society Of Professional Engineers, et al.
6. "Standard Specifications For Sanitary And Water Service Connections" by Lake County department of public works.
7. Other standards or specifications specifically referred to in an individual provision of these standards and specifications.
8. All documents cited in the above standards and specifications relevant to the subject under consideration. If a conflict arises between any
provision(s) of the referenced items above and any provision(s) of these standards and specifications, then the more restrictive provision(s) shall
apply.
D. Contractor May Discharge Duties: Many of the obligations of the developer or owner found in these standards and specifications are more properly
discharged by the contractor. Provisions pertaining to the construction and warranty phases of a development with the phrase "developer or owner" or
"developer or owner or contractor", in whatever order, shall be taken to be equivalent to the phrase "developer and/or owner and/or contractor".
The intent of this provision is to ensure that the parties to the contract are jointly and individually obligated to meet the construction, warranty and
maintenance requirements of the village. It is the intent of this provision that the village not be burdened with tasks required of one of the contracting
parties who has abandoned his responsibilities.
E. Alternate Methods Or Materials:
1. Where provisions of these standards and specifications are impractical or extraordinarily costly to implement because of site conditions, the village
engineer may vary or modify the provisions in question at the request of the developer or owner; provided, that the intent of these standards and
specifications is not violated.
2. Materials or methods not specifically prescribed in these standards and specifications may be used at the discretion of the village engineer based on
the intent of these standards and specifications.
3. The developer or owner shall provide the village engineer technical data and reports as deemed necessary by the village engineer to assist the
village engineer in reaching a decision concerning the acceptability of proposed variations or modifications of provisions of these standards and
specifications, or the acceptability of proposed nonprescribed materials or methods. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
4. The developer or owner may appeal a negative decision of the village engineer to the director of building and zoning, the village manager and the
village board, in that order. A decision of the village board shall be considered final. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. Ord. 95-02-712, 2-21-1995;
Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
F. Reasonable Working Hours And Days:
1. Subject to ordinance 88-06-265 of the village, construction activities, including the preparation or delivery of construction equipment or materials,
shall begin no earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and shall cease no later than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday through Friday. Construction
activities shall begin no earlier than eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and shall cease no later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Saturday. No construction
activity is allowed on Sunday without a special permit.
2. This provision shall not apply where construction activities are for the prevention of injury to persons or property.
G. Materials: Only materials not previously used and in like new condition shall be used in the construction of improvements unless the village engineer
approves otherwise in writing. The village engineer shall be given copies of material invoices at his request. He may also inspect the materials at their
place of origin.
H. Errors And Omissions: Errors and omissions in these standards and specifications shall immediately be brought to the attention of the village engineer.
Errors and omissions in these standards and specifications shall in no way relieve a developer or owner, his or her agents, consultants or contractor(s)
of the responsibility to provide a developmental environment in full compliance with all pertinent ordinances, regulations, laws, court orders, etc.,
promulgated by recognized authorities and in full compliance with the stated intent of these standards and specifications.
I. Certification: All plats, plans and specifications relevant to the design and construction of any development shall be certified and stamped by a person
licensed by the state of Illinois who has been responsible for the surveying or design task entailed.
J. Plans: Plans submitted to the village engineer shall include plans for all improvements in a development except buildings. Only the outline and pertinent
floor elevations are required for buildings.
K. Improvements: Improvements for development shall complement existing improvements in abutting properties or shall conform to the comprehensive
plan where abutting properties are not developed.
L. Preconstruction Meeting: Shortly after plans for improvements are approved by the village and by other public or quasi-public agencies as required, and
after a general contractor is engaged, a preconstruction meeting shall be convened. A representative of the developer or owner, the contractor, the
village engineer, and any other person(s) deemed necessary by the village engineer shall attend. Representatives of other public or quasi-public
agencies may attend at their option. The meeting time and place and the notification list shall meet the approval of the village engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 418/524
M. Notice; Changes: The developer or owner or the contractor shall notify the village engineer at least forty eight (48) hours before construction is to begin
or end. This provision shall apply to the resumption of construction after a break of three (3) days or more and to the temporary halting of construction
as for holidays or vacation. Any significant changes in the construction schedule shall be reported to the village engineer.
N. Maintenance Warranty: The developer or owner shall provide the village with a two (2) year maintenance warranty for all public improvements. The
warranty shall not commence until after the public improvements have been accepted by the village in writing.
O. Service Connections: Service connections to be installed under existing roadways in commercial, industrial and multi-family developments shall be
augured. Nonmetallic pipe shall be installed in steel casing under the roadway and for five feet (5') beyond the back of curb.
P. Additional Insured Parties: The developer or owner and the general contractor shall include the village, its officials and employees, and the village
engineer as additional insured parties under all insurance policies required for development in the village.
Q. Fencing; Landscaping: Residential areas shall be separated from both commercial and industrial areas by fencing and/or landscaping.
R. Water Service: Water service at a site must be complete prior to any building.
S. Rumble Strips: All new developments over one acre in size must install a rumble strip at the intersection to prevent mud and debris from leaving the
site.
T. Road To Storage Sites: The contractor must install a gravel road into a new subdivision where there exists the storage of building materials or
flammable materials of any type. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
U. Temporary Roads For New Construction Areas: The contractor shall install a temporary construction gravel road to access any new building
construction. The gravel road shall be not less than eighteen feet (18') in width and shall be constructed in a manner to carry the weight of heavy
equipment, as determined by the village's director of public works. (Ord. 2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
10-6-2: PROTECTION AND RESTORATION:
A. General: It is the intent of this standard to provide for the protection of people, property and existing improvements and, where property or existing
improvements are damaged or destroyed, to provide for their restoration to their previous condition or better. Existing improvements include, but are
not limited to:
1. Trees, shrubs, ground cover;
2. Underground and overhead utilities;
3. Sewerage and water distribution systems;
4. Pavements and sidewalks;
5. Buildings and other structures.
B. Protection:
1. A traffic-control plan, including State Highway Standard details where applicable, shall be required for any construction work in and adjacent to
active streets. All the traffic-control requirements of Illinois Department of Transportation shall be met. Adequate traffic control shall be required for all
site access operations.
2. Any operations that require the closing of one or more traffic lanes shall be allowed only with the permission of the Village Engineer. Such
permission will not be granted without the approval of emergency services officials and without all the required traffic-control items in place. Requests
for traffic lane closures shall be received by the Village Engineer at least forty eight (48) hours before the desired land closure is put into effect.
If construction activities will close one or more lanes of a commuter route as identified by the Village Engineer, two (2) easily-read warning signs, one
for each direction of travel, shall be erected at least two (2) working days in advance of the lane closure. The signs shall have printed on them "Lane
Closure" and the first date the lane is to be closed.
3. Construction shall not begin until the locations of all existing utilities have been marked by J.U.L.I.E. J.U.L.I.E. stakes and other markings shall not
be destroyed or obliterated unless absolutely necessary.
4. Construction, including the delivery of materials, shall not begin until the locations of all original survey control points have been marked with sturdy,
brightly painted stakes at least five feet (5') high. The installation of marker stakes shall be accomplished so as not to disturb the survey point being
marked.
Survey control points shall include by way of example: 1) right-of-way markers, 2) points of change in curvature, 3) subdivision boundary corners, 4)
permanent or semi-permanent bench marks, 5) angle points, 6) points identified by the Village Engineer as important, etc.
5. During construction, excavation material and construction materials shall not be allowed to interfere with access to water distribution system controls
or hydrants. Excavated material and construction materials shall not be piled so as to interfere with overall drainage patterns. Excavated materials
and construction materials shall not be stockpiled or deposited in such a manner as to affect the respiration or drainage of trees. Driveways and
roadways not in the immediate construction area shall be kept passable. Pavements and sidewalks shall be cleaned of construction materials, debris
and dirt at least daily.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 419/524
6. The contractor shall take all necessary action to protect the site at the end of each work day.
C. Restoration:
1. Improvements associated with a development will not be accepted by the Village until the Village Engineer is satisfied that the site of construction
has been restored to a condition at least as good as that existing before construction began. If, prior to construction, portions of the site were in poor
or deficient condition, those portions shall be restored to a state conforming to the intent of this Section; that is, they shall be cleaned up rather than
returned to their previous poor or deficient condition.
2. All pavements or sidewalks damaged during construction shall be replaced with pavement or sidewalk of equal or better quality than that existing
prior to construction. Such replacement pavement or sidewalk shall, as a minimum, meet the requirements of these Standards and Specifications.
Repairs to existing flexible pavements shall include provision for neatly saw-cut edges.
Repairs to rigid pavements or sidewalks shall include provision either for neatly saw-cut edges or for the repair of whole sections between existing
joints.
All repairs to pavements and sidewalks shall conform at a minimum to the applicable provisions of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", as amended by subsequent sections of these Standards.
3. All damaged lawn or parkway shall be restored with sodding rather than seeding unless, because of certain weather or site conditions, the Village
Engineer allows seeding. If seeding is allowed, mulch shall be applied in such a way that it will not be scattered by wind.
4. Damaged sewerage or water distribution components shall be repaired immediately after the damage occurs. The developer or owner shall be
responsible to repair all damage to sewerage or water distribution components caused by construction of site improvements whenever they are
discovered up to the last day of the warranty period.
All repairs to sewerage and water distribution components shall be made with materials equivalent to or better than to original components. All such
repairs shall be done in accordance with the applicable provisions of these Standards and Specifications and with provisions of the other applicable
standards and specifications listed in these Standards and Specifications.
5. The contractor shall not attempt to make repairs to damaged live or active utility lines himself, but shall take action to protect lives and property (in
that order) if necessary. The contractor shall, immediately after taking any emergency action, inform the affected utility company. The contractor shall
lend every assistance to the utility company's repair crew.
6. All damaged or destroyed survey points shall be replaced at the end of construction before the Village will accept the improvements associated with
the development. Only an Illinois registered land surveyor shall replace damaged or destroyed survey points. The surveyor who replaces damaged
or destroyed survey points shall provide the Village Engineer with a signed and sealed statement certifying that the damaged or destroyed survey
points were replaced at the location indicated on the recorded plat of subdivision.
7. The two-year warranty period for any improvement shall not begin before all trash, debris, surplus material and contractor equipment pertaining to
that improvement has been removed from the site and until the Village Engineer has agreed in writing that said work is accepted.
8. The developer and the owner and the contractor shall be responsible to satisfy all damage claims associated with construction in and around the
development. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
10-6-3: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
(Rep. by Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
10-6-4: STORM SEWERAGE SYSTEM AND DRAINAGE:
A. Storm sewerage system pipes serving inlets of any kind shall be not less than ten inches (10") in diameter in public property nor less than eight inches
(8") in diameter in private property. Storm sewerage system pipes servicing sump pumps and/or roof or footing drains shall not be less than six inches
(6") in diameter except for single-family detached dwellings where storm sewerage service connection pipes shall be not less than four inches (4") in
diameter.
B. Storm sewerage system pipes less than twelve inches (12") in diameter shall be laid straight and at a uniform gradient between structures unless
otherwise approved by the Village Engineer. All other storm sewerage system pipes may be laid along a mathematically derived horizontal curve of not
less than two hundred feet (200') radius or along a straight line as appropriate and shall be installed at a uniform gradient between structures.
C. Storm sewerage system pipes of different diameters shall join only at structures. Ideally, invert elevations shall be adjusted to match the eighty onehundredths
(0.80) depth points of the differing diameter pipes.
D. Surface drainage inlets or open grate catch basins shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across any street intersection or major parking
area driveway. Surface runoff shall not travel more than four hundred feet (400') nor attain a flow of more than two (2) cubic feet per second in a 10-
year storm without being intercepted by an inlet or catch basin. Inlets and catch basins shall discharge into the piped portion of the storm sewerage
system and not directly into a lot or roadside ditch, open channel or swale wherever practical in the opinion of the Village Engineer. Inlets or open-grate
catch basins shall be provided at all low points. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89; amd. Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
E. The point of all sump pump discharges shall be shown on the improvement plan for each building having a cellar, basement or crawl space. All sump
pump discharges, whether for new construction or for existing development, shall be made directly into the nearest storm sewer via a "French drain"
system, as directed by the Village Engineer. If no storm sewer exists, then the sump pump shall discharge to a point at least ten feet (10') away from
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 420/524
the foundation and no closer than ten feet (10') to any property line. No downspouts shall be permitted to connect to the "French drain" or storm sewer
unless approved, in advance, in writing by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
F. Drainage shall be away from buildings and into lot line swales which shall merge as quickly as possible and discharge into the piped storm sewerage
system. The route of flow of all runoff shall be shown on the plans.
G. Buildable lots left vacant at the time that the improvements are completed elsewhere on the site shall be graded to drain into the storm sewerage
system. Outlots and other nonbuildable areas of the site shall be similarly graded unless they are part of a planned pond area.
H. Manholes or catch basins shall be located at the end of all sewers that do not end at an inlet, headwall or flared end section; at all changes in pipe size,
shape, direction or gradient; and at all junctions with other storm sewerage system lines. Manholes or catch basins shall also be located so that the
following intervals are not exceeded:
Pipe Size
(Inches)
Maximum Interval
(Feet)
6 - 24 250
24 - 36 400
42 - 54 500
60 + 1,000
I. All storm sewerage system pipes not ending at a manhole, catch basin or inlet shall end at a headwall or flared end section. The flared end section or
precast headwall shall include a Class X concrete foundation built as shown in Exhibit No. 101.
J. Where design conditions dictate, special manholes or junction chambers or other structures shall be designed and built to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer.
K. Storm sewers shall be constructed deep enough to provide an outlet for all storm water runoff in the ultimate service area, both existing and future. The
depth to the top of an inlet or catch basin outlet pipe shall be no less than two feet (2') except as noted in Exhibit No. 92 and except cover for rear yard
inlet pipes may be one foot (1') minimum at the structure.
L. Storm sewerage system pipe class shall be determined from the specifications of section 603 of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction".
M. Where deemed necessary by the Village Engineer based on site and load considerations, concrete cradle or encasement shall be used. Pipes shall not
be adjusted to grade with brick or shims unless concrete cradle or concrete encasement is to be provided.
N. Swale side slopes shall be no steeper than four horizontal to one vertical (4:1). Swales shall be no longer than four hundred feet (400') measured along
a flow line from the high point in the swale service area to the first intercepting inlet structure. Overflow swales shall be designed so water depth is no
more than twelve inches (12") in a 100-year storm.
O. Open Channels:
1. An open channel may be substituted for an enclosed storm sewerage system in developments with more than eighty percent (80%) of the lots larger
than forty thousand (40,000) square feet or in watershed areas larger than eighty (80) acres and, in either case, only if approved by the Village
Engineer.
2. All existing or proposed connecting channels off the site but in Village property or easement and within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the site
boundary and all proposed on-site open channels shall be improved subject to the following provisions:
a. Side slopes shall not be steeper than four horizontal to one vertical (4:1).
b. In order to accommodate maintenance vehicles where deemed necessary in public property by the Village Engineer, an eight foot (8') wide, six
inch (6") minimum thick Class I bituminous pathway shall be constructed two feet (2') (minimum) above the normal (20-year storm) water level and
eight feet (8') (minimum) horizontally from the normal water line measured from the near edge of the pathway.
c. A six inch (6") diameter underdrain with at least six inches (6") of cover shall be built in the bottom of all normally dry open channels within the
limits set in subsection O2b above if longitudinal slope is less than three-fourths of one percent (0.75%).
d. A Municipal drainage, access and utility easement shall be provided along the open channel with a width adequate to include the area covered by
a 100-year storm.
e. Roadside ditches were allowed in single-family residential developments with lots larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet shall meet these
open channel provisions. In addition, such roadside ditches shall be a minimum of two and one-half feet (2.50') deep at pavement low points.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 421/524
P. Materials:
1. Storm Sewerage System Pipes:
Material
Use
Min.
Class
Joints
Pipe
Spec
Joint
Spec
Min.
Dia.
Max.
Lining Dia.
PCPE U.D. OR ASTM 4 6
F405
PVC Carr. SDR35 PO ASTM ASTM
D3034 D3212
R. Conc. Culv. 3 OR ASTM ASTM 12
S.C. C76 C443
S.S.
R. Conc. Culv. 3 OR ASTM ASTM 12
Arch S.C. C506 C443 (equiv)
S.S.
R. Conc. Culv. HEIII OR ASTM ASTM 12
Ellip. S.C. VEIII C507 C443 (equiv)
D.I.P. Culv. 50 PO ANSI ANSI 12 C.M.
S.C. A21.51 A21.11 4
S.S. 10
Case 8
Steel Case 5/16"
(min)
weld ASTM
A120
12
PCPE Perforated corrugated polyethylene pipe in geotextile fabric filter
envelope;
DIP Ductile iron pipe;
S.C. Service connection; U.D.--underdrain; Culv--culvert;
S.S. Storm sewer main; Case-casing; Carr.--carrier pipe;
OR "O" ring; PO--push on; solv.--solvent weld;
equiv. Circular equivalent diameter; C.M.--cement mortar lining;
The Village Engineer may allow or may require that all or part of the proposed storm sewerage system be laid with open joints. The method of preventing
material from entering any open-joint pipe at the joints shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.
2. Manholes and Catch Basins (See Exhibit Nos. 3 and 73):
a. Manholes and catch basins shall have precast reinforced concrete barrel sections conforming to ADSTM C478 with preformed bituminous joints
and with integral precast-in-place bottoms. Precast slab bottoms may be used for manholes to be built in existing storm sewerage system lines.
b. Manholes shall have offset access holes. Catch basins shall have concentric access holes.
c. Manholes and catch basins for storm sewerage system pipes thirty six inches (36") or less in diameter shall be designed in accordance with
Exhibit Nos. 3 and 74. For pipes larger than thirty six inches (36") in diameter, the manholes and catch basins shall have large enough bottom
sections to fit the pipes or, for pipes over forty eight inch (48") diameter riser seated on a slab if a manhole bottom section is used or on a tee if no
bottom section is used. The required structure size shall be increased if warranted by the number and size of pipes entering the structure.
d. No more than two (2) precast concrete adjusting rings shall be allowed for a maximum height adjustment of eight inches (8").
e. Each manhole shall have a poured Class X concrete bench carefully shaped to drain to the outlet pipe.
3. Inlets (See Exhibit No. 95):
a. Inlets shall be constructed of precast reinforced concrete conforming to ASTM C478 with "O"-ring or preformed bituminous joints and with precastin-
place bottom. Inlets shall have a wall thickness of no less than four inches (4").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 422/524
b. Inlets shall be twenty four inches (24") in diameter and between two feet (2') and four feet (4') deep.
c. No more than two (2) precast concrete adjusting rings shall be allowed for a maximum height adjustment of eight inches (8").
d. No more than one major pipe connection is allowed per inlet.
e. A Class X concrete bench shall be poured in the bottom of each inlet and shaped to drain to the outlet pipe. The fall across the inlet shall be no
less than four inches (4").
4. Castings:
a. All grates in paved areas shall be bicycle-safe.
b. Frames and lids equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R-1712 shall be used where structures fall in pavement and require solid lids. Castings
for structures falling in landscaped areas and requiring solid lids shall be equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R-1772-A frames and lids. Lids
shall be embossed with "Storm Sewer".
c. Casting for structures falling in pavement and requiring grated lids shall be equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R-2504-C frames and grates.
d. Castings for structures falling in curb shall be equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R-3281-C (B-6.12) or R-3277 (B6.24) frames, grates and
boxes.
e. Castings for structures falling in driveway depressed curb shall be equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R-3505-A frames and grates. The
curb, gutter and adjacent driveway apron (if necessary) shall be carefully shaped to drain to the grate flow line.
f. Castings shall not be allowed in sidewalk handicap ramps.
g. Inlets falling in landscaped areas where clogging will not be a problem shall have grates equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R-4340-B. Catch
basins falling in landscaped areas where clogging will not be a problem shall have frames and grates equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R-
2502-A. In areas where clogging may be a problem, Neenah Foundry Company R-2561 equivalent frames and grates shall be required for both
inlets and catch basins. The choice of casting shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.
h. Manhole steps shall be equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R-1981-S.
5. Standard pipe bedding shall be crushed stone or crushed gravel conforming to IDOT CA-6 100% Crushed.
6. Structures falling in pavement of any kind shall include provision for the prevention of particles from entering the structure below the casting. A
chimney seal or geotextile fabric wrapping may be required by the Village Engineer. Low point structures in pavement shall include at least four (4)
one inch (1") diameter weep holes just below sub-base level protected by two (2) layers of geotextile filter fabric over a stiff, noncorrodible screen.
Q. Construction:
1. Bedding shall be placed as shown in Exhibit No. 16. The bedding surface shall be adjusted to support the bottom of the pipe at all points.
2. If a significant amount of water enters the trench during pipe laying, it shall be removed before operations may continue.
3. If soft, spongy or other unsuitable soils are encountered at the bottom of the trench, all such material shall be removed and replaced with well
compacted crushed limestone bedding material. If rock is encountered, it shall be removed to at least six inches (6") below the bottom of the pipe to
allow the proper thickness of bedding to be installed.
4. Adequate provision shall be made for the safety, storage and protection of all pipe prior to actual installation in the trench. Proper equipment shall be
used for the safe handling, conveying and laying of the pipe. All pipe shall be careful lowered into the trench, piece by piece by means of suitable
tools or equipment so as to prevent damage to sewerage system materials, protective coatings or linings.
5. All portions of the joining materials, the socket and the spigot of the joining pipes shall be wiped or brushed clean of all foreign materials at the time
the joints are assembled. Assembly shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and as instructed in writing by the Village
Engineer. If required by the Village Engineer, the open end of the installed pipe shall be sealed with a plug until the next pipe is added.
6. Cutting of pipe for any purpose shall be done in a neat, workmanlike manner without damage to any lining. Pipe cutting shall result in a smooth end
at the proper angle to the axis of the pipe. A bevel shall be neatly filed or ground around the outside circumference of any ductile cast iron pipe to
minimize damage to the gasket material at that joint. All debris from the cutting operation shall be removed from the inside of the pipe and from the
joint area. Flame cutting of pipe shall not be allowed.
Structures shall not be broken to provide a hole for pipe but shall be neatly saw cut with the proper equipment.
7. The trench shall be carefully backfilled as shown in section 10-8-1, "Exhibit No. 1", of this title except as follows:
Trenches in or within two feet (2') of a roadway, parking area, curb, sidewalk or any other paved area shall be backfilled with trench backfill in
accordance with the pertinent sections of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". See section 10-8-1, "Exhibit No. 2", of
this title.
8. The trench shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with section 502.11 of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction",
except the backfill material shall be compacted everywhere, not just near and under pavements or sidewalks.
If jetting is used as a compaction method, the jetting tube shall not be allowed within two feet (2') of the pipe. The jetting tube shall be inserted along
the trench at six foot (6') intervals.
R. Inspection And Testing:
1. All storm sewers and appurtenances shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to final inspection and prior to testing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 423/524
2. The developer or owner shall have an employee in charge on site at all times that construction of the storm sewerage system is under way. The
developer or owner shall be fully responsible for the quality of the materials and methods of the construction work and shall bear full responsibility for
ensuring that the storm sewerage system shall meet the stated requirements of the village in every way.
3. Upon completion of construction and prior to the beginning of the maintenance guarantee period and again approximately one year after the
commencement of the warranty period, a videotaped television inspection shall be performed on the sections or portions of the sewer as directed by
the village engineer. Videotapes and written reports for all television inspections shall be provided to the village prior to the initial acceptance
provided for in this title. The form of the report and the format of the videotape shall be approved by the village engineer. All fees and costs involved
in this television inspection shall be borne by the developer or owner.
4. The village engineer shall inspect the storm sewerage system under construction during construction as he deems necessary. The village engineer
shall not be responsible to direct the work of the contractor but shall be responsible only to assess the acceptability of the improvement as
constructed. In no case shall the village engineer be responsible for day to day quality control at the site of construction.
5. The developer or owner shall ensure that work done over a shallow storm sewer is done carefully. Pavement undercutting, especially, shall be done
so as not to damage a shallow storm sewer. The developer or owner shall require that any storm sewer pipes damaged as a result of construction
activity shall be immediately replaced by the contractor responsible for the damage. The village engineer shall not approve any storm sewerage
system containing damaged components regardless of who or what damaged them. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
S. Subbase Relief Underdrains: A six inch (6") diameter subbase relief underdrain shall be installed one foot (1') from the back of curb and shall be
connected into the lower inlet fifty feet (50') on each side away from the inlet. See section 10-8-1, "Exhibit No. 11", of this title. (Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-
1993)
10-6-5: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS:
The Lake County watershed development ordinance, as most recently amended by the county of Lake on October 13, 2015, is hereby adopted by
reference and is in full force and effect within the village of Lake Zurich and is found in its own compilation. (Ord. 2015-12-095, 12-7-2015)
10-6-6: SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM:
A. Intent: It is the intent of this standard to provide for the safe and efficient disposal of sanitary sewage and that the public health be protected from the
negative aspects of sanitary sewage by the proper separation of sanitary sewage from the environment until such time that it is rendered harmless. All
developments shall include a sanitary sewerage system meeting the approval of the Village Engineer. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
Sanitary sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with the "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois" unless
otherwise modified in this Section. Materials shall be as specified in Exhibit 147. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89; amd. Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
B. Service Areas: All sanitary sewers shall be designed to accommodate an ultimate service area as identified by the Village Engineer. If extending the
ultimate service area beyond the limits of the proposed development results in additional construction costs within the development, the Village may
provide an agreement for the recapture by the developer or owner of the additional cost when future system extensions are made. Recapture
payments will be made to the developer or owner only after those benefiting from the extended service area have made payment to the Village.
C. System Extension: The location of proposed extensions to the existing sanitary sewerage system shall be approved by the Village Engineer.
D. Design Standards:
1. Design flows for residential developments, single and multiple, shall be based upon full development of the service area with the population served.
Design flow assumptions shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.
2. The formula to be used for residential developments to determine the maximum daily per capita design flow is as follows:
Q(max)
=
Q(avg)
18 + V P
4 +
where:
Q = design flow, gpcpd
P = population served in thousands (1000's)
3. Design flows for nonresidential developments shall be based on full development of the service area with the daily average design flow calculated as
follows:
Q = (0.10) (AF)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 424/524
where:
Q = design flow, gpd
AF = floor area in square feet
or
Q = (1500) (AS)
where:
Q = design flow, gpd
AS = site area in acres
Add to the calculated figure, the estimated process water requirements to arrive at a final design flow.
Design flow shall include total allowable infiltration at any point based on one hundred (100) gallons per inch diameter per miles per day at any time for any
section of the sanitary sewerage system.
For nonresidential developments where the details of the development are not established, domestic design flows shall be approved by the Village
Engineer. The developer or owner shall, however, be ultimately responsible for the provision of enough sanitary sewerage system capacity to serve any
and all future requirements within the development.
4. The required capacity of sanitary sewers shall be computed using Manning's formula:
1.486
Q = (A)-------(R) (S)
n
where:
Q =Flow capacity in cubic feet per second
A =Area of flow cross section in square feet
R =Hydraulic radius in feet (R = area of flow divided by the length of the wetted perimeter)
S =Slope of the hydraulic energy line, typically the same as the conduit slope, in feet per foot
n =Roughness coefficient
For circular conduit (pipe), the formula takes the form:
0.463
Q = (A)---------(D) (S)
n
where:
D =diameter of pipe in feet
5. The coefficient n shall be as follows:
Concrete pipe 0.013
Ductile iron pipe 0.013
PVC pipe 0.012
6. Design mean velocity (design flow rate divided by cross sectional area) flowing full shall not be more than six feet (6') per second nor be less than
two feet (2') per second. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. per letter dated 1-10-1990)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 425/524
E. Minimum Diameter: Sanitary sewerage system main line pipes shall not be less than eight inches (8") in diameter. Sanitary service connection pipes
shall not be less than six inches (6") in diameter. Sanitary service connection pipes shall be laid at a gradient of at least one percent (1%). Sanitary
service connection pipe shall not be permitted to connect to a manhole. (Ord. 2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
F. Between Manholes: Sanitary sewerage system pipes shall be laid straight and at a uniform gradient between manholes unless otherwise approved by
the village engineer.
G. Different Diameters: Sanitary sewerage system pipes of different diameters shall joint only at manholes. Ideally, invert elevations shall be adjusted to
match the eighty one-hundredths (0.80) depth points of the differing diameter pipes.
H. Manholes:
1. Manholes shall be located at the end of all sewers; at all changes in pipe size, shape direction or gradient; and at all junctions with other sanitary
sewerage system lines. An inspection manhole shall be required within ten feet (10') of any commercial, industrial, or multi-family building. Manholes
shall be located so that the following maximum intervals are not exceeded:
Pipe Size
(Inches)
Maximum Interval
(Feet)
8 - 16 250
18 - 54 400
2. Whenever possible, pipe of uniform size, direction and gradient passing through a manhole shall be laid through the manhole and later cut out to the
horizontal diameter line or as appropriate for other pipes entering the manhole. In any case, a smooth, well formed invert shall be provided across
the manhole.
3. An outside drop manhole shall be provided for manholes with any pipe entering the manhole twenty four inches (24") or more above the invert of the
outlet pipe.
4. Special manholes or junction chambers shall be designed and constructed to the satisfaction of the village engineer where flows and other
conditions dictate.
I. Depth And Outfall: Sanitary sewers shall be constructed at a minimum depth of six feet (6') and shall provide an outfall for all sanitary sewage within the
ultimate service area, both existing and future.
J. Lift Stations:
1. Whenever possible, sanitary sewerage facilities shall be designed to avoid the necessity of lift stations.
2. Lift stations and force main designs shall be submitted for review and approval to the village engineer and the Illinois environmental protection
agency.
3. Lift stations shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer and the village public works department.
4. Where feasible, a dual connect to the power supply system shall be required. A receptacle and switching for the connection of a portable generator
shall be required.
5. Air- and vacuum-release valves shall be installed in vaults at appropriate places in the force main. Cleanouts shall be installed at convenient points
in the force main.
6. An emergency alarm system approved by the village engineer and village public works department must be installed.
K. Pipe Class: Sanitary sewerage system pipe class shall be determined by using ASTM rigid or flexible pipe design strength formulas as applicable.
L. Pipe In Inaccessible Areas: Main-line sanitary sewerage system pipe laid in relatively inaccessible areas outside the right of way shall be class 52
ductile iron pipe. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. per letter dated 1-10-1990)
M. Materials: All sanitary sewerage system elements shall conform to exhibit no. 13 in section 10-8-1 of this title and to the following specifications: (Ord.
2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
1. Sanitary Sewerage System Pipes:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 426/524
Material
Use
Min.
Class
Joints
Pipe
Spec.
Joint
Spec.
Min.
Dia.
Max.
Lining Dia.
PVC Carr. SDR35 PO ASTM
San.S. SDR26 D3034
F.M. SDR18 AWWA ASTM 6
C900 D3139
R.Conc. San.S. 3 OR ASTM ASTM
18 Epoxy
S.C. C361 C443 18
D.I.P. San.S. 52 PO ANSI ANSI
8 Poly.
S.C. A21.51 A21.11 4
F.M. 6
Carr. 6
Case 10
Steel Case 5/16" weld ASTM 12
A120
S.C. - service connection; San.S - sanitary sewerage main; FM - force main, Case - casing; Carr. - carrier pipe; ES - extra strength, OR - O ring; PO
- push on; solv. - solvent weld; poly - polyethylene
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. per letter dated 1-10-1990)
If the soil report for the development indicates the possibility of corrosive soils, a manufacturer-approved polyethylene wrap shall be specified for all
ductile cast-iron pipes. Installation shall be done in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. If the soil can have a deleterious effect on
concrete pipe, concrete pipe shall not be used.
2. Manholes (See Exhibit No. 3 In Section 10-8-1 Of This Title):
a. Manholes shall be precast reinforced concrete barrel sections conforming to ASTM C478 with preformed bituminous or O-ring joints and with
integral precast-in-place bottoms. The precast-in-place bottom requirement may be waived for manholes to be built in existing sanitary sewer
system lines, where precast slab bottoms may be used.
b. Manholes shall have offset cones.
c. Manholes with pipes thirty six inches (36") or less in diameter shall be designed in accordance with exhibit no. 3 in section 10-8-1 of this title. For
pipes larger than thirty six inches (36") in diameter, the manhole shall have a large enough bottom section to fit the pipe. The required manhole
diameter shall be increased if warranted by the number and size of pipes entering the structure.
d. No more than two (2) precast concrete adjusting rings shall be allowed for a maximum height adjustment of eight inches (8").
e. All pipe connection openings shall be precast with resilient rubber watertight pipe-to-manhole sleeves or seals except for manholes installed in an
existing live sanitary sewerage line. Flexible watertight sleeves (chimney seals) shall be installed from the manhole cone to the manhole casting.
See exhibit no. 4 in section 10-8-1 of this title.
f. Manholes shall include a poured class X concrete bench carefully shaped to drain to the outlet pipe.
3. Castings:
a. Frames and watertight solid lids with machined horizontal-bearing surfaces equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R1712 shall be used where
manholes fall in pavement. Castings for manholes falling in landscaped areas shall be equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R-1772-A frames
and watertight solid lids with machined horizontal-bearing surfaces. The lids shall be embossed with "Sanitary Sewer".
b. Manhole steps shall be equivalent to Neenah Foundry Company R-1981-S.
4. Standard Pipe Bedding: Standard pipe bedding shall be crushed stone or crushed gravel conforming to IDOT A6-100% crushed.
5. Release Valves: Air- and vacuum-release valves shall be equivalent to Apco series 400 SAVV or as approved by the village engineer.
N. Construction:
1. No construction shall begin until copies of all the required permits from the pertinent public agencies are filed with the village engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 427/524
2. No construction shall begin until at least forty eight (48) hours after the village engineer and public works has been notified of the intention to begin
construction.
3. The installation of the sanitary sewerage system and appurtenances shall conform to the requirements of this section and to the following:
a. For reinforced concrete pipe, section 603 of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction".
b. For ductile iron pipe, AWWA C600.
4. The proposed outlet pipe to the existing sanitary sewerage system shall be plugged at the lowest new manhole with a masonry or mechanical
plumber's plug to prevent any flow from the new sanitary sewerage system from reaching the existing sanitary sewerage system. The plug shall not
be removed without the permission of the village engineer.
5. Bedding shall be placed as shown in Exhibit 1. The bedding surface shall be adjusted to support the bottom of the pipe at all points. Where deemed
necessary by the Village Engineer based on site and load conditions, concrete cradle or encasement shall be required.
6. If a significant amount of water enters the trench during pipe laying, it shall be removed before operations may continue.
7. If soft, spongy or other unsuitable soils are encountered at the bottom of the trench, all such material shall be removed and replaced with well
compacted crushed limestone bedding material. If rock is encountered, it shall be removed to at least six inches (6") below the bottom of the pipe to
allow the proper thickness of bedding to be installed.
8. Adequate provision shall be made for the safety, storage and protection of all pipe prior to actual installation in the trench. Care shall be taken to
prevent damage to any pipe castings, both inside and out. The inside of the pipe shall be kept clean throughout its storage period. Proper equipment
shall be used for the safe handling, conveying and laying of the pipe. All pipe shall be carefully lowered into the trench, piece by piece, by means of
suitable tools or equipment so as to prevent damage to sewerage system materials and protective coatings and linings.
9. All portions of the joining materials, the socket, and the spigot of the joining pipes shall be wiped clean of all foreign materials at the time the joints
are assembled. Assembly shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and as instructed in writing by the Village Engineer.
If required by the Village Engineer, the open end of the installed pipe shall be sealed with a watertight plug until the next pipe is added.
10. Cutting of pipe for any purpose shall be done in a neat, workmanlike manner without damage to any lining. Pipe cutting shall result in a smooth end
at a right angle to the axis of the pipe. A bevel shall be neatly filed or ground around the outside circumference of any ductile iron pipe so as to
minimize damage to the gasket material at that joint. All debris from the cutting operation shall be removed from the inside of the pipe and from the
joint area. Flame cutting of pipe shall not be allowed.
Structures shall not be broken to provide holes for pipe but shall be neatly saw-cut using the proper equipment.
11. All joints in force main requiring the use of a fitting shall be blocked as shown in the details for water main thrust blocking where undisturbed earth
is available to spread the reaction forces. Where undisturbed earth is not available, the plans shall include a detail of a tie-rod system to absorb
reaction forces and to transmit them to undisturbed earth or to concrete anchors. The tie-rod system shall be subjected to the approval of the Village
Engineer.
Blocking of fittings shall be done so that the blocking does not interfere with access to the adjacent joints.
12. The trench shall be carefully backfilled as shown in Exhibit No.1 except as follows:
Trenches in or within two feet (2') of a roadway, parking area, curb, sidewalk or any other paved area shall be backfilled with trench backfill in
accordance with the pertinent sections of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction". See Exhibit No. 2.
13. The installation of sanitary service connections shall conform to this Section and to Exhibit No. 14.
14. The trench shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with section 502.11 of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction",
except the backfill material shall be compacted everywhere, not just near and under pavements or sidewalks.
If jetting is used as a compaction method, the jetting tube shall not be allowed within two feet (2') of the pipe. The jetting tube shall be inserted along
the trench at six foot (6') intervals.
15. The developer or owner shall deliver to the Village Engineer and Public Works a record of all sanitary service connections, each wye located by a
measurement to the nearest downstream manhole. The end of each sanitary service connection stub shall be marked with a four inch by four inch
(4" X 4") timber extending vertically from two feet (2') above the end of the stub to three feet (3') above the finished grade. The timber marker
locations shall be recorded with measurements to nearby lot corners and to the back of curb or other permanent structure. Final Village acceptance
of the sanitary sewerage system shall not be given until this report is received and approved by the Village Engineer.
O. Inspection and Testing: All sanitary sewers and appurtenances shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to final inspection and prior to testing.
1. Inspection:
a. The developer or owner shall have an employee in charge on-site at all times that construction of the sanitary sewerage system is under way. The
developer or owner shall be fully responsible for the quality of the materials and methods of the construction work and shall bear full responsibility
for insuring that the sanitary sewerage system shall meet the stated requirements of the Village in every way.
b. Upon completion of construction and prior to the beginning of the maintenance warranty period and again approximately one year after the
commencement of the warranty period, a video taped television inspection shall be performed on the sections or portions of the sewer as directed
by the Village Engineer. Video tapes and written reports for all television inspections shall be provided to the Village prior to the acceptance of the
sanitary sewerage system. The report shall include the footage traveled by the camera recorded as each stub is passed. The form of the report
and the format of the videotape shall be approved by the village engineer. All fees and costs involved in this television inspection shall be borne by
the developer or owner.
c. The village engineer shall inspect the sanitary sewerage system under construction during construction as deemed necessary. The village
engineer shall not be responsible to direct the work of the contractor but shall be responsible only to assess the acceptability of the improvement
as constructed. In no case shall the village engineer be responsible for day-to-day quality control at the site of construction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 428/524
2. Testing: It is the intent of this provision to ensure a sanitary sewerage system with a minimum amount of infiltration. The maximum allowable
infiltration shall be one hundred (100) gallons per inch diameter per mile per day at any time of the year and for any section of the system. The joints
shall be tight and any joint with visible leakage or any section of sanitary sewerage system with infiltration in excess of that specified above shall be
sufficient cause for village rejection of the system.
Repairs made to the sanitary sewerage system in order to fulfill the requirements of this section shall be permanent and shall be equal in quality to
new work constructed in accordance with this section. All such repairs shall be at the expense of the developer or owner.
The sanitary sewerage system testing program shall be paid for by the developer or owner.
The village engineer shall choose one of the following methods of testing the integrity of the sanitary sewerage system:
a. Infiltration Test: Immediately after backfilling, the entire length of the sewer trench including stubs shall be inundated to normal ground water level
or to eighteen inches (18") above the top of the pipe, whichever is higher. At that time, infiltration tests shall be made to determine compliance with
the allowable infiltration criteria. To measure the amount of infiltration, the contractor shall furnish, install and maintain a V-notch, sharp, crested
wire in a metal frame tightly secured at the lower end of each sewer test section as directed by the village engineer or by a representative of the
Lake Zurich department of public works. The wire shall be installed twenty four (24) hours before the test is to be made. Infiltration will be
measured by measuring the flow over the wire. When infiltration is demonstrated to be within the allowable limits, the contractor shall remove such
wires.
b. Air Test: An air test in accordance with "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois", section 31-1.11. (Ord. 89-08-
335, 8-21-1989)
10-6-7: WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
A. Connection Required; Standards:
1. Policy: The board of trustees hereby finds that the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare requires a continuous and dependable
supply of safe, clean potable water. The village has, and shall continue to maintain, such a water supply, which supply is available to every potable
water user within the village's corporate limits. It is the policy of the village therefor that all users of potable water shall be connected to the village's
water supply system. (Ord. 94-06-669, 6-6-1994)
2. Connection Required: Every development and structure in the village that uses potable water for any purpose shall be connected to the village's
water supply system if: a) any portion of the village's water supply system intended to serve that development or structure is within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of any point of the subject property of that development or structure, or b) if any point of the subject property of that development lies
within one thousand feet (1,000') of any point of the property located at 351 Lions Drive and commonly known as the former village public works site.
This connection requirement shall apply to any and all uses of potable water, including, without limitation, water for consumption, for landscape
sprinkling and irrigation, for manufacturing and processing, and for fire protection; provided, however, that a property served as of January 1, 1994,
with a private well used only for landscape sprinkling and irrigation and not for any potable water purpose may continue to be so served for such
purposes only, but only under the condition stated in subsection A3 of this section. All nonresidential connections to the village's water supply system
shall be at least two inches (2") in diameter.
3. Potable Water Wells Prohibited: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code or of any other village code, ordinance, or regulation, and subject
only to the next sentence of this subsection A3, no potable water wells shall be constructed or used in the village except only by the village for
village-related public purposes. A private well existing as of January 1, 1994, may be maintained provided that such well is used only for landscape
sprinkling and irrigation and not for any potable water purpose and provided, further, that no such well shall be substantially repaired or renovated. If
any such well requires such substantial repair or renovation, then such well shall be properly abandoned and an appropriate connection shall be
made to the village's water supply system. The determination of whether a repair or renovation is "substantial" shall be made by the village engineer
in the exercise of his or her sound judgment based on the condition of the well, the scope of the repair or renovation, the cost of such repair or
renovation compared to the value of the well before such repair or renovation and other factors the village engineer reasonably determines are
appropriate. (Ord. 2001-02-93, 2-20-2001)
4. Minimum Standards: Every development in the village shall include a water distribution system, connected to the village's water supply system, that
provides adequate potable water to the development for all required uses, including, without limitation, consumption and fire suppression purposes.
Every water distribution system shall include a service connection or connections at the approximate midpoint of the front property line of each lot or
parcel in the development. If a lot includes, or is intended to include, more than one building, or if water main construction is required for fire
suppression purposes, then the development shall include all water main construction and appurtenances within the lot or parcel except service
lines.
5. References To Specifications: Specification references made in this section for manufactured materials such as pipe, hydrants, valve, and fittings
refer to designations of the American water works association (the AWWA) or of the American national standard institute (ANSI). All water
distribution systems shall be constructed in accordance with the "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois", latest
edition, unless otherwise specifically provided in this section. (Ord. 94-06-669, 6-6-1994)
B. Design Standards:
1. The layout of the water distribution system shall be designed to serve the entire development. All water mains shall be of an adequate size to supply
the required domestic consumption needs, as well as the necessary fire flow requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to
verify, by calculation, that these flow demands are met with a required minimum of twenty (20) psi residual pressure. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
2. Design Flow: For the purpose of designing the water distribution system, the following design formula shall be used:
DF=( C )(O)(X+P)
Where DF is needed fire flow, DF in gal per min (L/min); C is a construction factor that depends upon the construction of the structure under
consideration; O is an occupancy factor that depends upon the combustibility of the occupancy; and (X+P) is an exposure factor that depends upon
the extent of exposure from and to adjacent structures.
The coefficients in the formula indicate that, where portions of a building have differing characteristics, a factor can be calculated for each section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 429/524
and multiplied by the percentage it represents of the effective area to obtain a weighted factor. The weighted C factor should not be less than the
individual factor required for any individual section.
a. Construction Factor: The construction factor, C is calculated from the following formula:
C=18F.A
Where:
F = Coefficient related to the class of construction,
= 1.5 for construction class 1 (frame),
= 1.0 for construction class 2 (joisted masonry)
= 0.8 for construction class 3 (noncombustible) or construction class 4 (masonry, noncombustible),
= 0.6 for construction class 5 (modified fire-resistant) or construction class 6 (fire-resistive), and
A = effective building area.
(1) The effective building area is the total square foot (m) area of the largest floor plus:
(A) Construction classes 1 through 4: fifty percent (50%) of all other floors.
(B) Construction classes 5 and 6: twenty five percent (25%) of the area not exceeding the two (2) largest floors when all of the vertical openings
have at least one and one-half (11/2) hour rated protection, or fifty percent (50%) of the area not exceeding eight (8) floors when vertical
openings are unprotected or have less than one and one-half (11/2) hour protection.
The value of C should not be less than five hundred (500) gpm (1,893 L/min) nor greater than eight thousand (8,000) gpm (30,280 L/min) for
construction classes 1 and 2, and six thousand (6,000) gpm (22,710 L/min) for construction classes 3, 4, 5, and 6, or any single, one story
building, regardless of construction.
b. Occupancy Factor: The occupancy factor, O, reflects the combustibility of the occupancy on the needed fire flow and is determined from the
occupancy combustibility class. Occupancy factors can be found in table 6-5A of this section. Typical occupancies and their classification can be
found in table 6-5B of this section.
c. Exposure And Communication [(X+P)] Factors: The exposure and communication factors are determined as:
(X+P) = (1+n) (X+P)
Where:
n = number of sides of subject building exposed to adjacent buildings, and
(X+P) has a maximum value of 1.75.
(1) The exposure factor, X, reflects the need for additional water to reduce the exposure to adjacent buildings. It depends on the separation
distance, the construction of the exposed building wall in feet (m) multiplied by the height in stories. Values can be obtained from table 6-5C of
this section.
(2) The communication factor, P, reflects the potential fire spread through open or enclosed communicating passageways between buildings and is
taken from table 6-5D of this section. Where there is more than one connection, only the one with the largest factor is used. Where there are no
openings, P=O.
d. Design Flow (DF): The needed fire flow is calculated from the formula given previously and from the above factors. The DF calculated from the
formula should be rounded to the nearest two hundred fifty (250) gpm (946 L/min) for flows under two thousand five hundred (2,500) gpm (9463
L/min) and to the nearest five hundred (500) gpm (1893 L/min) for larger flows and then adjusted by the following:
(1) For buildings with a wood roof, add five hundred (500) gpm (1893 L/min).
(2) When calculating the required fire flow using the provided formula, the calculated fire flow may be reduced by twenty five percent (25%) if the
building is equipped with a complete fire suppression system. An additional twenty five percent (25%) may be taken if the building is a type 1,
type 2A, or type 2B construction.
Table 6-5A. Occupancy Factors
Occupancy Combustibility Class Occupancy Factor (O)
C-1 (noncombustible) 0.75
C-2 (limited-combustible) 0.85
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 430/524
C-3 (combustible) 1.00
C-4 (free burning) 1.15
C-5 (rapid burning) 1.25
Table 6-5B. Occupancy Classification
C-1 (Noncombustible)
Steel or concrete products storage, unpackaged
C-2 (Limited-Combustible)
Apartments
Ceramics manufacturing
Churches
Concrete or cider products manufacturing
Courthouses
Dormitories
Hospitals
Hotels
Metal products fabrication
Metals industries (primary)
Motels
Offices
Parking garages
Schools
C-3 (Combustible)
Amusement park buildings, including arcades and game rooms
Automobile sales and services
Baking and confectionery
Dairy processing
Department stores
Discount stores
Food and beverage - sales, service, or storage
Hardware, including electrical fixtures and supplies
Leather processing
Motion picture theaters
Pharmaceutical retail sales and storage
Repair or service shops
Soft-drink bottling
Supermarkets
Tobacco processing
Unoccupied buildings
C-4 (Free Burning)
Aircraft hangars, with or without servicing/repair
Apparel manufacturing
Auditoriums
Breweries
Building material sales and storage
Cotton gins
Food processing
Freight depots, terminals
Furniture - new or secondhand
Metal coating or finishing
Paper and paper product sales and storage
Paper products manufacturing
Printing shops and allied industries
Rubber products manufacturing
Theaters, other than motion picture
Warehouses
Wood product sales and storage
Woodworking industries
C-5 (Rapid Burning)
Cereal or flour mills
Chemical manufacturing
Chemical sales and storage
Cleaning and dyeing material sales and storage
Distilleries
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 431/524
Meat or poultry processing
Paint sales and storage
Plastic or plastic product sales and storage
Plastic products manufacturing
Rag sales and storage
Textile manufacturing
Textile products fabrication, except clothes
Upholstery shops
Waste and reclaimed materials sales and storage
Table 6-5C. Factors For Exposure, X
Construction Of Facing Wall Of Exposed Building
Classes 2,4,5, And 6
Construction Of Facing
Wall Of Subject Building
Distance (ft) To
The Exposed
Building
Length-Height Of Facing
Wall Of Exposed Building
1
And
3
Unprotected
Openings
Semi-Protected Openings (Wired
Glass Or Outside Open
Sprinklers)
Blank
Wall
Frame, metal or masonry
with openings
0-10 1-100 0.22
0.21 0.16 0
101-200 0.23
0.22 0.17 0
201-300 0.24
0.23 0.18 0
301-400 0.25
0.24 0.19 0
Over 400 0.25
0.25 0.20 0
11-30 1-100 0.17
0.15 0.11 0
101-200 0.18
0.16 0.12 0
201-300 0.19
0.18 0.14 0
301-400 0.20
0.19 0.15 0
Over 400 0.20
0.19 0.15 0
31-60 1-100 0.12
0.10 0.07 0
101-200 0.13
0.11 0.08 0
201-300 0.14
0.13 0.10 0
Frame, metal or masonry
with openings (cont.)
301-400 0.15
0.14 0.11 0
Over 400 0.15
0.15 0.12 0
61-100 1-100 0.08
0.06 0.04 0
101-200 0.08
0.07 0.05 0
201-300 0.09
0.08 0.06 0
301-400 0.10
0.09 0.07 0
Over 400 0.10
0.10 0.08 0
Blank Masonry Wall:Facing wall of the exposed building is higher than subject building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 432/524
Use the above table, EXCEPT use only the length-height of facing wall of the exposed building ABOVE the height of the facing wall of the subject building.
Buildings 5 stories or over in height consider as 5 stories.
When the height of the facing wall of the exposed building is the same or lower than the height of the facing wall of the subject building, X = 0. Table 6-5D.
Factors For Communications, P
Fire-Resistive, Noncombustible, Or
Slow-Burning Communications
Communications With Combustible Construction
Open Enclosed Open Enclosed
Description Of Protection Of Passageway Openings
Any
Length
10 Feet Or
Less
11
Feet
To
20
Feet
21
Feet
To
50
Feet+
10 Feet
Or Less
11
Feet
To
20
Feet
21
Feet
To
50
Feet+
10 Feet
Or Less
11
Feet
To
20
Feet
21
Feet
To
50
Feet+
Unprotected 0 ++ 0.30 0.20 0.30 0.20
0.10
++ ++ 0.30
Single class A fire door at one end of passageway 0 0.20 0.10 0 0.20 0.15
0 0.30 0.20
0.10
Single class B fire door at one end of passageway 0 0.30 0.20 0.10 0.25 0.20
0.10
0.35 0.25
0.15
Single class A fire door at each end or double class
A fire doors at one end of passageway
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Single class B fire door at each end or double class
B fire doors at one end of passageway
0 0.10 0.05 0 0 0 0 0.15 0.10
0
+For over 50 feet, P = 0.
++For unprotected passageways of this length, consider the 2 buildings as a single fire division.
NOTE:When a party wall has communicating openings protected by a single automatic or self-closing class B door, it qualifies as a division wall for
reduction of area. Where communications are protected by a recognized water curtain, the value of P is 0.
For SI nits: 1 ft. = 0.305 m.
3. Pipe Size: The minimum water main pipe shall be eight inches (8") in diameter. Six inch (6") diameter pipe shall only be used as a service line to a
fire hydrant or as the last run of piping to a fire hydrant on a dead-end water main.
The following minimum diameters of water mains shall be used based upon the determined fire flow requirements:
*Flow 2,000 GPM = 8 inch water main
*Flow 2,000 GPM to 3,000 GPM = 10 inch water main
*Flow 3,000 GPM to 4,000 GPM = 12 inch water main
*Flow >4,000 GPM = subject to review and approval of village engineer
4. Water Main Layout: All water distribution mains shall be installed in such a manner as to create a balanced loop. In those cases where looping of the
water distribution mains, as determined by the village director of public works or the fire chief, is not feasible, then single directional feed resulting in
a dead end may be permitted. Water service to a fixed fire suppression system shall not be permitted from a dead-end water distribution main. (Ord.
2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
5. Fire Hydrants:
a. Fire hydrants shall be installed at all street intersections, both public and private.
b. Fire hydrants shall be installed along public streets at a maximum spacing of three hundred feet (300'), in addition to the fire hydrants required at
all street intersections. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
c. When any portion of a structure or building is more than two hundred fifty feet (250') from the nearest fire hydrant, then additional fire hydrants
shall be installed. One fire hydrant shall be installed no closer than fifty feet (50') and no further than two hundred feet (200') from the fire
department connection to any fixed fire suppression system.
Any water distribution mains installed in connection with these fire hydrants shall comply with all other provisions of this code.
Subject to the prior approval of the village director of public works and the fire chief, fire hydrants installed upon adjacent properties may be used
to satisfy these requirements. (Ord. 2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
d. In the center of the street, directly in front of the fire hydrant, a reflective street marker shall be securely attached to the pavement. This device
shall be colored blue and comply with all applicable department of transportation (DOT) standards. The specific type of reflective device must be
approved by the village engineer and/or director of public works, prior to installation by the developer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 433/524
e. At a point which is three feet (3') directly behind each fire hydrant, a rigid metal post topped with a piece of rigid metal plate coated with a reflective
paint shall be installed. The rigid metal post shall project a minimum of five feet (5'), but not more than eight feet (8') straight up from finished
grade. The rigid metal post shall be of sufficient length to permit adequate depth for support of the entire unit. The rigid metal plate coated with
reflective paint shall be a minimum of twenty (20) square inches in size and shall be coated with OSHA safety yellow reflective paint. The entire
assembly shall be constructed and/or coated in such a manner as to be resistant to corrosion and need for maintenance. The specific type of
assembly and its construction shall be approved by the village engineer and/or director of public works, prior to installation by the developer.
f. All fire hydrants shall have a minimum of seven (7) cubic feet of one inch (1") to one and one-half inch (11/2") stone placed at the base of the
hydrant to permit proper drainage of the barrel.
g. All fire hydrants shall be placed a minimum of three feet (3'), but no more than five feet (5') from the back of the street curb.
h. The break line flange of each fire hydrant shall not be less than one inch (1") nor more than three inches (3") above finished grade.
i. Each fire hydrant shall be a Mueller centurian A423, dry barrel type with break line flange and auxiliary gate valve. Each fire hydrant shall have two
(2) 21/2-inch hose outlets and one 41/2-inch hose outlet. All threads shall be national standard thread (NST). Each fire hydrant shall have a main
valve opening of five and one-quarter inches (51/4").
6. Valves And Vaults:
a. Valves shall be located on all water distribution mains to permit isolation of specific sections of the main from the entire system with minimal
disruption of service.
b. Valves shall be installed at every six hundred feet (600') or less along all water distribution mains. Additional valves shall be installed, as needed,
so that no more than two (2) fire hydrants and/or twenty five (25) dwelling units are affected by isolation of any section of water distribution main.
c. Valves shall be arranged in such a manner that it will require no more than four (4) valves to be closed in order to isolate a section of water
distribution main.
d. Valve vaults shall be required on all valves two and one-half inches (21/2") in size or larger. The specific size of each vault shall be determined by
the village engineer.
7. Thrust Blocks: Thrust blocks shall be required at all fire hydrants and fittings, where stress due to water hammers may occur. Specific design of each
thrust block shall be approved by the village engineer and/or director of public works, prior to installation by the developer.
8. Depth Of Water Distribution Mains: All water distribution mains shall be installed at five feet six inches (5'6") below final grade, unless approved
otherwise by the village engineer and/or director of public works. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
C. Materials: All water distribution system elements shall conform to exhibit no. 13 in section 10-8-1 of this title and to the following specifications: (Ord.
2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
1. Pipe for water main and for service connections larger than two inches (2") in diameter shall be minimum thickness class 52 (ANSI A21.50) ductile
iron pipe (DIP) manufactured in accordance with ANSI A21.51 with cement lining conforming to ANSI A21.4. Fittings for DIP shall conform to ANSI
A21.10. Joints for DIP shall be mechanical or push-on joints conforming to ANSI A21.11.
Pipe for water service connections two inches (2") or less in diameter, with one inch (1") being the minimum diameter, shall be type K copper pipe
conforming to ASTM B88.
Lead pipe shall not be allowed. Solder containing lead shall not be allowed in making joints or repairs.
If the soil report for the development indicates the possibility of corrosive soils, a manufacturer-approved polyethylene wrap shall be specified for all
ductile iron pipe. Installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
2. All valves shall turn counterclockwise to open. Valves for pipes up to sixteen inches (16") in diameter shall be Mueller resilient wedge gate valves of
iron body construction with bronze-mounted seats, nonrising stems, mechanical joints and A-2380-20 O-ring seals.
Corporation stops shall be Mueller H-15000, one inch (1") in size.
Roundway for copper pipe service connections shall be Mueller H-15150, one inch (1") stop, Minneapolis pattern.
Curb box shall be Mueller H-10300. Upper section shall have an inside diameter of one and one-quarter inch (11/4"). The size of the Minneapolis
thread in hose shall be two inches (2").
Curb stops for ductile iron pipe service connections shall conform to the specifications given above for valves for pipe up to sixteen inches (16") in
diameter.
3. Fire hydrants shall be Mueller centurion, A-423 model dry barrel, break-flange hydrants conforming to AWWA C502. They shall be painted yellow
aboveground and shall include a waterous corporation six inch (6") resilient wedge auxiliary gate valve with six inch (6") to twenty four inch (24") long
spacer. See exhibit no. 17 in section 10-8-1 of this title.
The main valve shall have a diameter of five and one-quarter inches (51/4") and shall open in a counter-clockwise direction.
The hydrant shall have two (2) 21/2-inch and one 41/2-inch nozzles each with national standard threads.
The joints shall be mechanical or flange, six inches (6") in diameter.
4. Valve boxes for fire hydrant auxiliary valves and for DIP water service connection valves with diameters larger than two inches (2") but no greater
than ten inches (10") shall have the equivalent of Mueller cast iron valve boxes no. 664-S (in pavement) or H-1303-1 (not in pavement) with
"WATER" embossed in lid.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 434/524
Valve boxes for copper water service connections shall be Minneapolis type with a plugged lid.
5. Any valves larger than four inches (4") in diameter, except fire hydrant auxiliary valves, shall be placed in valve vaults.
Valve vaults shall be precast, reinforced concrete conforming to ASTM C478 with preformed bituminous joints and a concentric cone. Vaults for
valves eight inches (8") or less in diameter shall be forty eight inches (48") in diameter; vaults for valves larger than eight inches (8") in diameter shall
be sixty inches (60") in diameter. No steps are required. See exhibit no. 16 in section 10-8-1 of this title.
No more than two (2) adjusting rings shall be allowed for a total possible adjustment of eight inches (8").
In paved areas, Neenah Foundry Company R-1712 frames and closed lids with "WATER" embossed thereon shall be used and chimney seals shall
be installed. Where vaults fall in nonpaved areas, Neenah Foundry Company R-1772-A frames and closed lids may be used. All lids shall be
watertight with machined horizontal bearing surfaces.
6. Air release valves shall be Apco type 200A or as approved by the Lake Zurich Department of Public Works.
7. Casting pipes shall be five-sixteenths inch (5/16") minimum thickness steel conforming to ASTM A120.
8. Bedding shall be well compacted crushed stone or crushed gravel conforming to IDOT CA-6, 100% crushed.
9. Blocking shall be constructed of poured or precast Class X concrete against undisturbed earth. See Exhibit No. 15.
D. Construction:
1. No construction permit(s) shall be issued until copies of all the required permits from the pertinent public agencies are reviewed by the Village
Engineer and filed with the Village Building Department.
2. No construction shall begin until at least forty eight (48) hours after the Village Engineer has been notified of the intention to begin construction.
3. The trench shall be excavated so that the water main will have at least five and one-half feet (51/2') of cover over all winter seasons.
4. Bedding shall be placed as shown in Exhibit No. 1. The bedding surface shall be adjusted to support the bottom of the pipe at all points.
5. If a significant amount of water enters the trench during pipe laying, it shall be removed before operations may continue. No trench water shall be
allowed entry into the newly laid pipe.
6. If soft, spongy or other unsuitable soils are encountered at the bottom of the trench, all such material shall be removed and replaced with well
compacted crushed limestone bedding material. If rock is encountered, it shall be removed to at least six inches (6") below the bottom of the pipe to
allow the proper thickness of bedding to be installed.
7. Adequate provision shall be made for the safety, storage and protection of all water pipe prior to actual installation in the trench. Care shall be taken
to prevent damage to the pipe castings, both inside and out. The inside of the pipe shall be kept clean throughout its storage period. All pipe shall be
thoroughly cleaned on the inside before laying of the pipe. Proper equipment shall be used for the safe handling, conveying and laying of the pipe.
All pipe shall be carefully lowered into the trench, piece by piece, by means of suitable tools or equipment so as to prevent damage to water main
materials and protective coatings and linings. Under no circumstances shall water main materials be dropped into the trench.
8. All portions of the joining materials, the socket and the spigot of the joining pipes shall be wiped clean of all foreign materials at the time the joints
are assembled. Assembly shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and as instructed in writing by the Village Engineer.
The open end of the installed pipe shall be sealed with a watertight plug until the next pipe is added.
9. Cutting of pipe for any purpose shall be done in a neat, workmanlike manner without damage to the cement mortar lining. Such cuts shall result in a
smooth end at a right angle to the axis of the pipe. A bevel shall be neatly filed or ground around the outside circumference of the pipe to minimize
damage to the gasket material at that joint. All debris from the cutting operation shall be removed from the inside of the pipe and from the joint area.
Flame cutting of pipe shall not be allowed.
Structures shall not be broken to provide holes for pipe but shall be neatly saw-cut using the proper equipment.
10. All joints requiring the use of a fitting shall be blocked as shown in Exhibit No. 15 where undisturbed earth is available to spread the reaction forces.
Where undisturbed earth is not available, the plans shall include a detail of a tie-rod system to absorb reaction forces and to transmit them to
undisturbed earth or to concrete anchors. The tie-rod system shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.
Blocking of fittings shall not interfere with access to the adjacent joints. Care shall also be taken to avoid interfering with fire hydrant drainage.
11. Repaired sleeves shall not be used to effect connections with other portions of the water distribution system. Instead, fittings and/or short-cut
lengths shall be used to properly connect new water main components.
12. The trench shall be carefully backfilled with the excavated material except as follows:
a. Trenches in or within two feet (2') of a roadway, parking area, curb, sidewalk or any other paved area shall be backfilled with trench backfill in
accordance with the pertinent sections of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction". See Exhibit No. 2.
b. At locations where it is known other pipe utilities are to cross above the water main, the water main pipe shall be encased with standard bedding
material to a level of one foot (1') above the top of the pipe for a distance of five feet (5') in either direction from the point of crossing, measured at
the top of such encasement.
13. The trench shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with section 502.11 of the "Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction",
except the backfill material shall be compacted everywhere, not just near and under pavements or sidewalks. Density requirements may be relaxed
somewhat away from pavements or sidewalks.
If jetting is used as a compaction method, the jetting tube shall not be allowed within two feet (2') of the pipe. The jetting tube shall be inserted along
the trench at six foot (6') intervals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 435/524
14. All connections to existing water distribution elements shall be made under full water system pressure unless the Lake Zurich Department of Public
Works and the Village Engineer approve otherwise. Such variant connections shall be made only where and when approved by the Village Engineer.
15. When making a connection to existing water distribution elements, it is mandatory that a representative from the Lake Zurich Department of Public
Works or the Village Engineer be present.
16. Fire hydrants shall be installed plumb with the pumper nozzle oriented perpendicularly to the roadway or pavement edge. Barrel extension sections
shall be provided and installed as necessary to leave the nozzle eighteen inches (18") to twenty four inches (24") (absolute limits) above finished
grade.
A drainage pit two feet (2') in diameter shall be excavated below each hydrant and filled completely with one inch (1") washed stone to a level six
inches (6") above the hydrant drainage opening. The drainage pit shall not be connected in any way to the storm sewerage system.
E. Inspection:
1. The developer or owner shall have an employee in charge on-site at all times that construction of the water distribution system is under way. The
developer or owner shall be fully responsible for the quality of the materials and methods of the construction work and shall bear full responsibility for
insuring that the water distribution system shall meet the requirements of the Village in every way.
The Village Engineer shall inspect the water distribution system under construction during construction as they deem necessary. The Village
Engineer shall be responsible only to assess the acceptability of the improvement as constructed. In no case shall the Village Engineer be
responsible for day-to-day quality control at the site of construction.
2. Testing: The completed water mains and appurtenances of the water distribution system improvement shall be tested to the satisfaction of the Lake
Zurich Department of Public Works and the Village Engineer. All newly laid water main shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure of one hundred
fifty (150) p.s.i. maintained for not less than two (2) hours. Each valved section of pipe shall be filled with water to the specified test pressure, all air
shall be expelled from the pipe. All leaks shall be repaired until tight. Any cracked or defective pipes, fittings, valves or hydrants discovered shall be
replaced and the test repeated until satisfactory results are obtained.
Suitable means shall be provided for determining the amount of water lost to leakage under the specified test pressure. Allowable leakage shall not
exceed that computed as follows:
(N) (D) VP
L =
7400
L = Allowable leakage in gallons per hour
N = Number of joints in test section
D = Nominal diameter of pipe in inches
P = Average pressure at lowest point in the line under test corrected to gauge elevation
Leakage is defined as the quantity of water required to be supplied to the newly laid pipe per hour to maintain the test pressure. Water shall be
added each time pressure in the main drops to one hundred forty (140) pounds to bring line pressure back up to one hundred fifty (150) pounds.
Gauge readings shall take into account any difference in elevation between gauge and water main under test.
F. Preliminary Flushing: After the pressure test is passed but prior to chlorination, the main shall be thoroughly flushed. If there is no hydrant at the end of a
main, a tap shall be provided large enough to effect a velocity in the main of at least two and one-half feet (21/2') per second.
G. Disinfection: All water mains shall be disinfected and tested according to the requirements of the "Standards for Disinfecting Water Mains", AWWA
C601, and as required in this Section. All disinfection shall be performed by an independent firm with experience in the methods and techniques of this
operation. The choice of firm shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer and Public Works.
The chlorinating agent shall be introduced at the beginning of the pipeline extension or any valved section of it through a corporation stop in the top of
the newly laid pipe. The water injector for delivering the chlorine gas into the pipe shall be supplied from a tap on the pressure side of the gate valve
controlling the flow of water into the pipeline extension.
Water from the existing distribution system or other source of supply shall be controlled so it flows slowly into the newly laid pipe during the application
of chlorine gas. The rate of chlorine mixture flow shall be in such proportion to the rate of water entering the pipe that the chlorine dose applied to the
water entering the newly laid pipe shall be at least forty (40) ppm, or enough to meet the requirements during the retention period. This may require as
much as one hundred (100) ppm of chlorine in the water in the line at time of chlorination.
The valves shall be adjusted so that the chlorine solution in the line being treated will not flow back into the line supplying the water.
Treated water shall remain in the pipe for at least twenty four (24) hours. The chlorine residual at the pipe extremities and at other representative points
shall then be measured to be twenty five (25) ppm or more. If the amount of residual chlorine is too low, the pipeline extension shall be rechlorinated.
All valves or other appurtenances in the newly laid pipe shall be operated while the pipe is full of chlorinating agent.
After chlorination, the pipeline extension shall be thoroughly flushed until the replacement water is approved as safe by the village engineer and the
Lake Zurich department of public works. The water shall be tested over a period of two (2) days. Test samples shall be drawn by the Lake Zurich
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 436/524
department of public works from taps located as directed by the Lake Zurich department of public works and installed by the contractor. The samples
shall be tested by the Lake Zurich department of public works. Chlorination and testing shall continue until satisfactory results are obtained.
The cost of flushing, disinfection, sampling and testing shall be borne by the owner or developer. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
10-6-8: STREETS AND PAVEMENTS:
A. Intent: It is the intent of this standard to provide for the construction of roadways that are safe to use, easy to maintain, conductive to the efficient flow of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, complementary to the existing roadway system of the village, and sturdy enough to last without major repairs or
resurfacing for the design life of the pavement.
B. Design References: All pavements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with one or more of the following references as they apply:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", Illinois department of transportation.
2. "Manual For Structural Design Of Portland Cement Concrete Pavement", Illinois department of transportation.
3. "Manual Of Instructions For The Structural Design Of Flexible Pavements On Projects Involving MFT, FAS And FAUS Funds", Illinois department of
transportation.
4. "Design Manual", Illinois department of transportation.
5. "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways", Illinois department of transportation.
6. "Minimum Standards For Street Design", village of Lake Zurich, exhibit 19.
C. Street Arrangement: Where such is not shown on the comprehensive plan and/or official map, the arrangement of streets within subdivisions shall
either:
1. Continuity: Provide for the continuation or projection of existing principal streets in adjacent areas; or
2. Conformity With Plan: Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood approved or adopted by the village to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.
D. Street Design: All required street right of way width, and pavement widths, curves, gradients and site distances shall be as shown in the appendix and
in accordance with the following:
1. Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be avoided.
2. Intersections: It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic flow and, in general, be at or near
right angles, and in no case shall a street intersect any other street at less than sixty degrees (60o). An intersection of more than two (2) streets shall
not be permitted.
3. Cul-De-Sac Streets: A cul-de-sac street, in single-family residential districts, shall be not more than six hundred feet (600') in length, measured along
its centerline from the point of origin to the end of its right of way. Cul-de-sac streets shall not be permitted in multi-family residential, commercial or
industrial areas.
Each cul-de-sac street shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum right of way diameter of one hundred twenty feet (120') and
pavement outside diameter of not less than eighty eight feet (88').
4. Median Strips: Median strips other than raised center curb separating lanes of traffic within a single right of way shall not be allowed. However,
where a parkway exists on a new street which is an extension of the existing street, a median strip may be constructed not more than five hundred
feet (500') in length to provide the transition to no median strip. All such median strips as described above shall have barrier curbs and gutters.
5. Access From Major Streets: Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property abutting a major street either by
providing: a) a marginal access road, or b) by backing lots to the thoroughfare and providing access by a collector, minor or cul-de-sac street one lot
depth removed and with a no access strip at least twelve feet (12') wide along the rear lot line. These standards are established for the purpose of
providing protection for the residential properties and to provide for traffic safety and the efficient use of the major street for its intended function of
accommodating through traffic.
6. Frontage Roads: Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or highway, the plan commission may require a street approximately parallel
to and on each side of such railroad or highway, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
7. Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities, streets or alleys shall be prohibited.
8. Street Levels: Street levels shall provide proper relation between the street and the elevation of the houses to assure positive drainage from the
building to the street.
E. Alleys: Alleys shall not be permitted.
F. Private Access Streets; Planned Developments:
1. Design Approval: The completed design for access streets, including specifications and designation of traffic ways, driving lanes, paving widths,
thickness, materials, etc., shall be submitted to the plan commission for review and approval prior to the issuance of building permits or the sale or
lease of buildings or land in planned developments as defined in section 10-2-3 of this title. The minimum number of off street parking spaces shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 437/524
be in accordance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the village. Where more than one owner or lessee are to use the same private
marginal access road or parking lot, a trust indenture shall be recorded before approval of the multi-family, commercial or industrial subdivision as
defined herein.
2. Ingress And Egress: A minimum distance may be recommended by the plan commission and required by the village board where deemed
necessary between points of ingress and egress where all property to be subdivided is under one ownership on the effective date hereof. Where
property has frontage on a state or federal highway, the spacing and design of the points of ingress and egress to the major highway shall be subject
to approval of the IDOT division of highways. Where property has frontage on a Lake County roadway, the spacing and design of the points of
ingress and egress to that roadway shall be subject to approval by the Lake County department of highways.
3. Conventional Development: A paved accessway from the property line to the street shall be provided as wide as the driveway for the dwelling to be
served; except, that no access driveway shall exceed twenty five feet (25') in width. In the case of property zoned for other than single-family
dwelling units, the requirements for access driveways shall conform as closely as possible therewith. Pavement shall be of concrete.
a. Sidewalks: Sidewalks located along expressways, major or collector type or designated streets shall be located so that a parkway separates the
curb from the sidewalk. Such sidewalk shall not be less than five feet (5') wide.
b. Pedestrianways Required: Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than ten feet (10') in the right of way with a paved walkway in accordance with
section 10-6-14 of this chapter, shall be provided near the center of any block in excess of one thousand feet (1,000') in length or in any other
block as recommended by the plan commission and approved by the village board. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
G. Fire Lanes: Fire lanes shall be installed as required in subsection 8-9-2H of this code. (Ord. 2005-06-357, 6-20-2005)
H. Materials: Pavement materials shall comply with the minimum requirements shown in the following table. Listed with these materials are the coefficients
to be used for computing the pavement structural number. The sum of the products of the coefficients and the course thickness is the calculated
structural number.
MATERIAL
STRENGTH REQUIREMENTS STRUCTURAL
LAYER
M.S. IBR PSI COEFFICIENT
Bituminous Surface
Class I 1700 0.40
Base Course:
Aggregate, type B
Crushed gravel 50 0.10
Crushed stone 80 0.13
Aggregate, type A 80 0.13
Binder, class I 1700 0.33
Waterbound macadam 110 0.14
Bituminous aggregate,
mixture
2400
0.28
Portland cement concrete 1850 (3-day)
(Class X with 5%-7% air entrainment) 2850 (7-day)
3500 (14-day) 0.50
S.S = Marshal Stability/IBR = Illinois Bearing Ratio
All aggregate material for subbase and base courses shall be crushed stone or crushed gravel. Where stone is required for undercut areas, it shall be
crushed stone; no round or subangular material shall be used.
I. Subgrade Preparation:
1. Subgrade material shall have a minimum Illinois Bearing Ratio (IBR) of 3.0 in all areas to be paved. The IBR of the subgrade shall be shown in the
plans.
If subgrade is undercut and replaced with angular stone three inches (3") in diameter or larger, the depth of undercut shall be at least twelve inches
(12"). In addition, a well graded aggregate shall be included with the larger aggregate to fill the voids.
Undercutting shall be done very carefully to avoid damage to shallow improvements. The Village Engineer shall carefully inspect shallow
improvements for damage. The contractor responsible for any damage and the developer or owner shall effect the proper and timely repair of
damaged improvements.
2. The subgrade of all paved areas shall be graded and rolled in accordance with the State Standard Specifications, section 212. Embankment shall be
placed and compacted in accordance with section 207 of the State Standard Specifications except as modified in these Standards and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 438/524
Specifications.
3. At least one moisture and density test shall be taken in each embankment section, with the maximum distance between tests of three hundred feet
(300'). The method of testing shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer. The density tests must be submitted for review to the Village
Engineer, and a report of acceptable subgrade preparation must be submitted to the Village Engineer before proof-rolling of the subgrade may take
place.
4. The subgrade shall be proof-rolled in the presence of the Village Engineer. All deficiencies shall be repaired before the subbase or the base course
is placed.
Proof-rolling shall be done using a three-axle dump truck together with load weighing at least twenty five (25) tons. The tires shall be designed for
highway use and shall be properly inflated. The load shall be uniformly placed in the dump body.
Subgrade allowing deflection of more than one-fourth inch (1/4") at any wheel shall be either recompacted to meet this standard or shall be undercut
as directed by the Village Engineer and replaced with suitable compacted replacement material.
The intent of this provision is to ensure that the subgrade is everywhere adequate to support the pavement structure and the loads it is designed to
carry.
Proof-rolling shall be clearly specified in each set of plans and specifications.
J. Flexible Pavement Construction:
1. Flexible pavement materials may not be installed until March 1, weather permitting. Any work done after November 1 shall require written
authorization from the Village Engineer. This authorization will in no way void the contractor's and the developer's or owner's guarantee of work done.
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
2. All bituminous pavement installation shall be done in accordance with sections 406.13, 406.14 and 406.15 of the latest revised edition of the IDOT
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. All testing shall be furnished at the owner's expense. In the event that minimum
compaction is not achieved as determined by nuclear density testing methods, the owner will be required to perform additional testing subject to the
Village Engineer's approval. (Letter of 1-10-90)
3. The developer or owner shall notify the Village Engineer at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the installation of a bituminous surface course. All
deficiencies shall be repaired and the binder shall be primed as deemed necessary by the Village Engineer prior to the installation of the final surface
course. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
4. Within four (4) months but not earlier than two (2) months after the final installation of the bituminous surface course, an asphalt rejuvenating agent
shall be applied. The product shall be "Reclamite", a petroleum hydrocarbon in water emulsion. The product shall be applied per the manufacturer's
recommendations and specifications. (Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
K. Rigid Pavement Construction:
1. Rigid pavements shall be constructed in conformance with all applicable Illinois Department of Transportation standards and specifications. Materials
testing shall be done as specified in the State Standard Specifications.
2. The developer or owner shall notify the Village Engineer forty eight (48) hours prior to the placement of any course and when the street is ready for
final inspection. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
L. Curb and Gutter:
1. Except for Village-owned park parking lots, State "B" series combination concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed on both sides of all full street
pavements and in all parking or loading areas where runoff waters run parallel to the curb. Concrete curb and gutter shall be installed in Villageowned
park parking lots at the Village Engineer's discretion. Concrete barrier curb shall be constructed along all edges of all commercial or industrial
parking or loading areas except as noted above. If curbs are to be cast integrally with a rigid pavement, then they shall be reinforced in the same
manner as the pavement itself. In general, combination curb and gutter and barrier curb shall be designed in accordance with Exhibit No. 248. (Ord.
92-09-551, 9-21-92)
2. Depressed curb or driveway entrances (see Exhibit No. 309) shall be provided at each known driveway entrance. Depressed curb as detailed shall
be provided at each sidewalk intersecting the curb line. State type M-4.XX combination curb and gutter shall be required at mailbox turnouts.
3. Expansion joints shall be installed in all curb and in all combination curb and gutter at intervals not to exceed sixty feet (60') in length. In addition,
expansion joints shall be installed:
a. Five feet (5') on either side of any casting falling in curb or combination curb and gutter;
b. At all changes in horizontal curvature;
c. At all junctions with existing curb or combination curb and gutter;
d. To match expansion joints in abutting rigid pavement or sidewalk.
Expansion joints shall not be installed within ten feet (10') of the center line of a trench crossing the curb.
4. Steel reinforcement consisting of at least two (2) No. 5 steel bars shall be installed in all concrete curbs and gutters at all trench crossings. The
reinforcement shall be continuous in the ten feet (10') (minimum) centered over the trench.
5. Control joints shall be installed in all curb and in all combination curb and gutter at intervals not to exceed fifteen feet (15') in length. They shall be
sawcut to a depth of not less than one and one-half inches (11/2"). They shall also be located so as to match any control joints in abutting pavement
or sidewalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 439/524
6. All combination concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed atop at least four inches (4") of well compacted aggregate subbase course material.
Generally, any required aggregate subbase course material or the first four inches (4") of aggregate base course material shall be placed and
compacted to just beyond the back of the curb. It is the intent of this provision that the curb and gutter not block drainage of the subgrade, subbase
or base courses.
M. Pavement Marking:
1. Pavement marking is required as follows unless otherwise approved by the Village Engineer:
Major Streets lane lines
edge lines *
median or no-passing lines
stop lines
crosswalks
railroad approach lines
lane symbols and letters
Collector, Industrial and center lines (two-lane)
Business Streets lane lines
edge lines *
no-passing lines
stop lines
crosswalks
railroad approach lines
Local Streets railroad approach lines
stop lines at major or
collector streets
crosswalks
*except where curbed
A mid-block crosswalk shall be required where a block abutting a local or collector street is longer than one thousand feet (1,000') measured along the
longest continuous right of way.
2. All turn lanes, crosswalks, etc., shall be marked as shown in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways".
3. All pavement markings shall be thermoplastic pavement marking in conformance with the appropriate material specifications of the "Standard
Specifications for Traffic Control Items," except parking areas and edge lines, which may be painted.
4. All pavement marking lines parallel to the direction of travel shall be six inches (6") in width except edge markings which shall be four inches (4") in
width. Miscellaneous pavement markings, such as that for parking areas, may be four inches (4") in width. Markings not basically parallel to the
direction of travel shall be at least twelve inches (12") in width but shall in no case be less than the width required in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways".
5. Immediately after the binder course is placed and compacted, pavement marking tape shall be installed and maintained until the surface course is to
be placed. The pavement marking tape shall be substantially removed before the surface course is placed.
N. Signage: Locations for traffic-control signs ("Stop", "Slow", "One-way", etc.) shall be shown on the plans, and State standard signs shall be provided
and installed by the developer or owner. Required "No-Parking" signs, street name signs and posts shall be provided and installed by the developer or
owner. The size, color and sign materials shall meet the approval of the Public Works Department.
10-6-9: EASEMENTS:
A. Easement Design and Location: Utility distribution or transmission installations serving the subdivision, and when required, storm water drainage ways
shall be located in the easements as designated on the subdivision plat of record. Such easements shall be located along the rear lot lines or side lot
lines at locations and extensions of utility installation between blocks, or continuity of drainage way. They shall occupy not less than the rear five feet
(5') of lot depth or five feet (5') of each lot width adjoining the applicable side lot line, or may be of greater width if recommended by the Village
Engineer and approved by the Board of Trustees. Additional easements at other locations may be recommended for specific conditions by the Village
Engineer and required by the Board of Trustees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 440/524
B. Continuity of Easements: Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
C. Drainage Easements: Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement,
conforming substantially with the areas bordering such watercourse that are subject to flooding. The easement width shall be determined by the Village
Engineer.
10-6-10: BLOCKS:
A. Configuration of Blocks: The shape of blocks shall be determined by topographical features, the basic street system and traffic pattern, lot depth and
areas designated for public and other nonresidential land uses. In addition to these, the lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to:
1. Site Adequacy: Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated.
2. Zoning: Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the corporate limits of the Village10.
3. Convenience: Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
B. Lengths of Blocks:
1. Residential: In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of blocks shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) lineal feet. No blocks shall
be less than one thousand (1,000) lineal feet in length unless recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees.
2. Nonresidential: In manufacturing and business subdivisions, maximum lengths of blocks shall be as recommended by the Plan Commission and
approved by the Board of Trustees.
C. Nonresidential Blocks: Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designated as such, and the plan shall show
adequate off-street areas to provide for parking, loading docks and other such facilities.
10-6-11: LOTS:
A. Nonresidential Lots: Width, area and depth of lots in a manufacturing or business subdivision shall be as recommended by the Plan Commission and
approved by the Board of Trustees.
B. Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street line, or reasonably close.
1. Access to Lots: Each lot within the subdivision must have access to a public or private street unless otherwise provided by local ordinance.
2. Separation from Major Streets: Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of
residential development from major streets or highways or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen
easement of at least ten feet (10'), and across which there shall be no right of vehicular access shall be provided along the rear lot lines of lots
abutting such highways and major thoroughfares.
3. Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots are not permitted, except where lots back upon a major street, upon a body of water in separate or
undivided ownership, or in manufacturing and business subdivisions when specifically recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Board of Trustees.
4. Lots Abutting a Watercourse: Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall have an additional depth or width as
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees in order to provide acceptable building sites.
5. Preservation of Natural Features: In the developing or subdividing of any land, due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural features, such
as trees, watercourses, historical landmarks, and similar community assets, which, if preserved, would add to the attractiveness and value of the
subdivision, neighborhood or the community as a whole. The Plan Commission shall include in its report its conclusions as to the compliance
herewith.
10-6-12: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
Building setback lines in all new developments and subdivisions shall conform to the provisions of the Lake Zurich Zoning Ordinance11.
10-6-13: PARKS, SCHOOL SITES AND PUBLIC AREAS:
Whenever required by this Title, or any other ordinance of the Village, parks, school sites and/or other public areas shall be shown on all plans and plats
and shall be of such configuration as to be acceptable to the Plan Commission, Village Board and concerned public agency.
10-6-14: SIDEWALKS:
A. In order to provide a coherent and comprehensive system of pedestrian and bicycle routes, sidewalks shall be required in all streets (1) abutting new
developments, or (2) created by new developments as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 441/524
1. Major Streets: Eight foot (8') wide sidewalk on one side and five foot (5') wide sidewalk on the other. The Village Engineer shall decide which side of
the street is to get which size sidewalk based primarily on providing a relatively coherent bikeway system throughout the Village.
2. Collector Streets: Five foot (5') wide sidewalks on both sides except where the Village Engineer may require an eight foot (8') wide sidewalk to
provide a segment of the bikeway system as noted in subsection A1 above.
3. Local Streets: Five foot (5') wide sidewalk on both sides.
4. Office/Industrial Streets: No sidewalk required except as noted below.
5. Retail/Business Streets: Same as subsection A1 above.
6. Frontage Streets: Five foot (5') wide sidewalk on the side away from street fronted on except where eight foot (8') wide sidewalk may be required to
provide a segment of the bikeway system as noted in subsection A1 above.
7. Mid-block Crosswalks: To serve mid-block crosswalks as required in subsection 10-6-8M1 of this Chapter.
Sidewalks in easements may be required to traverse large parcels of land away from the streets so as to tie together the pedestrian sidewalk system
of the Village. The Village Engineer may require that such sidewalks be eight feet (8') in width to provide a segment of the bikeway system as noted
in subsection A1 above. The Village Engineer may allow the use of bituminous materials rather than concrete for the construction of these easement
sidewalks. Maintenance driveways required along drainage easements may fulfill the requirements of this provision.
In addition, sidewalks shall be required across nonpavement areas between any habitable building entrance or exit meant for normal use and a
paved area or other sidewalk. This provision does not apply to patio door entrances, secondary basement accessways, or emergency exits not used
for everyday access.
B. Design Standards (See Exhibit No. 25):
1. All sidewalks in a public right-of-way or easement or in the portions of parcels fronting on a public right of way or easement shall be concrete with a
minimum thickness of five inches (5"). Six inches (6") of thickness shall be required over improvement trenches and across driveways, except that
sidewalks crossing pavements shall not be of less strength than that of the pavement crossed.
2. All sidewalks in public right of way or easements shall be constructed on a four inch (4") thick (minimum) base course composed of compacted
crushed store or crushed gravel aggregate, gradation CA-6.
3. Sidewalks shall not end at the edges of a driveway but shall be built across in a smooth, continuous manner. At the discretion of the Village
Engineer, this provision may be waived for large commercial or industrial entrances.
4. Sidewalks ending at the curb shall include a handicap ramp of a design functionally similar to those of Exhibit No. 26.
5. Wherever possible, sidewalks shall drain to an edge rather than longitudinally. Sidewalks shall everywhere have a slope compatible with area
drainage of from one percent (1%) to eight percent (8%) measured in the direction of slope. Generally, a cross slope of two percent (2%) shall be
required. Sidewalk slopes in excess of eight percent (8%) in any direction shall require the approval of the Village Engineer. Sidewalk slopes shall
never exceed twelve and one-half percent (12.50%) in any direction.
6. Three-quarter inch (3/4") expansion joints shall be required as follows:
a. Transverse joints at fifty foot (50') intervals longitudinally.
b. Transverse joints to match existing expansion joints in abutting curb or pavement.
c. Transverse or longitudinal joints, as appropriate, between pavements or curbs and sidewalk.
d. Transverse joints at points where placement of concrete is interrupted for thirty (30) minutes or more.
Spacing of transverse expansion joints shall be adjusted at increments equal to the control joint spacing without exceeding the fifty foot (50')
maximum interval to avoid placing such joints in driveway crossings.
7. One-half inch (1/2") expansion joints shall be required at all structures built in or abutting the sidewalk except storm sewerage, sanitary sewerage,
water distribution or underground utility improvement casings.
8. Control joints at least one-fourth (1/4) of the sidewalk thickness deep shall be constructed at right angles to the center line of the sidewalk. Control
joints shall be uniformly spaced at an interval approximately equal to the sidewalk width but not greater than eight feet (8').
Sidewalks more than eight feet (8') wide shall include longitudinal control joints at some convenient interval and shall have a transverse control joint
spacing approximately equal to the distance between longitudinal joints or between the longitudinal joint and the edge.
Control joint slots shall be between one-eighth inch (1/8") and one-fourth inch (1/4") in width and shall have one-fourth inch (1/4") radius edges.
9. Sidewalks abutting curb where both are new construction shall be tied to the curb with smooth, clean No. 4 steel bars eighteen inches (18") long
bent so that six inches (6"), minimum, protrudes from the back of curb into the mid-depth of the sidewalk. The support bars shall be installed on thirty
inch (30") centers, through the expansion joint material, and the portion to be embedded in the sidewalk shall be heavily greased.
C. Materials:
1. Base course for sidewalk shall be well compacted crushed stone or crushed gravel, IDOT grade CA-6.
2. Concrete for use in sidewalks shall meet or exceed the requirements of article 504.08, Composition of Concrete, of the "Standard Specification for
Road and Bridge Construction" for Class X concrete except that the entrained air shall be between five percent (5%) and seven percent (7%).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 442/524
3. Reinforcing steel shall meet or exceed the requirements of article 710.13, Concrete Reinforcement Bars, Fabric and Strand, of the "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction".
4. Expansion joint material shall conform to article 715.05, Preformed Fibre (sid) Joint Filler, of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction".
5. Side forms shall be steel or two inch (2") (nominal) lumber. Forms shall have a depth equal to or greater than the thickness of the sidewalk. No twoby-
four lumber shall be allowed as forms.
D. Construction:
1. In fill areas, the topsoil shall be removed and the proper grade achieved by filling and compacting in lifts not to exceed six inches (6") loose
thickness. In cut areas, the topsoil shall be removed and the proper grade achieved by excavation. Over-excavated areas shall be filled with select fill
material or crushed stone or crushed gravel aggregate, gradation CA-6 in six inch (6") or less lifts and shall be compacted and brought to correct
grade. Subgrade preparation shall extend to at least six inches (6") beyond the edge of the sidewalk.
2. The contractor for the sidewalk work shall inform the Village Engineer at least forty eight (48) hours before placement of the base material.
3. The granular base material shall be placed and compacted so that the top surface is at least as wide as the sidewalk.
4. Framework shall be constructed in conformance with article 504.06, Forms, of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction". The
forms shall be securely held to line and grade with stakes or braces. The top of the form shall be at the plan grade for the appropriate edge of the
sidewalk.
Base material disturbed by the placement of the forms shall be repaired and recompacted by hand prior to the placement of the concrete.
5. The contractor for the sidewalk work shall inform the Village Engineer at least forty eight (48) hours before the placement of any concrete for
sidewalk.
6. The Village Engineer may require the contractor to provide a test report from a commercial testing laboratory for the first twenty five (25) yards of
concrete delivered and one test report for each additional fifty (50) yards delivered. Each test shall include a slump test, an air content test, two (2)
seven (7) day compression tests, and two (2) twenty eight (28) day compression tests.
7. Concrete for sidewalk shall be placed and compacted in conformance with article 504.12, Placing and Compacting, of the "Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction".
8. Generally, concrete sidewalks shall have a transverse broomed finished. At handicap ramps, however, the center panel shall be given a different
texture. For example, a distinctively patterned expanded steel screen may be pressed into the surface after the water sheen is gone to impart a
shallow pattern to the concrete. The pattern shall not collect water. On private property, the concrete at handicap ramps shall be given a different
color, either with a colored admixture or with a nonskid concrete paint.
The intent of these provisions is to provide additional visual and tactile evidence of the presence of a ramp-to-pavement transition.
9. During extremes in the temperature, the proper construction techniques as given in the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction"
shall be used to protect the integrity of the sidewalk concrete.
10. The edges of sidewalk shall be carefully backfilled as soon as possible after the forms are removed. The intent of this provision is to maintain the
aggregate base course in position. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
10-6-15: STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM:
A. It is the intent of this standard to provide for the installation of a safe, attractive, coherent and easily maintained street lighting system throughout the
Village. It is also the intent of this standard to provide for adequate lighting in off-street areas accessible to the driving public to promote the safe use of
such areas and to promote more efficient public services such as police protection to the properties in and around such areas.
Lighting systems shall be installed in streets and parking areas in all developments. Developments abutting a street with substandard lighting shall be
required to provide a street lighting system for the abutting street that meets the requirements of this Standard.
B. Design References:
1. All residential street lighting systems shall be designed, constructed, owned and maintained by Commonwealth Edison Company.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to coordinate Commonwealth Edison's activities with that of the other subdivision work.
3. Street lights in residential subdivisions shall be placed at least at the following locations: all intersections, center of street curve and the end of a culde-
sac.
4. Commercial street, parking, plaza and pedestrian lighting systems will be a designed system which should define the circulation hierarchy of the
commercial development, expose traffic conditions and provide visual orientation to help both pedestrians and drivers find their way at night. During
the daytime, the repetitive lighting standards should also contribute to this hierarchy and sense of order. The lighting plan will be designed by a
qualified engineer and approved by the Village Engineer.
C. Testing and Acceptance:
1. The Village Engineer shall test the luminaries for distribution. If necessary, the contractor shall adjust the luminaries to attain the design lighting
pattern.
2. After the foregoing has been completed, as-built plans submitted and proof of Commonwealth Edison's acceptance of the work, the street lighting
system shall be considered accepted by the Village. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 443/524
10-6-16: LOT GRADING:
A. All developments shall provide for the grading of all lots. Lots that are not to be built upon within six (6) months after the time the rest of the
improvements are completed shall be rough-graded to drain and the top three inches (3") disked to provide a bed for turf crop.
B. Lot Grading:
1. Maximum depth of ponding in the event of a storm sewerage system failure shall not exceed twelve inches (12") except in detention and retention
areas. That is, the difference in elevation between the lowest point in a depression and an overland spillway for that depression shall not exceed
twelve inches (12"). (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89)
2. The finished ground surface shall everywhere (except at high points and low points) have a gradient of between two percent (2%) and eight percent
(8%). Swales may have a minimum longitudinal gradient of two percent (2%). Proposed gradients outside those ranges shall require the approval of
the Village Engineer. At no time will a gradient greater than three to one (3:1) be allowed. Additionally, the use of retaining walls, sandbags,
engineered structures or some similar treatment shall not be allowed in order to effect desired gradient changes. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89; amd.
Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93)
C. Grading Certification: Before public improvements are accepted by the village, the developer's or owner's engineer shall prepare an as built set of
plans. As part of these plans, actual elevations at critical points shall be shown alongside the planned elevations and the planned elevations shall be
neatly crossed out so that the planned elevation is still legible. The developer's or owner's engineer shall attach a certificate to the as built plans
certifying that the elevations as finally built substantially conform to those in the originally approved grading plan. In addition, the developer's or owner's
engineer shall certify that all the lots drain properly in conformance with these standards and specifications. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
10-6-17: CONSERVANCY DISTRICTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 91-04-444, 4-15-1991)
10-6-18: LANDSCAPING:
A. Landscaping Plan: A landscape plan shall be required with application for all commercial, office, institutional and industrial buildings and all residential
uses (of 6 or more homes or units, unless covered in a previously approved PUD, special use or annexation agreement). The plan shall:
1. Be developed and implemented by a qualified landscape architect.
2. Be drawn at a scale not smaller than the following:
For areas of less than 2 acres, at a scale of 1" = 10'; for areas of 2 to 10 acres, at a scale of 1" = 30'; for areas of more than 10 acres, at a scale of 1"
= 50'.
Reduced copies may also be required by the village. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
3. Show all proposed grading including final grades from the site plan and including such detail as plant species and tree species and varieties (using
both botanical and common names), size, and quantities to be installed. (Ord. 2003-10-243, 10-6-2003)
B. Trees:
1. Intent And Purpose: This subsection B establishes requirements to protect and preserve existing trees throughout the village. The requirements
apply to all public and private new construction, enlargements or expansion of any structure, building, or parking lot, service areas, all undeveloped
property and other construction. Existing developed or contiguous single-family subdivided residential lots and public rights of way shall be excluded
from the requirements of this subsection B except that a single-family lot large enough in area to be subdivided shall comply with these requirements.
2. Tree Removal: No tree of living quality having a trunk size of four inches (4") or greater in diameter, as measured six inches (6") above the
established ground level, shall be removed from unimproved or partially improved land prior to receiving approval of a tree survey and land
preservation plan supplied by the property owner. (Ord. 2000-05-29, 5-1-2000)
3. Protection Of Existing Trees:
a. Tree Survey And Conditions:
(1) Tree Survey: A tree survey shall be submitted by anyone planning any site development to the village's director of public works and the village
arborist for review, regardless of whether any other development plan is required by this code. The tree survey shall indicate the location, size,
species, and condition of each trunk with a trunk diameter of four inches (4") or more measured six inches (6") about the existing grade. The tree
species shall be stated with both the scientific name and the common name.
(2) Tree Condition: The condition of each tree shall be stated as "poor", "fair", or "good". The following point system, based on a determination of
tree defects or deficiencies, shall be used to determine tree condition:
Poor: 3 or more points
Fair: 1 or 2 points
Good: 0 points
Defect categories (each category represents 1 point):
Cankers
Cavities
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 444/524
Deadwood
Disease
Insect problems
Poor tree architecture
Root problem
Splits/cracks
Weak unions
(Ord. 2003-10-243, 10-6-2003)
b. Landscape Plan: Subject to determination of the village arborist, a reasonable effort shall be made to retain existing trees on the tree survey
through the integration of those trees into the site and landscaping plan for a proposed development. If a reasonable integration into the
development plan is not possible, the developer may choose to mitigate the trees in dispute based upon the exchange rate set forth in subsection
B5 of this section. Removal of trees designated for preservation shall be allowed only pursuant to the provisions of this subsection B.
c. Tree Preservation Plan: A tree preservation plan indicating the location and species of those trees to be preserved, and the methods which are to
be used to preserve such trees, shall be submitted to the village arborist.
4. Preservation Techniques:
a. Grading And Construction Equipment: All grading and construction equipment shall be forbidden from encroaching within the drip line of any tree.
b. Material Detrimental To Trees: Crushed limestone and other materials detrimental to trees shall not be dumped within the drip line of any tree nor
at any higher location where drainage toward the tree could conceivably affect the health of the tree.
c. Installation Of Snow Fencing: Snow fencing shall be installed during construction at the periphery of the drip line of every tree. In an area where a
tree is in the construction zone and fencing the drip line is not possible, two by six inch by eight foot (2 x 6" x 8') long boards banded or wired
around the trunk of that tree shall be provided as protection to adequately prevent scarring.
d. During Construction: If a tree has its roots exposed, the roots are to be pruned. If exposed roots are greater than two inches (2"), the tree crown is
to be pruned to compensate for the root loss. Also, the tree shall be watered and fertilized.
e. Preservation Methodology: The methods which are to be used to preserve those trees shall be clearly specified on the preservation plan. These
shall, at a minimum, include the preservation techniques listed above, although alternative methods may be considered. If, in the opinion of the
village arborist, the necessary precautions as specified in the preservation plan for the development were not undertaken before or during
construction to ensure the preservation of those trees, the building permit for the parcel shall not be issued, or, if previously issued, may be
suspended until such time as these precautions have been complied with.
5. Removal Of Trees Designated For Preservation: If a tree designated for preservation on the preservation plan is destroyed or razed or removed
without receiving prior approval from the village arborist, such tree shall be replaced with a new tree in accordance with the following:
a. Exchange Rate:
Size Of Existing Tree1
(Diameter In Inches)
Number Of
Replacement Trees
36 or greater 8
30-35 7
26-29 6
20-25 5
13-19 4
08-12 3
04-07 2
Note:
1.Trunk size as measured 6 inches above the established ground level. Every fraction of an inch shall be rounded up to the next highest full number.
b. Minimum Size Of Replacement Trees: All replacement trees shall have a minimum trunk size of four inches (4") in diameter, as measured six
inches (6") above the established ground level, upon installation.
c. Species Of Replacement Trees: Permitted species of replacement trees are set forth in section 7-6-2-2 of this code.
d. Amended Landscape Plan: Removal of trees designated for preservation shall be allowed only by amending the landscape plan and with the
approval of the village arborist and inspection by the village arborist. The amended landscape plan shall indicate the location, species and size of
all replacement trees in accordance with the recommendation of the village arborist.
6. In The Field Adjustments: In the field adjustments to trees designated for preservation on the preservation plan may be necessary during the course
of construction. In such instances, the developer or property owner shall not remove any trees designated for preservation prior to site inspection
and/or consultation with the village arborist. If a tree designated for preservation substantially impedes the development then, but only then, an in the
field adjustment may be approved by the village arborist.
7. Tree Survival Guarantee: Any relocated or replaced tree shall be guaranteed survival for not less than one growing season. In the event a relocated
or replaced tree dies or is in declining condition, the tree shall be replaced with a four inch (4") diameter tree. The requirement of four inch (4") trees
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 445/524
set forth in this code may be modified by the village arborist, if a four inch (4") tree is not suitable for that location, or unavailable, or available but of
poor quality. In such cases, the village arborist may accept either a smaller tree or a greater quantity of smaller trees in accordance with the
exchange rate set forth in subsection B5a of this section.
8. Compliance Bonds: Upon application for a building permit, the owner shall furnish a cash bond to guarantee compliance with the tree preservation
plan and tree replacement requirements. The bond shall be in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each tree designated to remain or
be transplanted on the approved tree preservation plan. The bond shall remain in effect for a period of eighteen (18) months after the final
completion of such work. The bond shall be held for the purpose of guaranteeing and securing the correction of any defect or death of plant material
furnished, transplanted, or preserved on site. If such defects have developed, then the cash bond may be applied by the village for any amounts
incurred in correcting such defects; and the balance of such deposit, if any, held at the end of such eighteen (18) month period shall be returned by
the village to the developer, or paid to the order of the depositor, without interest. (Ord. 2000-05-29, 5-1-2000)
C. Areas To Be Final Graded And Sodded:
1. All swales, drainageways subject to immediate erosion, and parkways shall be graded and sodded. The minimum width of sodding in swales shall be
ten feet (10') and shall be centered along the centerline of the swale or to the flow line, whichever is smaller.
2. Areas to be sodded shall be cleared of stumps, badly damaged streets, boulders and other debris. The areas shall then be graded smooth and
compacted. A minimum of six inches (6") of topsoil shall be spread on top of the prepared ground surface.
3. All sodding shall be done in conformance with the applicable sections of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
4. Sodded areas shall be maintained and repaired as necessary until the growth is uniformly well established.
D. Areas To Be Final Graded And Seeded:
1. All open ground not to be sodded shall be graded, seeded and fertilized.
2. Areas to be seeded shall be cleared of stumps, badly damaged trees, boulders and other debris. The areas shall then be graded smooth and
compacted. For residential development, all topsoil shall be retained on site. No topsoil shall be removed from the site without the written approval of
the village engineer. A minimum of twelve inches (12") of topsoil shall be otherwise prepared for seed. For nonresidential development, all seeded or
sodded areas shall have a minimum of twelve inches (12") of topsoil.
3. All seeding and fertilizing shall be done in conformance with the applicable sections of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction". If straw is used as mulch, it must be applied so that it will not be scattered by the wind.
4. Seeded areas shall be maintained and repaired as necessary until the growth is uniformly well established.
E. Other Landscaping Requirements:
1. Wood chips shall not be used in areas designed to detain storm runoff waters, in areas less than fifteen inches (15") above the bottom of a local
depression or in areas less than fifteen inches (15") above the bottom of a swale serving more than one acre or serving more than two (2) lots.
2. Decorative curbing or retaining walls more than two feet (2') in height, as measured from the original designed and approved ground elevation, shall
not be allowed. All materials used to create such curbing or walls shall be inert and permanent in nature and not subject to rapid corrosion or
deterioration as would be the case with wood or untreated steel. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
F. Parking Lot Landscaping:
1. Intent And Purpose: This subsection F establishes landscaping standards for certain parking lots, with the goal of protecting and enhancing the
public's health, safety, and welfare by reducing air pollution, reducing noise pollution, and improving the appearance of the village.
2. Applicability: The requirements of this subsection F shall apply on and after October 1, 2003, to:
a. A new parking lot constructed with fifteen (15) parking spaces or more;
b. A reconstructed parking lot containing fifteen (15) parking spaces or more;
c. A parking lot whose number of parking spaces is increased by thirty percent (30%) or more and the resulting number of parking spaces is fifteen
(15) or more, and
d. A parking lot that contains fifteen (15) parking spaces or more and that serves only one building with only one occupancy, if that occupancy
changes; and
e. A parking lot that serves a single retail use of sixty thousand (60,000) gross square feet in area or more, regardless of whether such parking lot
also serves other uses, when the tenancy of that retail use changes.
For purposes of this subsection F, the term "reconstructed" shall mean removal of subbase over, or the grinding of, more than fifty percent (50%) of
the parking lot area or removal of one hundred percent (100%) of the asphalt of a parking lot to expose the subbase.
The provisions of this subsection F shall not apply to the parking lots identified in subsections F2a and F2b of this section if, but only to the extent
that, the installation of any additional landscaping shall cause a reduction of the number of parking spaces in the parking lot to fall below the
minimum number of parking spaces required for that parking lot by the Lake Zurich zoning code.
3. Minimum Landscaped Surface Area: A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the gross area of the parking lot, including, without limitation, driving
aisles, shall be landscaped areas. These landscaped areas shall be included in the calculation of the total landscaped area required for the property.
4. General Landscaping Standards:
a. The required landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 446/524
b. The minimum size for a planting area shall be equivalent to one parking space.
c. In each planting area, a minimum of one 4-inch diameter salt tolerant shade tree shall be planted, and at least one shade tree for every forty (40)
linear feet of continuous islands shall be planted.
d. Each type of tree shall be approved by the village's director of public works prior to planting.
e. The soil in each planting area shall have a drainage rate of not less than two inches (2") of water drop within one hour.
f. All landscaped areas shall be served by a permanent means of irrigation.
g. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of every interior parking lot landscaping area shall be comprised of live landscaping such as ground cover or
shrubs. The remaining area may be mulched with bark chips or shredded bark mulch to a minimum depth of three inches (3") over a landscaped
fabric.
5. Installation Standards: All landscaping material shall be installed in accordance with the planting procedures established by the "Illinois EPA Urban
Manual".
6. Maintenance: All landscaping shall be maintained in a good condition at all times. All damaged, dead, and diseased plant material shall be replaced
promptly with plant material in good condition.
7. Responsibility For Compliance: The owner of the parking lot, and all of the owner's successors and assigns, shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all landscaped materials. (Ord. 2003-10-243, 10-6-2003)
10-6-19: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
A. All public utility transmission lines of an electrical, electronic or optical nature except radio frequency transmission or reception antennas shall be placed
entirely underground in dedicated easements or in the right of way. Those placed in the right of way or in a multiuse easement shall be located so as to
avoid conflicts with other improvements or utilities located in the right of way easement.
B. All gas mains shall be placed in dedicated easements or in the right of way. They shall be located so as to avoid conflicts with other improvements or
utilities.
C. The village engineer shall be notified at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of any utility installation work.
D. Public utilities shall be installed in accordance with the applicable franchise agreement.
E. Plans for the installation of public utilities shall be submitted to the village plan commission for review and approval.
F. If utility company wording or a utility company sticker is used on the plans, wording shall be added if it is not already there to the effect that all utilities
are to be installed underground. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
10-6-20: DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES, DRIVEWAYS AND OFF STREET PARKING:
A. Intent: The intent for the design of driveway entrances, driveways and off street parking are threefold: 1) to provide for safe, efficient, easily maintained
and attractive off street parking; 2) to limit the number of access points to off street parking areas in major and collector streets; and 3) to provide
convenient access and safety for the handicapped. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
B. Design: All parking lots and driving aisles shall be designed to promote safe movement of pedestrians and shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with all of the following standards of the Illinois department of transportation, as applicable: (Ord. 2003-10-243, 10-6-2003)
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
2. "Manual For Structural Design Of Portland Cement Concrete Pavement".
3. "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways".
C. Definition Of Terms:
COMMERCIAL OFF STREET PARKING AREA: A parking area serving more than four (4) residential units or serving educations, religious,
commercial, medical, industrial or similar concerns.
DRIVEWAY: An accessway constructed primarily outside the street right of way between the driveway entrance and an off street parking area. Where
no sidewalk is present, a driveway shall begin at the right of way line; where a sidewalk is present, a driveway shall begin at the right of way line side of
the sidewalk.
DRIVEWAY ENTRANCE: A paved way from the roadway to the driveway over the parkway. A driveway entrance shall include the curb cut and the
driveway entrance pavement (driveway apron) itself but not the sidewalk.
RESIDENTIAL OFF STREET PARKING AREA: A parking area serving no more than four (4) residential units with a maximum of four (4) individual
parking spaces including garage spaces per residential unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 447/524
D. Location And Layout Of Driveway Entrances:
1. Residential lots or sites with less than one hundred feet (100') street frontage shall have no more than one driveway entrance. Residential lots or
sites with one hundred feet (100') or more of street frontage shall have no more than two (2) driveway entrances except as noted below.
2. Commercial lots or sites shall have no more than two (2) driveway entrances on each abutting street except as noted below.
3. Additional driveway entrances shall be permitted as follows:
a. One additional driveway entrance shall be permitted per six hundred feet (600') of continuous frontage on a street.
b. One additional driveway entrance shall be permitted on each abutting street if the additional entrance is for use solely as a service entrance to a
commercial site and is physically separated to the satisfaction of the village engineer from customer or client driveways and entrances.
c. Additional driveway entrances may be permitted to serve multi-unit housing or condominiums from local streets only. The number of additional
permitted entrances shall not exceed one per four (4) residential units.
4. Driveway entrances for individual lots of a multilot residential development shall not be constructed in a major or collector street except with the
permission of the village engineer.
5. No part of a driveway entrance shall be closer to the near right of way line extended of an intersecting street than as follows:
Frontage
Street
Intersecting
Street
Distance
(Feet)
Residential entrances:
Local Local 10
Local Collector or frontage 50
Local Major 50
Frontage Local 50
Frontage Frontage 50
Frontage Major 75
Commercial entrances:
Local Local 10
Local Collector or frontage 10
Local Major 20
Collector or frontage Local 10
Collector or frontage Major 20
Major Local 10
Major Frontage 75
Major (sec.) Major 125
Major (pri.) Major See village engineer
The village engineer may require longer or shorter distances than those shown in accordance with the intent of this subsection.
6. No part of a residential driveway entrance shall overlap an adjacent lot line extended radially to the street centerline. The edge of an uncurbed
residential driveway entrance at the right of way line shall not be closer than five feet (5') to an adjacent property line; the edge of a concrete curbed
residential driveway entrance at the right of way line shall not be closer than ten feet (10') to an adjacent property line.
7. The edges of any two (2) adjacent driveway entrances at the right of way line shall be no less than ten feet (10') apart. No part of two (2) adjacent
driveway entrances shall overlap. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
8. Driveway entrances for residential off street parking must be a minimum of eight feet (8') in width at the right of way line, and may not exceed a width
of twenty feet (20') at the right of way line, except as provided in this subsection D8. An existing residential driveway entrance that exceeds twenty
feet (20') in width at the right of way line may be maintained, repaired, and replaced at its current width if, but only if, the driveway entrance complied
at the time of its original installation with applicable provisions of this code and the Lake Zurich zoning code. If scavenger services are required to
use the driveway, then the driveway entrance at the right of way must be twenty feet (20') in width.
Driveway entrances for commercial off street parking and for service driveways must be a minimum of twelve feet (12') in width at the right of way
line and may not exceed a width of forty feet (40') at the right of way line. If the commercial or service driveway is meant for simultaneous two-way
traffic, then the minimum required width of the driveway entrance at the right of way line is twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2008-10-579, 10-6-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 448/524
9. Residential driveway entrances shall be designed as shown in exhibit no. 3012, except that the back of an existing curb may be neatly sawcut to
provide a depressed curb as a substitute for the detailed depressed curb. (Ord. 91-06-452; amd. Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-1993)
All residential driveway entrances shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete or bituminous asphalt.
Single-family residential driveway entrances shall be allowed only in local or frontage streets in new construction.
Driveways serving village owned or leased facilities in Kuechmann park may be constructed of gravel or other material as determined by the village
to be appropriate. (Ord. 91-06-452, 6-3-1991)
10. Commercial driveway entrances shall be laid out in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices. Commercial driveway entrances
shall include curbs with a flag radius of at least fifteen feet (15'). Larger radii may be required to accommodate larger vehicles expected to use the
driveway entrance.
Commercial driveway entrances serving large commercial, business, or industrial centers may be required to be designed in accordance with street
standards13. Generally commercial driveways supporting two hundred fifty (250) or more nonemployee daily vehicle movements into and out of the
parking area shall require an intersecting street design at the driveway entrance.
Commercial driveway entrances may be rigid or flexible pavements.
11. Driveway entrance locations shall take sightline distances into account. Required stopping sight distances for the roadway involved shall be
increased by fifty feet (50') when used in figuring the location for a driveway entrance.
12. Innovative driveway entrance designs are encouraged but are subject to review by the village engineer.
13. Driveway entrances shall intersect the edge of the roadway as near to perpendicular as possible. A driveway entrance shall not intersect the edge
of the roadway at less than a sixty degree (60°) angle except in the case of a one-way, right turn ramp entrance where allowed or required by the
village engineer.
14. The village engineer shall require the replacement of any street lighting electrical cable damaged during construction of a driveway entrance.
The developer or owner shall notify the village engineer at least twenty four (24) hours before driveway entrance construction is to begin.
15. Driveway entrance slope shall be between two percent (2%) and eight percent (8%). Where practical, the driveway entrance shall drain to the
roadway. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
E. Parking Area Location And Layout:
1. The minimum aisle width for two-way traffic shall be twenty four feet (24').
2. Each off street parking space shall be a minimum nine feet (9') wide by twenty feet (20') long and not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet;
provided, however, that the minimum length of a perimeter space or space perpendicular to a landscape area shall be eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 93-
10-615, 10-4-1993)
F. Driveway And Parking Area Pavement Design: It is the intent of this subsection to provide for the construction of parking area pavements that are
durable, easily maintained and well drained, both on the surface and at the level of the subgrade.
1. Parking and pavements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of section 10-6-8, "Streets And Pavements", of this
chapter, except provisions of this section shall govern over any conflicting provisions of section 10-6-8 of this chapter.
2. Minimum driveway and parking area pavement structural numbers shall be as follows:
Not Visible From Public Areas
Commercial Residential
Parking area 2.30 1.90
Fire lane/primary driveway 2.50 1.90
Heavy truck lane 4.00 N/A
Visible From Public Areas
Parking area 2.30 1.90
Fire lane/primary driveway 2.75 1.90
Heavy truck lane 3.15 N/A
3. The subgrade shall everywhere have a minimum slope of one percent (1.00%) draining to a subsurface drainage system of design approved by the
village engineer. A means of draining low spots at inlets or catch basins shall be devised that prevents subgrade fines from entering the storm
sewerage system. The village will require the extensive use of geotextile filter fabrics in and around inlets and catch basins. A means of draining
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 449/524
undercut areas filled with stone or granular backfill shall be devised where other soil conditions indicate it is likely a shallow subsurface water pocket
may form and remain for a significant period of time. The intent of this provision is to ensure that water does not remain in the base, subbase or
subgrade for any significant length of time and to ensure that the integrity of the subgrade is maintained for the life of the pavement.
4. The parking area surface shall everywhere have a slope of at least one percent (1.00%) except at local crests or sags.
5. Where surface runoff waters in the parking areas are to run parallel with and adjacent to the curb, a combination concrete curb and gutter of
standard design shall be used.
6. Maximum slope in an off street parking area or driveway shall be ten percent (10%).
7. Full depth bituminous or concrete pavements shall be placed on a well compacted subbase course at least four inches (4") thick of approved
crushed granular material. The intent of this provision is to provide for a sure drainage path for subsurface water reaching the subgrade.
8. All pavement shall be designed in accordance with street standards14. In no case, however, shall granular base course be less than eight inches (8")
thick after compacted, and asphalt surface and binder courses be less than three inches (3") placed in two (2) lifts.
9. Manholes, valves, vaults and other underground structures primarily for access to underground improvements shall be constructed with chimney
seals or functional equivalents in off street parking areas.
G. Commercial Off Street Parking Area Lighting:
1. Retail parking areas shall be provided with an average illuminance of one foot-candle at times they are in use (active). The average illuminance
divided by the minimum illuminance shall not exceed three (3).
2. Parking area lighting shall be arranged to direct as little light into residential windows as possible.
3. Retail parking areas shall be provided with an average illuminance of two-tenths (0.2) foot-candle at times they are not in use (inactive). The average
illuminance divided by the minimum illuminance shall not exceed ten (10). (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, FEES
10-7-1: ORGANIZATION:
The following offices of the government of the village are concerned with the administration of this title.
A. The Village Board: The village board is vested with the following responsibilities in regard to subdivision control:
1. Plans And Plats: Approval or disapproval of all preliminary plans and final plats referred to it by the plan commission.
2. Variations: Approval or disapproval of all variations and exceptions recommended by the plan commission.
3. Amendments: Amendments of the regulations of this title when found necessary and desirable after review by the plan commission.
4. Enforcement: Initiation of appropriate proceedings to enforce the provisions of this title.
B. The Village Plan Commission: The plan commission shall administer the provisions of this title and in furtherance of said authority shall:
1. Maintain Title: Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including amendments thereto.
2. File Plans And Plats: Receive and file all preliminary plans and final plats (together with applications).
3. Liaison With Concerned Agencies: Forward copies of the preliminary plan to other appropriate offices and agencies for their recommendations and
report.
4. Liaison With Village Board: Forward with recommendations to the village board all preliminary plans.
5. File All Checked Plats: Receive and file all final plats, and check their compliance with the preliminary plan.
6. Forward Plats To Village Board: Forward with recommendations to the village board all final plats.
7. Other Determinations: Make all other determinations required by the regulations herein.
C. The Village Engineer:
1. Review Of Plans: The village engineer shall review all preliminary subdivision plans and make determinations in the areas of design standards and
engineering specifications, as stipulated herein.
2. Inspection Of Work: The village engineer shall inspect all improvements required by this title both during construction and after completion to ensure
compliance with this title and with good construction practice.
3. Conflict Of Interest: The village engineer shall not be retained by a subdivider or other interested party to perform engineering work in any
subdivision subject to the application of this title. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 450/524
10-7-2: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Village Manager To Administer Title: It shall be the duty of the village manager to administer this title and to bring any violations or lack of compliance
herewith to the attention of the village attorney. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
B. Compliance Required Before Sale of Lots or Issuance of Building Permit: No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed
subdivision shall transfer or sell such parcel, nor shall any public official issue a building permit for the construction of buildings or structures within a
proposed subdivision, before the final plat of the subdivision has been approved by the Village Board, in accordance with the provisions of this Title,
and filed with the Recorder of Deeds of Lake County, Illinois.
C. Use of Metes and Bounds Measured Prohibited: The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds for the purpose of
sale, transfer, or lease with the intent of evading this Title will not be permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the
requirements and regulations contained in this Title.
D. Compliance Required Before Plat Approval: No final plat of subdivision shall be approved which does not comply with all the provisions of this Title.
10-7-3: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
A. Hardships: Where the Plan Commissions finds that extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties regarding the physical development of land may
result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may recommend variations or exceptions of the regulations so that substantial justice may be
done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variation or exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this Title;
and, further provided the Plan Commission shall not recommend variations or exceptions to the regulations of this Title unless it shall make findings
based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
1. Public Welfare Protected: The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to nearby properties;
2. Unique Conditions: The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and
are not applicable, generally, to other property;
3. Particular Physical Conditions: Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
B. Conditions: In recommending variations and exceptions, the Plan Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgement, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this Title.
C. Procedure: A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plan is filed for consideration by
the Plan Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
D. Recommendations: Such variations and exceptions as may be recommended by the Plan Commission shall be forwarded to the Village Board in
writing, substantially the recommended variations and/or exceptions. The Village Board may approve such variations or exceptions from the
requirements of this Title in specific cases as listed on the final plat, which in its opinion do not adversely affect the adopted Comprehensive Plan or the
intent and purpose of this Title.
10-7-4: RECORD OF PLATS:
All of such plats of subdivision, after the same have been submitted and approved as provided in this Title, shall be copied upon a book of plats of said
Village and shall be filed and kept by the Village.
10-7-5: VALIDITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Title is adjudged to be void, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Title.
10-7-6: APPEALS:
Any person may appeal within sixty (60) days to the Village Board of Trustees any final action taken by the Plan Commission. The Board of Trustees shall
act as a Board of Appeals and shall hear and decide appeals from and review any final order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Plan
Commission, under this Subdivision Control Ordinance. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Trustees shall be necessary to reverse
any final order of the Plan Commission under this Title.
10-7-7: REPEAL:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this title are, to the extent that such conflict exists, hereby repealed. (Ord. 89-08-335,
8-21-1989)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 451/524
10-7-8: EXCEPTION FOR VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT:
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 10-1-4, 10-3-1, 10-5-2, 10-5-9 of this title and section 10-7-3 of this chapter or any other provision of this title,
the Board of Trustees may waive the application of any procedural or substantive regulation of this title to any project or development undertaken by the
Village for public purposes. (Ord. 92-03-507, 3-2-1992)
10-7-9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who fails to comply with, or violates, any of the provisions of this title, shall be subject to a fine pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule",
of this Code, and each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Whoever shall sell or offer for sale, lease or offer for lease, while this title is in effect, any lot or lots or block or blocks, within the incorporated limits of the
Village, or any resubdivision of any lot or block therein, or within contiguous territory and not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
incorporated boundary of the Village before a final plat of subdivision has been approved by the Plan Commission and the Village Board of Trustees as
required by this title, shall be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code for each lot, block or part thereof so disposed of, offered for
sale or leased. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
10-7-10: FEES:
A. Conditions: (Rep. by 97-06-859, 6-16-1997)
B. Amount: Refer to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
All such fees shall be payable to the Village by certified check or money order.
C. Recording Fees: In addition to the fees listed in subsection B of this section, the subdivider shall also bear the cost of recording the plat. (Ord. 89-08-
335, 8-21-1989)
10-7-11: FILING OF ENGINEERING PLANS AND REVIEW FEE:
A. Four (4) complete sets of engineering plans and specifications of required land improvements shall be filed, together with an estimate of the cost of
improvements, the plans and specifications to bear the seal of an Illinois registered professional engineer along with his signed statement that such
plans and specifications have been prepared in compliance with this title and with good engineering practice. The plans shall be drawn to a minimum
horizontal scale of fifty feet to the inch (50' = 1") and a minimum vertical scale of five feet to the inch (5' = 1"). Plans shall show profiles of all utility and
street improvements, with elevations referred to United States Geological Survey datum. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
B. Plan review fees passed shall be paid by the developer to the Village pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code.
C. A charge for inspection of facilities to be constructed for land under consideration within this title shall be based on cost to the Village for having such
inspection performed by the Village Engineer or designate of the Village Board. A deposit pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code
shall be placed on deposit with the Village. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
D. Engineering review and inspection charges set out above are in the form of deposits. The amount due the Village shall be equivalent to the cost to the
Village for their services and shall be paid prior to any final acceptance. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
Chapter 8
EXHIBITS
10-8-1: EXHIBITS:
See the following pages of this chapter for exhibits no. 1 through no. 32, which are applicable to this title. (Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989; amd. Ord. 2001-02-
91, 2-20-2001)
EXHIBITS
EXHIBIT NO. 1
TYPICAL TRENCH AND STANDARD BEDDING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 452/524
Notes:
1. Standard bedding material for non-plastic pipe shall be well compacted one-fourth inch (1/4") to three-fourths inch (3/4") crushed stone, ASTM D448,
Size 67.
2. Standard bedding material for plastic pipe shall conform ASTM D2321, Class II non-angular aggregate except the maximum size shall be one-half inch
(1/2").
3. Select, well compacted excavated material shall be placed to line "A" if standard bedding material is not required to line "A".
4. Voids left by sheeting shall be filled with standard bedding material as the sheeting is removed.
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989)
EXHIBIT NO. 2
TRENCH BACKFILL
Notes:
1. Trench backfill shall conform to the provisions of Article 210 of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
2. Trench dimensions as detailed elsewhere shall be used to calculate payment limits. Additional trench backfill necessary to fill a trench wider than that
detailed shall be provided and placed at no additional cost to the Developer, Owner, or Village.
Order No. 13001 EXHIBIT NO. 3
STANDARD MANHOLE
Notes:
1. For sewers 24 inches or less in diameter, use 48 inch manholes; for sewers more than 24 inches in diameter, use 60 inch manholes.
2. For vitrified clay pipe sewers, Locate a bell or spigot as appropriate just outside the manhole wall to provide a pivot point for any different movement.
Order No. 13001 EXHIBIT NO. 4
EXTERNAL CHIMNEY
Notes:
1. Chimney seals shall be installed on all sanitary sewerage system manholes and on all other manholes in pavement.
2. "Cretex" external or internal seals are recommended: other products or other design solutions shall require the approval of the Village Engineer.
3. Chimney seals shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
4. Chimney seals are required for all valve vaults in pavement or sidewalk. EXHIBIT NO. 5
FLAT SLAB TOP FOR RESTRICTED DEPTH MH.
Note:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 453/524
A 6" slab top may be allowed for 48" diameter restricted depth manholes not in pavement.
An internal chimney seal shall be required in locations where a chimney seal is called for. EXHIBIT NO. 6
RAINFALL INTENSITIES
rainfall intensities in inches per hour for use with the Rational Method for areas of less than 100 acres
time
in
hours
year storm
3 0 100
0.08 5.30 6.45 9.35
0.17 4.30 5.20 7.60
0.25 3.60 4.40 6.35
0.33 3.10 3.80 5.50
0.42 2.75 3.35 4.90
0.50 2.50 3.05 4.40
0.58 2.30 2.80 4.00
0.67 2.15 2.60 3.70
0.75 2.00 2.40 3.40
0.83 1.85 2.25 3.20
0.92 1.75 2.10 3.00
1.00 1.65 1.95 2.80
1.50 1.25 1.50 2.10
2.00 1.00 1.20 1.70
3.00 0.73 0.86 1.20
4.00 0.58 0.69 1.00
5.00 0.48 0.57 0.84
6.00 0.42 0.49 0.73
7.00 0.37 0.44 0.65
8.00 0.33 0.40 0.58
9.00 0.30 0.36 0.53
10.00 0.27 0.33 0.49
11.00 0.25 0.31 0.46
12.00 0.23 0.29 0.43
EXHIBIT NO. 7
CATCH BASIN
Note:
1. For sewer pipes 24 inches or less in diameter, use 48 inch diameter catch basin: for sewer pipes more than 24 inches in diameter, use 60 inch diameter
catch basin.
2. Outlet pipe shall be no less than 12 inches in diameter. EXHIBIT NO. 8
FLAT SLAB TOP FOR RESTRICTED DEPTH C.B.
Notes:
1. A 6" thick slab top may be allowed for 48" diameter restricted depth catch basins not in pavement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 454/524
2. No steps are required in restricted depth catch basins. EXHIBIT NO. 9
INLET
Notes:
1. Inlet barrel sections shall conform to A.S.T.M. Designation C478.
2. Minimum pipe size for inlets in public street is 10 inches diameter.
3. Ductile cast iron pipe shall be used in paved areas of public streets for inlet connections if less than 3 feet of cover is provided. EXHIBIT NO. 10
FOUNDATION FOR FLARED END SECTION
Notes:
1. Width of the foundation shall be the same as the width of the flared end section. The top of foundation shall extend half-way up the side of the flared
end section.
2. The bottom of the foundation shall rest on undisturbed earth. The bottom of the foundation shall be no less than three feet (3') deep at the open end of
the flared end section.
3. A foundation similar to this foundation shall be constructed under all precast headwalls.
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-89) EXHIBIT NO. 11
UNDERDRAIN
(Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-93) EXHIBIT NO. 12
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
STREET PAVEMENT DESIGN
Major 4" Granular Sub-base
9" Bituminous Aggregate Mixture
4" Bituminous Concrete
Collector 3" Granular Sub-base
6" Bituminous Aggregate Mixture
21/2" Bituminous Concrete
Minor 3" Aggregate Base Course
5" Bituminous Aggregate Mix
2" Bituminous Binder Course
11/2" Bituminous Surface Course
-OR-
10" Aggregate Base Course
(CA-6, Grade 9)
2" Bituminous Binder Course
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 455/524
11/2" Bituminous Surface Course
Cul-de-sac Same as minor
Marginal Access Same as minor
In Business and 3" Granular Sub-base
Industrial Districts 8" Bituminous Aggregate Mixture
3" Bituminous Concrete
(Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-1993) EXHIBIT NO. 13
UTILITY MATERIAL STANDARDS
WATER SERVICE LINE FITTINGS
Corporation Stop Mueller H _ 15000 _ 1" Size
AY McDonald 4701
Roundway Mueller H _ 15154 _ 1" Stop, Minneapolis Pattern
AY McDonald 6104
B-Box Mueller H _ 10300 Upper section inside diameter 11/4"
Mueller H _ 10302 Upper section inside diameter 11/2"
Service Line 1" type K Copper
Tapping Saddle Stainless Steel Tapping Saddle with 1" corporation Stop
Hardware All nuts and bolts below grade shall be stainless steel, and Properly tightened
WATERMAIN
Fire Hydrants Clow Medallion, 51/4" with Auxiliary Valve
Kennedy Guardian, 51/4" with Auxiliary Valve
Mueller Centurion A _ 423 with Auxiliary Valve
51/4" three-way (2 hose nozzles & 1 pumper nozzle)
Painted Safety Red
Pipe Class 52 Ductile Iron, Cement Lined, DI Fitting
Wrapping the watermain with polyethylene film is not permitted, unless authorized by the Village Engineer
Bedding Materials Well Compacted CA-6 Grade 9 Crushed Stone or sand 12" over the pipe
Valves Clow, American Flow Control
Kennedy Resilient Wedge
American Flow Control AFC Series 500 NRS
Resilient Wedge Valve UL/FM General
Mueller Resilient Wedge Valve
Non-Rising Stem, Mechanical Joint
Manholes Cast Iron Frames and Lids: Neenah Type 1 self-sealing Marked "Water"
Casing Manufactured pipe chocks must be used between the ductile iron water main and casing
Pea gravel need to be jetted through the casing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 456/524
SANITARY SEWER
Pipe PVC, SDR _ 26, meeting requirements of ASTM _ 3034
Gasketed Joint/Cell Classification 12454 _ B
Depth over 15 feet _ SDR 12 or 18
Service Laterals: PVC SCH 40 or better, SDR 35 or 26
Bedding Materials Well Compacted CA-6 Grade 9 Crushed Stone or sand 12" over the pipe
Manholes Pre-Cast Concrete with Bench and Rubber Boots
Cast Iron Frames and Lids: Neenah Type 1 self-sealing
Marked "Sanitary Sewer"
WrapidSeal Manhole Encapsulation System
Contractor shall be qualified by manufacturer's rep
Exterior banding between barrel and cone sections
Manhole must be water tight and sealed from the outside
Fiberglass Steps
Casing Manufactured pipe chocks must be used between the DIP sewer main and casing
Couplings Non-Shear Mission Couplings
WATERMAIN INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS
1.Watermains shall not be exposed for any reason without the approval of the Operations Supervisor _ Utilities.
2.Filling mains, pressure connections, pressure tests, tie-ins, and chlorinations require 48 Hour notification to the Operations Supervisor _ Utilities.
3.Pressure connections and tie-ins to the Village systems will be scheduled and witnessed by the Utilities Division personnel.
4.Once mains are tied to the Village system, no valves or hydrants shall be operated by anyone other than Utility Division personnel.
5.Filling and flushing will be done by the Utilities Division only.
6.Water for pressure tests will be supplied by the Utilities Division, but it is the responsibility of the contractor to provide a backflow preventer or an
approved anti-siphon method before the pump.
7.Corporation Stops and 1" copper lines for the chlorination and sampling shall be installed at locations determined by the Utilities Division.
8.Chlorination will not be performed on service lines until all first permanent water valves are installed.
Water vaults for 8" valves and larger must have an inside diameter of 60".
(Ord. 2001-02-91, 2-20-2001) EXHIBIT NO. 14
SANITARY SERVICE CONNECTION
Notes:
1. This exhibit is applicable to four (4) or six (6) inch sanitary service connections only. Larger diameter sanitary service connections shall be made at
manholes only.
2. The bedding under the wye fitting and stub shall be particularly carefully compacted to prevent the wye fitting from rotating.
3. The sanitary service connection pipe shall be laid in a straight line and at a uniform gradient from the top of the rise from the main line to three (3) feet
beyond the right-of-way line.
4. Securely plug the end of the service connection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 457/524
EXHIBIT NO. 16
VALVE VAULT
Notes:
1. Water main 10 inches or more in diameter shall require a 60 inch diameter valve vault; water main less than 10 inches in diameter shall require a 48
inch valve vault.
2. Valve vault barrel sections shall conform to A.S.T.M. Designation Date. EXHIBIT NO. 17
FIRE HYDRANT
EXHIBIT NO. 19
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
Street
Right-Of
Way Width
Pavement
Width*
Radius Of
Horizontal
Curves
Length Of
Vertical
Curves
Tangent
Between
Horizontal
Reverse
Curves
Maximum
Gradient
Minimum
Gradient
Clear Sight
Distance
Major 100 ft. 54 ft. 500 ft. 200 ft.(a) 200 ft. 5% 0.5% 500 ft.
Collector 80 ft. 44 ft. 400 ft. 200 ft.(a) 200 ft. 5% 0.5% 400 ft.
Minor 60 ft. 30 ft. 150 ft. 100 ft.(b) _ 6% 0.5% 200 ft.
Cul-de-sac 120 ft. 88 ft. 150 ft. 100 ft.(b) _ 6% 0.5% 200 ft.
Marginal access 60 ft. 30 ft. 400 ft. 200 ft.(a) 100 ft. 6% 0.5% 200 ft.
In business and industrial districts 80_100 ft. 54 ft. 500 ft. 200 ft.(a) 200 ft. 2% 0.5% 500 ft.
*Pavement widths are measured back to back of curb and include additional width for on-street parking.
(a)Fifty (50) feet for each one (1) percent algebraic difference of grade but in no case less than two hundred (200) feet.
(b)Forty (40) feet for each one (1) percent algebraic difference of grade but in no case less than one hundred (100) feet. EXHIBIT NO. 20
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 458/524
STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
EXHIBIT NO. 21
STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
EXHIBIT NO. 22
CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS
MAJOR STREETS should carry through traffic past residential areas.
COLLECTOR STREETS should serve to carry traffic from local areas to the arterial system.
MINOR (LOCAL) STREETS should only serve abutting land.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS provide access to properties which would otherwise have to abut a major street or other right-of-way in an undesirable
manner. EXHIBIT NO. 23
INTERSECTION DESIGNS
EXHIBIT NO. 25
SIDEWALK
EXHIBIT NO. 26
HANDICAP RAMP
EXHIBIT NO. 27
STREETLIGHT. 30'
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 459/524
EXHIBIT NO. 28
STREETLIGHT, 20'
EXHIBIT NO. 29
LUMINAIRE
EXHIBIT NO. 30
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY ENTRANCE
(Ord. 89-08-335, 8-21-1989) EXHIBIT NO. 31
CLEAR SIGHT AREAS AT STREET INTERSECTIONS
(Ord. 93-10-615, 10-4-1993) EXHIBIT NO. 32
CONCRETE MONUMENTS
(Ord. 2001-02-91, 2-20-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 460/524
Chapter 9
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEES
10-9-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES AND COSTS:
The President and Board of Trustees of the Village have determined that it is appropriate and in the best interests of the Village and its residents to adopt
standards related to fees for building, engineering, and public works review of development applications, as provided in this section. Therefore, be it
ordained by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village that fees and costs for the applications and reviews shall hereby be pursuant to title 13,
chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 97-06-859, 6-16-1997; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
A. Consultant Fees: When payment of consultant fees is required, the applicant shall pay all outside consultant fees including Village Attorney fees
incurred by the Village during review of the application.
Each applicant for multi-family or nonresidential development shall pay to the Village an amount determined by the Code official to be set up as an
escrow account to pay for review fees other than engineering fees.
If amounts for reviews exceed the balance in the escrow account the developer will be required to reimburse the account upon notice from the Village.
If, following final development completion, there is a balance remaining in the escrow account, the applicant will be refunded the reconciled amount
without interest, upon his request.
If, after one year from final development completion date, no request has been received, the remaining balance will not be available for refund.
B. Engineering, Planning, And Public Works Review Fees: The applicant shall pay the engineering, planning, and public works review and inspection fees
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code. For purposes of this subsection, the phrase "estimated costs of site development" shall
mean the sum of all costs estimated to be incurred to complete development of the project as proposed, including, without limitation, the costs of all
required public improvements, site development, parking facilities, utilities, landscaping, and the like, but not including costs of construction of
buildings, all as determined by the Village Engineer.
C. Fees For Additional Notices And Hearings: If any application requires one or more public hearings, with public notice, in addition to the first public
hearing, then the applicant shall pay all costs incurred by the Village in making the required public notice for each such additional public hearing and
shall pay all costs incurred by the Village for court reporting services and other such administrative costs.
D. Recording And Filing Fees: The applicant shall pay all recording and filing fees applicable to the application.
E. Multiple Forms Of Relief: Whenever an application seeks more than one form of relief, then the applicant shall pay all fees associated with each form of
relief, as provided herein.
F. Fees Cumulative: All fees provided herein are cumulative.
G. Payment Required Before Application Processed Or Approved: No application shall be processed, and no approval shall be made, until all applicable
fees provided in this section have been paid in full. (Ord. 2003-02-219, 2-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Title 11
FLOOD CONTROL
Chapter 1
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to avoid the hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from flooding and to comply with the rules and regulations
of the national flood insurance program as promulgated by the federal emergency management agency, federal insurance administration as provided in
the rules and regulations of the federal register, volume 44, no. 31177, May 31, 1979, as amended, and which are hereby adopted by reference and filed in
the office of the village clerk, pursuant to Illinois law and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-30-2. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
11-1-2: JURISDICTION AND SCOPE:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall extend and apply to all land within the territorial limits of the village and, to the extent permitted by any applicable
laws of the state of Illinois, to all unincorporated territory within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the village.
B. No provisions of this chapter are intended or shall be construed so as to take any property or to infringe upon or impair any existing property right. (Ord.
1114-83, 5-2-1983)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 461/524
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
A. Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed as additional requirements to minimum standards required by other ordinances
of the village. In case of conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply.
B. Existing Laws: Before starting any of the work regulated by this chapter, the developer or applicant shall comply with the requirements set forth in other
applicable ordinances, including, but not limited to, those regulating the submission and approval of preliminary and final subdivision plats1,
improvement plans2, building and zoning permits3, inspections, appeals and other similar ordinances, along with the requirements set forth in this
chapter, or any amendments thereto hereafter enacted or as may be required by any applicable law of the state of Illinois or rules or regulations of any
department thereof, or of any applicable laws, rules or regulations of the United States or any agency thereof. Where provisions of this chapter are
more restrictive than other requirements, this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
11-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings adopted, unless the context clearly requires another
signification:
APPEAL: A request for a review by the village manager for an interpretation of any floodplain provision of this chapter to be finally determined by the
village board.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land within the floodplain which is subject to one percent (1%) chance of flooding annually. This area may also
be identified as that which is subject to the 100-year flood.
BASE FLOOD: A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also known as the 100-year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation at all locations at which there is a one percent (1%) chance of annual flood occurrence. This elevation for
special flood hazard areas of Buffalo Creek and North Flint Creek shall be as delineated by the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the
village prepared by the U.S. department of agriculture soil conservation services and published by FEMA.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank.
BYPASS CHANNEL: A channel formed in the topography of the surface of the earth which functions as a duct to carry storm and flood water runoff
through or around a specific area.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated volume of storage within a floodplain used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity
when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off site floodwater
elevations and flows.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: Any structure designed to control the volume of storm or flood water runoff that passes through such structure during a specific
measurable period of time.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building or structure; or the construction, reconstruction or any alteration of any
portion of or addition to any building or structure; or the storage of materials; or the preparation and recording of a plat of subdivision in accordance with
applicable law; or some other change made to land, including paving, excavation, filling, dredging, mining, or substantial improvements on a given site,
whether or not in connection with a proposed building or structure. Also included is the installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
DRY BOTTOM STORM OR FLOOD WATER STORAGE AREA: A natural or artificial stormwater storage area that is designed and maintained temporarily
to contain water only when excess stormwater runoff occurs.
EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of a volume of stormwater runoff that exceeds the safe storm drainage capacity of storm sewers or
natural drainage channels serving a specified watershed.
FPE OR FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The elevation of the base flood (plus 1 foot) at any given location in the SFHA.
FLOOD: The condition existing when the waters of any river, stream, creek, watercourse, lake or pond temporarily rise to a height above their normal
levels and overflow the boundaries within which they are ordinarily contained.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years during which a flood of a stated magnitude will be expected to occur once on the average.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report prepared by the federal insurance administration, including flood profiles, the flood boundary and
floodway map and water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD OF RECORD: An actual historical flood event for which sufficient records are available to establish its extent. No uniform probability of occurrence
is associated with floods of record; however, the probability of occurrence may be determined for the event at specific locations.
FLOOD PROFILE: Graphical representations of the elevation of the water surface of the 100-year flood along the watercourses of the village.
FLOODPLAIN: The special flood hazard lands adjoining a watercourse whose surface elevation is lower than the base flood elevation and which are
subject to periodic inundation during floods.
FLOODPROOFING: Modifications to structures made to reduce flood damages by making walls substantially watertight and having structural components
with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. These changes may be made to existing, or incorporated
in the design of new, structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains of which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
100-year flood with no significant rise in the base flood elevation. Any floodway not delineated on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 462/524
federal emergency management agency for the area shall be according to the best data available to the Illinois state water survey floodplain information
repository.
FLOODWAY BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP AND FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): Official maps of the village, issued or approved by the
administrator of the federal insurance administration, on which the boundaries of the floodway have been delineated and the areas of special flood hazard
delineated.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES: The lateral boundaries of the floodway which separate it from the floodway fringes.
FLOODWAY FRINGE: The higher portion of the floodplain, immediately adjacent to and on either side of the floodway occupied by quiescent or slow
moving waters during floods.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainty in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as may be caused by ice or debris jams.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE: An artificial or natural process of replenishing natural underground water supplies.
HIGH WATER ELEVATION: The elevation of floodwaters of the 100-year flood at any given point.
HYDROSTATIC UPLIFT: The upward pressure exerted on floor slabs or an entire structure by standing water or groundwater which tends to float a
structure or crack the floor. It is measured by the difference in elevation between the surface under pressure and the surface level of the water. Hydrostatic
pressure may also be horizontal, imposing forces on walls causing them to crack or fail.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: The drainage of water through channels or other watercourses formed or occurring in the existing surface topography of the earth
prior to changes made by artificial causes.
100-YEAR FLOOD AND 100-YEAR RAIN: A flood magnitude with a one percent (1%) statistical chance of being equaled or exceeded during any year. A
flood this large would be reached once during a one hundred (100) year period, on the average. However, the occurrence of such an event does not
diminish the chance of its recurring again at any time. The same conditions apply to determining the magnitude and frequency of the 100-year rain.
RETENTION STORAGE AREA: Same as storm or flood water storage area herein.
SFHA OR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The SFHAs
of the village are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map of the village prepared by United States department of agriculture, soil and
conservation service dated July 5, 1983, and as delineated by federal emergency management agency in the flood insurance study dated January 5,
1983, and flood insurance rate map, dated November 3, 1982.
SAFE STORM DRAINAGE CAPACITY: The quantity of stormwater runoff that can be transported by a channel or conduit without having the water surface
rise above the top of such channel or conduit.
STORMWATER STORAGE AREA: Areas that naturally or artificially serve to store excess stormwater.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is started, or b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not,
however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or a state
inventory of historic places.
TRIBUTARY WATERSHED: All of the area that contributes stormwater runoff to a given point.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the floodplain requirements of this chapter permitting construction otherwise prohibited.
VILLAGE: The village of Lake Zurich, Lake County, Illinois.
WATERCOURSE: Any stream, creek, branch, tributary, natural or artificial depression, slough, gulch, reservoir, lake, pond or natural or manmade
drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff and floodwaters flow either regularly or intermittently.
WET BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREA: A stormwater storage area that is designed and maintained temporarily to contain water only when
excess stormwater runoff occurs and permanently to hold an additional volume of water at a level which is at or below the discharge structure of such
storage area.
WETLANDS: The land areas in which the groundwater table or zone of saturation periodically intersects the surface and which contain wetland plant
species that are listed in Norman C. Fasscett, "A Manual Of Aquatic Plants" (Madison: University Of Wisconsin Press, 1957) and/or Floyd Swink, "Plants
Of The Chicago Region", second edition (Lisle, Illinois, the Morton Arboretum, 1974) and/or Henry A. Gleason, "The New Britton And Brown Illustrated
Flora Of The Northeastern United States And Adjacent Canada" (New York: Hafner Press, 1952). (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983; amd. Ord. 88-02-257, 2-15-
1988; Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
11-1-5: MAPS AND PROFILES:
The flood insurance rate map no. 1703760001-0006 dated July 5, 1983, and amendments thereto, delineating A zones as areas that are susceptible to the
base flood as prepared by the United States department of housing and urban development, federal insurance administration, and the flood insurance
study, village of Lake Zurich dated January 5, 1983, are hereby adopted for the purpose of this chapter and filed as a record in the office of the village
clerk. Other maps, profiles and technical data on file in the office of the village clerk should be consulted to the extent that such data is consistent with
recognized and accepted engineering standards, such as:
A. Floods in the Lake Zurich quadrant northeastern Illinois, atlas HA-208.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 463/524
B. Flood recognizance study, village of Lake Zurich, Lake County, prepared by PECO Enterprises, Inc., dated November 1980.
C. Flood hazard analysis Des Plaines River Tributaries, soil conservation service, Illinois department of transportation division of water resources,
September 1981.
D. Surface water runoff study, Wight Consulting Engineers, Inc., October 12, 1972.
E. Centralized stormwater detention for Lake Zurich, Wight Consulting Engineers, Inc., March 31, 1977. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
11-1-6: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No person shall commence any construction, substantial improvement, subdivision of land, placement of mobile homes or other
development in areas located in an A zone without first obtaining a permit from the manager of the village of Lake Zurich. The village shall not issue
such permit for any construction, substantial improvement or other development that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or that has
been denied a permit required by the federal or state law including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act, 1972, 33 USC 1334. (Ord.
1114-83, 5-2-1983; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
B. Application For Permit:
1. The application for a building permit for a building or other improvement all or partially within the floodplain shall bear on its face or be accompanied
by the following information which shall be recorded in the appropriate village files:
a. Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement or cellar;
b. Elevation to which any structure has been floodproofed;
c. Where the elevation of the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above;
d. A survey of the site, prepared by a registered Illinois land surveyor, drawn to scale showing:
(1) Property line dimensions;
(2) Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling;
(3) The direction of flow of surface drainage and flood flows;
(4) The location of all watercourses and drainage facilities; and
(5) The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings, including "as built" elevations of lowest floors and floodproofing levels.
2. For development proposals located in an identified floodway or within a riverine SFHA where the floodway has not yet been identified, applicant must
present a certification by a registered professional engineer that the development will not:
a. Create a new obstruction to flood flows;
b. Involve a channel crossing;
c. Modify the shape of the channel; and
d. Increase the flood levels during the base flood discharge.
If any of these four (4) situations will result, the applicant shall notify any adjacent community and obtain a permit from the Illinois department of
transportation, division of water resources, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/23. A permit shall not be issued until the applicant
has obtained either a section 70 permit or a "waiver of permit required" from the division of water resources. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
11-1-7: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
A. Use Of Base Flood Data: The village board shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize base flood elevation data available from federal, state or other
sources until such time as such data has been received from the federal insurance administration. Base flood data received from the federal insurance
administration shall take precedence over data from other sources. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
B. Certain Base Flood Elevations: The "base flood elevation" for the SFHAs (as defined in section 11-1-4 of this chapter) of those parts of unincorporated
Lake County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village shall be delineated on the 100-year flood
profiles in the flood insurance study of Lake County, dated May 3, 1982. (Ord. 88-02-257, 2-15-1988)
11-1-8: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
A. Drainage Construction Requirements: The following regulations shall apply to any construction on or about a floodplain or where localized floods of
record have occurred intermittently in other areas subject to the jurisdiction of the village:
1. Flood Protection Elevation:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 464/524
a. Residential: Any development of residential building as defined in this chapter shall have the lowest floor, including any basement, not lower than
the base flood elevation as defined in this chapter, plus one foot (1').
b. Nonresidential: Any development of nonresidential building as defined in this chapter shall have the lowest floor, including any basement, not
lower than the "base flood elevation" as defined in this chapter, plus one foot (1'), or have any portion lower than the "base flood elevation" as
defined in this chapter, plus one foot (1') floodproofed in accordance with the provisions hereof.
2. Materials And Methods: Any construction, otherwise permitted by this chapter, occurring below the "base flood elevation", as defined in this chapter,
plus one foot (1'), shall utilize flood resistant materials and methods, as follows:
a. Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
b. Have the lowest floor (including basement), and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters
located at or above the floodplain elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps and other waterproofed
serviced facilities may be located below the floodplain elevation. (Ord. 88-02-257, 2-15-1988)
c. Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage to other properties.
d. Have all structural components below the base flood elevation designed to be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and such structural components shall be designed to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
3. Roof Drainage Disposal: Roof drainage shall be accomplished by means of downspouts or otherwise with no direct connection to any street, storm
or sanitary sewer or combined sewer. Such roof drainage downspouts shall be directed away from the building and shall empty into splashblocks so
situated as to minimize or eliminate erosion as the water passes into the lawn or yard or into a seepage well.
4. Foundation Footing Drainage: Foundation footing drainage shall not be permitted to empty into a street, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, but may
be drained into a storm sewer or seepage well or pumped for disposal onto the lawn or yard.
5. Floodproofing:
a. Building Protection Requirements: The elevation to which the building is floodproofed is located and certified by the design engineer. It must be at
or above the FPE. With watertight floodproofing, all openings such as doors and windows must be above the FPE. Any part of the building subject
to flood damage must be above the FPE.
b. Insurance Record Requirements: Watertight floodproofing so certified by a structural engineer or architect. The elevation to which the building is
floodproofed.
6. Building Wall Openings: Any doorsill, windowsill or base of any other opening in the outer walls of a main building or other structure shall be erected
at an elevation not lower than the "base flood elevation", as defined in this chapter plus three feet (3'), unless provided with a watertight areaway the
top of which is not lower than the aforementioned minimum elevation.
7. Outer Walls And Basement Floors: The outer walls, basement floor and areaways below the "base flood elevation", as defined in this chapter, plus
three feet (3'), shall be constructed of masonry materials up to the minimum prescribed elevation, designed and constructed to withstand the
hydrostatic pressure caused by floodwaters standing above the base flood elevation.
8. Anchorage: Any proposed construction to the extent that it is otherwise permissible shall be designed to be erected so as to assure sufficient
anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
9. Sewer Mains: Sanitary sewer lines may be permitted in accordance with other provisions of this chapter, providing all manholes or other
aboveground opening located below the flood protection elevation are watertight.
B. Compensatory Storage: For any portion of a floodplain to be authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by at least an equal volume of excavation taken from below the base
flood elevation. In the case of streams or watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or immediately adjacent to the areas so filled or
occupied. All such excavations should be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. All earthmoving in the village shall be pursuant to a
permit issued in accordance with applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the village.
C. Filling Land: Areas permitted for fill shall be constructed as follows:
1. The area to be filled shall be cleared of all standing trees, brush, down timber, trash and other growth or objects unsuitable for use of foundation
material. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
2. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') deep before compaction, and the material shall be approved by the village manager.
(Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
3. The final elevation of the fill shall be at or above the FPE. The fill shall extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the foundation of the building where
sloping below the FPE.
4. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetation, cover, riprap or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is used, the
slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1).
5. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
D. Other Development Requirements: The village shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions related to
land management use and development:
1. The village shall not approve any annexation agreement or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. New subdivisions and planned unit development (PUDs) shall meet the requirements of this chapter. Plats or plans for any new subdivision and
planned unit development shall include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 465/524
drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2.
3. Plats or plans for new subdivisions and planned unit developments shall display the following flood data:
a. The boundary of the special flood hazard area;
b. The boundary of the floodway, if shown on available special flood hazard area maps;
c. The flood protection elevation for each building site where the base flood elevation is not available from existing study filed with the Illinois state
water survey. The applicant shall be responsible for calculating the flood protection elevation and submitting it to the state water survey for review
and approval as best available elevation data. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
4. Development activities to be undertaken by the village in the special flood hazard area shall comply with this chapter. Except as exempted by law, no
other local government shall commence any development activity in a special flood hazard area without first obtaining a development permit from the
village manager. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983; amd. Ord. 2012-10-861, 10-1-2012)
11-1-9: MOBILE HOME STANDARDS:
A. All mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions located in an A zone shall file evacuation plans indicating vehicular access and escape routes,
including mobile home hauler routes with appropriate disaster preparedness authorities.
B. All mobile homes to be placed on a site located in an A zone shall:
1. Have the lowest floor elevation one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
2. In the instance of elevation on pilings, have all piling foundations placed in stable soil no more than ten feet (10') apart and reinforcement shall be
provided for piers more than six feet (6') above ground.
3. Have lots large enough to permit steps to the mobile home and have adequate surface drainage on all sides of the structure.
4. Be placed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure due to flooding.
5. Be anchored according to the following specifications:
a. Over the top ties shall be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the mobile home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations
and mobile homes less than fifty feet (50') long shall require one additional tie per side.
b. Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the mobile home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less
than fifty feet (50') long shall require four (4) additional ties per side.
c. All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds.
d. Any additions to the mobile home shall be similarly anchored. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
11-1-10: UTILITY STANDARDS:
All new construction and substantial improvement to utilities located in an A zone shall provide that:
A. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
B. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into the floodwaters.
C. All new and replacement on site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord.
1114-83, 5-2-1983)
11-1-11: SUBDIVISION AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All subdivisions and other developments located in an A zone shall provide that:
A. All subdivision and other development proposals shall be designed to minimize flood damage to the proposed subdivision or development site as well
as to other properties.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
C. Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. For any proposed subdivision or new development greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, the applicant shall show the base
flood elevation data for each lot or platted parcel; provided, that if the base flood elevation data is not available, the applicant shall compute and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 466/524
provide this information for each lot or platted parcel of a subdivision or new development proposal which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is lesser. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
11-1-12: WATERCOURSE STANDARDS:
The village shall notify adjacent communities and the Illinois department of transportation, division of water resources and the federal insurance
administration prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. The flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse
shall be maintained. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
11-1-13: REPORTS AND RECORDS:
A. The village shall provide the village board, the Illinois department of transportation, division of water resources and the federal insurance administration
with an annual report on forms as provided the village by the federal insurance administration.
B. The village shall maintain the records of lowest floor elevations, floodproofing certifications, all variance documents required by section 60.6(a)(5) and
(6) of the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program, permit applications and all other records required by the federal insurance
administration. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
11-1-14: VARIANCES:
Upon application and after fifteen (15) days' notice of a public hearing, the village board may grant a variance of this chapter subject to compliance with
the provisions of section 1910.6(a) of the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program and such other conditions as the village board
deems necessary to comply with the intent of this chapter.
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development proposed in a floodplain, the applicant may apply, as provided by
the subdivision ordinance4, for a variance.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the special flood hazard area;
2. A substantial economic hardship would result if the variance was not granted;
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health or safety, no creation of a nuisance nor any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads, utilities or other public
facilities;
6. Other provisions of this chapter can still be met.
B. An applicant shall be notified in writing that a variance from these requirements would lessen the degree of protection of a building resulting in:
1. Increased premium rates for flood insurance as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance;
2. Increased risks to life and property;
The applicant shall acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and liability.
C. A variance may be granted to permit a "wet floodproofed" building, that is: a building to be intentionally flooded during a flood, provided:
1. No part of such a building below the flood protection elevation may be subject to flood damage; and
2. The variance shall be conditioned on the contents being:
a. Of materials resistant to flood damage; or
b. Items declared "property not covered" by a standard flood insurance policy of the national flood insurance program.
D. Any alteration of the area below the flood protection elevation that violates the conditions of the variance shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
Any such alteration is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore will cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
11-1-15: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of areas designated as an A Zone will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create
liability on the part of the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 467/524
11-1-16: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined pursuant to title 13, chapter 1, "Fee Schedule", of this Code and in addition,
shall pay all legal and engineering costs and expenses involved in litigation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983; amd. Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Nothing herein shall prevent or impair the right of the Village to take such other lawful corrective action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation
of the provisions of this chapter. All such costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 1114-83, 5-2-1983)
Title 12
SIGN CODE
Chapter 1
SIGN REGULATIONS
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to establish a comprehensive system of sign controls regarding the construction, installation, and maintenance of signs that will:
A. Promote and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the Village by ensuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding structures and land uses.
B. Create a more attractive business and economic climate by enhancing and protecting the orderly and effective display of signs, and discourage sign
clutter.
C. Protect the public from hazardous conditions that result from the indiscriminate use and placement of signs, structurally unsafe signs, signs that
obscure the vision of pedestrians or motorists, and signs that compete or conflict with necessary traffic signals, government signs, and warning signs.
(Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms used in this title are defined as follows:
A-FRAME SIGN: A temporary sign ordinarily in the shape of the letter "A" or some variation thereof, which is displayed on the ground, not permanently
attached to the ground, and usually two-sided, generally connected at the top and separated at the bottom.
A-FRAME SIGN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 468/524
ANIMATED SIGN: A sign that uses moving or changing lights to depict action, movement, or the optical illusion of movement of part of the sign structure,
sign, or pictorial segment, or including the movement of any illumination or the flashing or varying of light intensity to create a special effect or scene.
Animated signs do not include electronic message signs.
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE: Signs, devices, or ornamentations designed for the purpose of attracting attention or promotion, except as otherwise
expressly permitted in this title. Attention getting devices include banners, sails/feather signs, temporary on-premises pole signs, and the like. Federal,
State, or local flags, or flags of fraternal, religious, and civic organizations, banners, and temporary holiday decorations are not considered attention getting
devices.
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE: EXAMPLES
Sail/Feather Sign
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 469/524
Temporary Pole Sign
Wall-Mounted Banner
Ground-Mounted Banner
AWNING/AWNING SIGN: An awning is a roof-like cover designed for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, which projects from a
wall or roof of a structure over a window, walkway, or door, with no supports that extend to the ground. An awning sign is a sign printed or displayed upon
an awning.
AWNING SIGN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 470/524
BALLOON SIGN: A sign or advertising device designed to be airborne or inflated and tethered to the ground or other structure. This includes any airinflated
signs and any signs that inflate and move via air inflation.
BANNER: A temporary sign printed upon flexible material mounted with or without rigid frames on a building or the ground.
BLADE (PROJECTING) SIGN: A sign that is attached to a rigid structure that extends more than eighteen inches (18") beyond the surface of the structure
to which it is attached. A marquee sign is not considered a blade sign.
BLADE (PROJECTING) SIGN
CANOPY: A roof-like cover designed for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment affixed to a building, or which is freestanding, and
with supports that extend to the ground. A canopy may be one (1) of the following types:
Canopy - Non-Structural: A roofed structure attached to a building, which is not integral to the structure, that is made of durable, weather-resistant
material such as canvas, canvas-like material, nylon, or vinyl-coated fabric, placed to extend outward from the building and supported both by mountings
on the structure wall and by supports that extend to the ground.
CANOPY - NON-STRUCTURAL
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 471/524
Canopy - Structural: A roofed structure constructed of permanent building materials, such as metal, brick, stone, wood or similar building materials,
that is constructed as part of and attached to a building, and extends outward from the building and supported both by the structure and by supports
that extend to the ground. Certain structural canopies may also be constructed freestanding accessory structures on the same lot with the principal
use and/or structure.
CANOPY - STRUCTURAL
CANOPY SIGN: A sign printed, mounted, or installed upon a canopy.
CHANGEABLE MESSAGE BOARD SIGN: A sign designed where a portion of the sign area allows for a message to be changed manually. A changeable
message board sign does not include electronic message signs or portable reader-board sign.
CHANGEABLE MESSAGE BOARD SIGN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 472/524
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN: A sign designed where a portion of the sign area uses changing light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or
other illumination devices within the electronic display panel(s) to form a message or messages in text and/or image from where the sequence of
messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. Time/temperature signs are not considered
electronic message signs. Flashing signs, animated signs, and video display signs are not considered electronic message signs.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Illumination by an artificial source of light not internal to the sign face.
FLAG: Flags of any nation, state, municipality, or political subdivision, flags officially designated as a national, state, or local symbol, or flags of fraternal,
religious, and civic organizations. Pennants and sails are not considered flags.
FLASHING SIGN: A sign with an intermittent or sequential flashing light source used primarily to attract attention. Flashing signs do not include electronic
message signs.
FLOODLIGHT: A powerful light, typically in a grouping of several lights, used to illuminate the exterior of a building or sign.
GROUND SIGN: A sign that is placed on or supported by the ground, independent of the principal structure on the lot, designed with a monument base
that is an integral part of the sign structure. A ground sign must be designed so that the width of the top of the sign face is a minimum of seventy percent
(70%) and a maximum of one hundred thirty percent (130%) of the width of the base, unless designed with decorative posts as permitted by the ground
sign regulations of this title. The following types of ground signs are regulated by this title:
GROUND SIGN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 473/524
Ground Sign - Multi-Tenant Retail Center: A ground sign used to identify a commercial development with two (2) or more tenants.
Ground Sign - Residential Subdivision: A ground sign used to identify a residential subdivision.
Ground Sign - Standard: A ground sign that identifies an establishment that is not specifically categorized as a residential subdivision ground sign or
a multi-tenant retail center ground sign.
LIGHT POLE BANNER: Banners mounted on and with arms installed perpendicular to light poles.
LIGHT POLE BANNER
MARQUEE: A permanent roof-like structure constructed of permanent building materials that extends from the wall of a structure with no supports
extending to the ground providing protection from the elements.
MARQUEE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 474/524
MARQUEE SIGN: A sign that is a part of or attached to a marquee. Where designed as a changeable message sign, the changeable message portion
may be manually changed or electronically changed when permitted by this title.
MENUBOARD: A sign constructed as part of drive-through facilities.
MENUBOARD
MOVING SIGN: A sign where the entire sign structure or a portion of which rotates, moves, elevates, or in any way alters position or geometry. A tri-vision
sign where triangular prisms rotate inside a frame to show a new message and/or information are considered moving signs. Moving signs do not include
clocks or barber poles.
MULTI-TENANT RETAIL CENTER: A commercial development under unified control consisting of two (2) or more separate commercial establishments
sharing a common building, or which are in separate buildings that share a common access/entranceway or parking area.
NEON: A source of light for externally lit street signs supplied by a neon tube that is bent to form letters, symbols, or other shapes.
NITS: A luminance unit equal to one (1) candle per square meter measured perpendicular to the rays from the source.
NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE: The expression of noncommercial ideas and messages. A noncommercial message does not direct attention to a
business, product, service, commercial entertainment, or other commercial activity offered on or off the premises.
OFF-PREMISES COMMERCIAL SIGN - PERMANENT: A permanent sign directing attention to a specific business, product, service, entertainment event,
activity, or other commercial activity that is not sold, produced, manufactured, furnished, or conducted at the property upon which the sign is located. Also
called a billboard.
OFF-PREMISES COMMERCIAL SIGN - TEMPORARY: A temporary sign directing attention to a specific business, product, service, entertainment event,
activity, or other commercial activity that is not sold, produced, manufactured, furnished, or conducted at the property upon which the sign is located. This
includes any ground-mounted, building-mounted, or sign painted, pasted, or otherwise affixed to any tree, rock, fence, utility pole, hydrant, bridge,
sidewalk, parkway, curb or street, bench, or trash receptacle that directs attention off-premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 475/524
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PYLON SIGN: A type of ground sign that is affixed, attached, or erected on one (1) or more poles, uprights, or braces from the ground and not supported
by a building or a base structure. Pylon signs are any ground signs that do not meet the design and construction standards of this title for a ground sign.
Pylon signs do not include permitted attention getting devices, such as temporary pole signs, ground-mounted banners, or other freestanding signs
specifically allowed by this title.
PYLON SIGN
PORTABLE READER-BOARD SIGN: A sign whose principal supporting structure is intended, by design and construction, to rest upon the ground for
support and may be easily moved or relocated for reuse. Portable reader-board signs include, but are not limited to, signs mounted upon a trailer, wheeled
carrier, or other non-motorized mobile structure, with wheels or with wheels removed. Portable reader-board signs do not include A-frame signs.
PUBLIC INFORMATION/EVENT SIGN: Temporary signs that provide information on a public event or provide public information that contains no
commercial advertising except for sponsor names and logos.
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION: A residential neighborhood developed as an integrated whole and typically with a specific identity.
ROOF SIGN: A sign that is erected, constructed, or maintained on and/or extending above the roof structure or parapet of any building with the principal
support attached to the roof structure.
ROOF SIGN
SAFETY GLASS: Glass designed to prevent splintering when broken, such as toughened/tempered glass, laminated glass, and wire mesh glass.
SEARCHLIGHT: An attention-getting device where an artificial light of high intensity is shined upward in a focused beam and can turn in any direction to
attract attention to a location. Also known as sky-beams or sky spotlights.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 476/524
SIGN: A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, or illuminated visual display designed to identify, announce, direct, or inform that is visible from a public
right-of-way.
SIGN COPY: The elements of a sign that communicate the message including, but not limited to, words, logos, designs, figures, or other symbols that
relay the subject matter or message.
SUSPENDED SIGN: A sign suspended from the underside of the horizontal plane surface of an awning, canopy, cantilever, marquee, arcade or gallery.
Under-awning signs are distinct from blade signs, which are attached to the structure.
SUSPENDED SIGN
VIDEO DISPLAY SIGN: A sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an electronic video, whether pre-recorded or streaming.
WALL SIGN: A sign that is attached directly to an exterior wall of a building or dependent upon a building for support and projects eighteen inches (18") or
less from the wall of a structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane substantially parallel to the face of the wall. Window signs are not considered
wall signs.
WALL SIGN
WINDOW SIGN: A sign that is attached to, placed upon, or printed on the interior or exterior of a window or door of a building, or displayed on the interior
within two feet (2') of a window intended for viewing from the exterior of such a building. A window sign may be either permanent or temporary. Shadowbox
design within display windows, where the window display is designed with a background enclosure against which signs are mounted that blocks view into
the establishment, is considered a window sign and the entire area of the shadowbox is subject to the maximum sign area limitation.
WINDOW SIGN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 477/524
(Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-3: ADMINISTRATOR:
This title is administered and interpreted by the Village Manager in accordance with section 1-6A-9 of this Code. The Village Manager may direct
administrative powers of this title to a designee. A decision on the applicability of this title may only be rendered once. (Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-4: SIGN PERMIT:
No sign, unless specifically identified as exempt by this title, may be erected, constructed, altered, or relocated without first obtaining approval of a sign
permit in accordance with the following:
A. Authority: The Village Manager issues sign permits.
B. Application: A complete application for a sign permit is required. The application must be made on a form prepared by the Village, and be accompanied
by all required submittals, unless waived by the Village Manager.
C. Process: Upon the filing of a complete application for a sign permit, the Village Manager will examine the plans and specifications for the proposed sign
and will issue a sign permit if the plans comply with the requirements of this title and other applicable Village codes and ordinances.
D. Fees: All fees must be paid to receive a permit. No permit will be issued without full payment of required fees. Applicable fees are listed in this Code.
E. Expiration: If the work authorized under a sign permit is not completed within one (1) year of issuance of the permit, unless the Village Manager has
allowed a longer time period of validity at the issuance of the sign permit, the sign permit expires and becomes null and void. (Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-
2017)
12-1-5: MODIFICATIONS AND VARIANCES:
No sign may be erected, constructed, altered, or relocated that does not comply with the regulations of this title unless a modification or variance is applied
for and approved in accordance with this section.
A. Authority: A sign variance may be authorized after a review by and recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission is forwarded to the
Village Board, who will make a final decision on an application. However, certain administrative modifications may be approved by the Village Manager.
B. Definition And Applicability Of Administrative Modifications And Sign Variances:
1. A sign variance may only be approved by the Village Board. An administrative modification may be approved by the Village Manager. Applications
eligible for an administrative modification are defined in this section.
2. Administrative modifications that may be approved by the Village Manager are limited to the following:
a. A modification to the maximum sign area or maximum sign height of no more than ten percent (10%).
b. Reduction in the required sign setback of no more than one foot (1').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 478/524
c. Modifications or additions to the permitted sign materials.
d. Modifications to the required sign landscape area and landscape materials.
3. All other requests that are not administrative modifications are sign variances, where the Planning and Zoning Commission makes a
recommendation and the Village Board makes a final decision.
C. Process: All applications for an administrative modification or sign variance must be filed with the Village Manager as part of a complete sign permit
application. Once it is determined that the application is complete, the Village Manager will forward a copy of the application to the Planning and Zoning
Commission in the case of a sign variance or process the application himself/herself in the case of an administrative modification.
1. Administrative Modification:
a. The Village Manager will approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested administrative modification. The Village Manager's decision
must be based on evaluation of the application pursuant to the approval standards of subsection D of this section.
b. The Village Manager may also, at his/her discretion, determine that, because of its nature, a proposed administrative modification application,
even if it meets the criteria of subsection B of this section, must be resubmitted in accordance with the procedures for a sign variance in subsection
C2 of this section with no additional fee.
c. If the Village Manager denies the application for an administrative modification, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Planning and Zoning
Commission by resubmitting the application as a sign variance. No new fees for the sign variance are required. Appeals must be filed within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the Village Manager's decision.
2. Sign Variance:
a. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning and Zoning Commission will review the application and forward its recommendation to the
Village Board.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation and the Village Board's decision must be based on evaluation of the application pursuant
to the approval standards of subsection D of this section.
c. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Village Board may impose additional conditions and restrictions upon the location
and construction of the sign as necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
d. The Village Board will consider the sign variance after receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation. The Village Board will
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the sign variance.
D. Approval Standards: Approval of an administrative modification or sign variance must be based on the evaluation of the request pursuant to the
following approval standards:
1. The proposed sign is compatible with the character of the surrounding area.
2. The proposed sign is not detrimental to the development of the surrounding area.
3. The proposed sign is not detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.
E. Expiration:
1. The sign variance or administrative modification is considered part of the sign permit and is subject to the expiration provisions for the sign permit.
2. A sign variance or administrative modification is issued for the specific sign on the specific site indicated on the sign permit. Once such sign is
removed or replaced, the sign variance or administrative modification is null and void. (Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-6: SIGN DIMENSION MEASUREMENT:
A. Calculation Of Sign Area:
1. The sign area of each sign is the total exposed surface devoted to the sign's message, including all ornamentation, embellishment, symbols, logos,
letters, characters, other figures, or frames, whether structural or decorative. The calculation of sign area does not include any supports or bracing.
For channel letters or freestanding logos/symbols, the sign area is calculated as the customary, applicable mathematical formula for the total area of
each square, circle, ellipse, rectangle, or triangle, or combination thereof, that encompasses each individual letter, logo, background or display.
SIGN AREA
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 479/524
2. Window area for the purpose of calculating maximum area of window signs is calculated as a continuous surface until divided by an architectural or
structural element. Mullions are not considered an element that divides window area. Only the individual letters or logos of the window sign shall be
used in the calculation of surface area. The transparent film around the perimeter of the individual letters or logos comprising the window sign and
used to affix the window sign to the interior or exterior of a windowpane or glass door shall be exempt from the area calculations, provided that such
portion of the transparent film maintains one hundred percent (100%) transparency of the window.
WINDOW SIGN AREA
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 480/524
3. The sign area of a free-form, sculptural (non-planar) sign is calculated as fifty percent (50%) of the sum of the area of the four (4) vertical sides of the
smallest three-dimensional regular shape that will encompass the sign.
FREE-FORM, SCULPTURAL (NON-PLANAR) SIGN AREA
B. Measurement Of Sign Height: For ground signs, sign height is measured as the vertical distance measured from the normal grade at the base of the
sign to the highest point of the sign, including any decorative elements. Normal grade shall be construed to be the existing grade prior to construction
or the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any fill, berm, mound, or excavation solely for the purpose of locating the sign, whichever
is lower.
SIGN HEIGHT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 481/524
C. Measurement Of Vertical Clearance: For building-mounted signs, vertical clearance is measured as the vertical distance measured from the ground
directly below the sign to the lowest point of the sign.
VERTICAL CLEARANCE
D. Determination Of Number Of Sign Faces: If the interior angle between two (2) sign faces is forty five degrees (45°) or less, the sign area is computed as
the area of one (1) face only. If the angle between two (2) sign faces is greater than forty five degrees (45°), the total sign area is computed as the sum
of the areas of the two (2) faces.
SIGN FACE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 482/524
E. Sign Setback: A required sign setback is measured from the applicable lot line to the closest point of the sign.
SIGN SETBACK
(Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-7: GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS:
All signs constructed, erected, modified, or altered must comply with the following standards.
A. Prohibited Installations:
1. No sign may be erected in a location that violates the building code, Fire Code, and other applicable Village codes or ordinances.
2. No sign may obstruct the sight triangle, as described in section 9-24-2 of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 483/524
3. Only signs that have been placed by or authorized by Federal, State, or the Village may be installed on public property. Any sign installed on public
property including rights-of-way without prior authorization may be removed by the Village without notice.
4. No permanent sign may be erected on private property without the consent of the property owner or his/her authorized agent. When a sign permit
applicant proposes to install a sign on property not owned by the applicant, written permission from the property owner or his/her authorized agent
must be submitted as part of the sign permit application.
5. No sign may be erected in a manner that obstructs access to any ingress or egress as provided for in section 9-24-1 of this Code, fire escapes, or
standpipes or similar fire safety connections.
B. Construction Standards:
1. Supports and braces must be designed as an integral part of the overall sign and obscured from public view to the extent technically feasible.
2. All signs attached to a building must be installed and maintained so that wall penetrations are watertight and the structure does not exceed allowable
stresses of supporting materials. To the greatest extent feasible, such penetrations should be located at joints of masonry units, or at locations of
structural members of wood or other like constructed facades.
3. All signs must be designed and constructed in compliance with the building code, Electrical Code, and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
4. All permanent signs must be constructed of rigid, weather-proof materials, as determined by the Village Manager.
5. No sign may be painted on a wall or any other structure.
6. Glass comprising any part of a sign must be safety glass.
7. All letters, figures, characters, or representations in cut-out or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any
sign must be safely and securely built into or attached to the sign structure.
8. Audio components are prohibited on any sign, with the exception of menuboards. For menuboards, the audio component is limited to communication
between the customer and service window.
C. Electrical Wiring:
1. All electrical fixtures, devices, circuits, conduits, raceways, or similar features must be installed and maintained in compliance with the current Village
Electrical Code.
2. Conduits and other components of a sign illumination system must be designed as an integral part of the overall sign structure and obscured from
public view to the extent technically feasible.
D. Required Maintenance:
1. All signs must be kept in a safe and well-maintained condition and appearance, and must be repainted or otherwise maintained by the property
owner or business owner to prevent corrosion or deterioration caused by the weather, age, or any other condition.
2. All signs must be maintained to prevent any kind of safety hazard, including faulty or deteriorated sign structures, a fire hazard, or an electrical shock
hazard.
3. All unused sign hardware or wiring must be removed. The Village Manager will serve written notice to the permit holder and property owner that
unused sign hardware or wiring must be removed within thirty (30) days of written notice for permanent signs or twenty four (24) hours for temporary
signs. If the unused sign hardware or wiring is not removed within the required time period, the Village Manager may enforce this order through
permitted enforcement procedures.
4. If a sign is maintained in an unsafe or unsecured condition, it must be removed or the condition corrected. The Village Manager will serve written
notice to the permit holder and property owner that the sign must be removed or the condition corrected within thirty (30) days of written notice for
permanent signs or twenty four (24) hours for temporary signs. If the sign is not removed or the condition is not corrected within the required time
period, the Village Manager may enforce this order through permitted enforcement procedures.
5. The Village may remove any sign that is an immediate public peril to persons or property summarily and without notice.
E. Illumination Standards:
1. Any sign illumination, including gooseneck reflectors, external illumination, and internal illumination, must be designed, located, shielded, and
directed to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon roadways and surrounding properties, and prevent the distraction of motor vehicle
operators or pedestrians in the public right-of-way.
2. The sign face of internally illuminated signs must function as a filter to diffuse illumination. The sign face must cover all internal illumination
components so that no exposed bulbs are visible.
3. All external illumination of a sign must concentrate the illumination upon the printed area of the sign face.
4. No sign illumination may be combined with reflective materials, such as mirrors, polished metal, or highly-glazed tiles, which would increase glare.
5. The use of neon or LED lighting as a sign accent is permitted only in the business, office, and industrial districts and only for window signs. When lit,
lighting must be continuously illuminated. Flashing neon or LED lighting is prohibited.
6. Neon or LED lighting to outline doors, windows, architectural features, and building facades is prohibited.
7. For all signs with the exception of electronic message signs, the maximum allowable foot-candle at the lot line is one (1) foot-candle unless such
signs are allowed to extend over the lot line, where the maximum of one (1) foot-candle is measured at the back of curb or edge of pavement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 484/524
8. For electronic message signs, the maximum brightness is limited to five thousand (5,000) nits when measured from the sign's face at its maximum
brightness, during daylight hours, and five hundred (500) nits when measured from the sign's face at its maximum brightness between dusk and
dawn, i.e., the time of day between sunrise and sunset. The sign must have an ambient light meter and automatic or manual dimmer control that
produces a distinct illumination change from a higher allowed illumination level to a lower allowed level for the time period between one-half (1/2)
hour before sunset and one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise. (Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-8: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
All signs not expressly permitted by this title are prohibited. In addition, the following sign types are specifically prohibited:
A. Banners used as permanent signs, including banners wrapped around a permanent sign structure, such as a ground sign, blade sign, or wall sign.
B. Balloon signs, including air-infused/air-inflated signs.
C. Home occupations signs within residential districts.
D. Flashing or animation.
E. Moving signs including any sign that rotates, revolves, or has any visible moving part. Any sign that gives the appearance of movement, including signs
designed to be moved by wind or other natural elements. This excludes clocks and barber poles.
F. Obscene sign. A sign that is found to meet the established criteria of obscenity: 1) prurient in nature; 2) completely devoid of scientific, political,
educational, or social value; and 3) a violation of local community standards.
G. Obsolete copy and obsolete signs. For any sign that becomes obsolete after the effective date of this title, all obsolete copy must be removed within
thirty (30) days of the discontinuance of the activity that is the subject of such copy. Compliance with the requirement to remove obsolete copy is not
satisfied by reversing (i.e., turning such copy so that it faces inward), rotating, altering, covering, or otherwise hiding or obfuscating such copy. In the
case of obsolete copy upon panels within a sign frame, such panels must be removed and replaced with a blank panel or panel with lawfully approved
copy. No sign frame may remain unfilled or allow any internal part or element of the sign structure to be visible.
H. Off-premises commercial signs - permanent. Also known as billboards.
I. Off-premises commercial signs - temporary.
J. Outlining of windows, doors, or architectural features with LED, neon, or any type of lighting.
K. Pennants and streamers.
L. Pylon signs.
M. Portable reader-board signs.
N. Roof signs.
O. Strobe lights, moving or fixed spotlights, floodlights/searchlights.
P. Signs that constitute a traffic hazard, including signs that:
1. Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or may be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device because of its position, shape, or color,
including signs illuminated in red, green, or amber color to resemble a traffic signal.
2. Make use of the words STOP, LOOK, DETOUR, DANGER, CAUTION, WARNING, or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner that
misleads, interferes with, or confuses traffic.
Q. Vehicle signs on unlicensed, uninsured, or inoperable vehicles that are placed on the vehicle for the primary purpose of attracting attention to an
occupant's presence within a building at which the vehicle is being parked. This prohibition does not include signs painted on or applied to vehicles,
trucks, or buses that are being operated and stored in the normal course of business, such as signs located on delivery trucks, moving vans, and rental
trucks, provided that the primary purpose of such vehicles is not the display of such sign, and that they are parked or stored in areas related to their
use as vehicles and all such vehicles are in operable condition. Vehicle for-sale signs are exempt from this provision.
R. Video display signs (electronic). (Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 485/524
12-1-9: EXEMPT SIGNS - NO PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Exempt Alteration And Maintenance On Existing Signs: The following activities are exempt from requiring a sign permit:
1. Painting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign, not involving structural changes, or changes in the electrical components of the
sign, including the removal and replacement of electrical components. Any activity that increases the sign area, sign height, or any sign dimension,
or moves the location of a sign, requires a sign permit. The changing of a sign face is not exempt from a sign permit.
2. Changing the copy of a changeable message sign or electronic message sign.
B. Exempt Ancillary Signs:
1. Signs not visible from any public right-of-way up to thirty two (32) square feet in sign area.
2. Logos and labels located on mechanical equipment, recycling bins, trash containers, and the like, which are part of the equipment as manufactured
and/or installed, are exempt.
3. A maximum of one (1) sign mounted on each gas station pump island is permitted and is limited to 1.5 square feet in sign area. Such signs must be
oriented to face the vehicle fueling.
4. Signs identifying only the address and name of a building or the name of an occupant thereof. A maximum of one (1) such sign is allowed per street
frontage or primary building entry, whichever is greater. Signs must be wall-mounted and no more than two (2) square feet in area, unless authorized
by the Village.
C. Exempt Permanent And Temporary Signs:
1. A-Frame Sign:
a. A-frame signs are permitted in the business districts and the O-1 and O-2 Districts.
b. One (1) A-frame sign is permitted per establishment, including one (1) for each tenant in a multi-tenant development. A minimum fifteen foot (15')
separation is required between all A-frame signs.
c. An A-frame sign must be placed within fifteen feet (15') of the primary entrance of the business, and must not interfere with pedestrian traffic or
violate standards of accessibility as required by the ADA or other accessibility codes. A-frame signs may be placed in the public right-of-way
concurrent with the lot of the establishment being advertised, but must maintain a five foot (5') sidewalk clearance at all times.
d. A-frame signs are limited to six (6) square feet in area per side and four feet (4') in height.
e. The placement of A-frame signs outdoors is limited to business hours only. A-frame signs must be stored indoors at all other times.
f. A-frame signs must not be used outdoors when high winds, heavy rain, or snow conditions exist.
g. Illumination of A-frame signs is prohibited.
h. No A-frame sign may have any type of electronic component.
A-FRAME SIGN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 486/524
2. Construction Activity Sign: On a lot where active construction is taking place, a temporary sign is permitted in conjunction with such construction and
may identify the proposed use for the property even if such use is not yet established, subject to the following:
a. Construction activity signs are permitted in all districts on all sites with active construction projects.
b. Construction activity signs may be installed only after approval of a building permit for such activity. Construction activity signs must be removed
as follows:
(1) For additions, alterations, or repairs to an existing structure: Sixty (60) days or when the building permit expires, whichever occurs first.
(2) For new construction: once construction is complete or the building permit expires, whichever occurs first.
c. Construction activity signs may be constructed as either freestanding signs, wall signs, or installed on accessory structures such as fences, and
subject to the following:
(1) Signs are limited to sixteen (16) square feet in area for construction sites for individual single-family or two-family dwellings, and for any site of
less than one (1) acre in lot area. Signs are limited to thirty two (32) square feet in area for all other construction sites.
(2) Freestanding signs are limited to seven feet (7') in height and must be located five feet (5') from any lot line.
(3) Signs may not be illuminated.
3. Flags: Flags are permitted in any district.
a. Flags may be freestanding or wall-mounted.
b. Flagpoles are limited to the maximum number of three (3) poles and a maximum height of thirty feet (30').
c. Flagpoles must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any lot line.
d. Wall-mounted flags may not extend over the public right-of-way.
e. External illumination of flags is permitted but must be focused on the flagpole and flag.
f. All flags must be maintained in good condition.
4. Government Sign: Federal, State, or local governments or taxing bodies may install signs in the public interest in any number, configuration, or size
in any district. Such signs may be illuminated as required by the agency. Any electronic message signs require Village approval, with the exception of
temporary roadway work, utility work, or emergency information signs.
5. Holiday Decorations: Decorations on private property clearly incidental and customary, and commonly associated with, national, local, or religious
holidays, are allowed but are limited to a maximum display period of forty five (45) days for each holiday.
6. Light Pole Banner: Light pole banners on private property are allowed as follows:
a. Light pole banners are permitted for light poles on private property and must be mounted so that they are held taut between support posts.
b. Light pole banners are limited to a maximum area of fifteen (15) square feet.
c. Light pole banners must be mounted to project perpendicular from light poles.
d. Light pole banners must not be used as a temporary off-premises sign.
LIGHT POLE BANNER
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 487/524
7. Memorial Signs: To memorialize a historic person, event, structure, or site, a sign is permitted as follows:
a. Memorial signs are permitted in any district.
b. Memorial signs may be constructed as either freestanding or wall signs, subject to the following:
(1) Memorial signs are limited to four (4) square feet.
(2) Freestanding signs are limited to four feet (4') in height and must be located five feet (5') from any lot line.
(3) Wall mounted signs shall be inlaid so as to be an integral part of the structure, cut into stone or masonry, or be a permanently affixed plaque of
bronze or aluminum.
(4) Signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
c. Memorial signs are limited to one (1) per street frontage.
8. Multiple Tenant Building Entryway Sign: Multiple tenant buildings, such as townhouse dwellings, multi-family dwellings, and non-residential
developments with multiple tenants, are permitted an additional building entryway sign subject to the following:
a. Multiple tenant building entryway signs may be constructed as either freestanding or wall signs, subject to the following:
(1) Signs are limited to six (6) square feet in area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 488/524
(2) Freestanding signs are limited to five feet (5') in height, and must be located within five feet (5') of the building entry and no less than five feet
(5') from any lot line. Freestanding building entryway signs must be installed so that they are primarily viewable from the building entryway and
not intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way.
(3) Signs may only be internally illuminated.
b. Multiple tenant building entryway signs are limited to one (1) per building entry.
9. Noncommercial Message Sign: Signs used for the expression of noncommercial ideas and messages, which include but are not limited to signs
advocating a public issue, recommending a candidate for public office, alerts, or warnings, are permitted in all districts.
a. Noncommercial message signs may be constructed as either freestanding, wall, or window signs. There is no limit on the number of signs
permitted.
b. Freestanding and wall-mounted noncommercial message signs in residential districts are limited to sixteen (16) square feet in area.
Noncommercial message signs in all other districts are limited to thirty two (32) square feet in area.
c. Window-mounted noncommercial message signs must meet the coverage limitations of window signs. If no coverage is specified, the limitation is
thirty percent (30%) of the window area.
d. Freestanding noncommercial message signs must be located five feet (5') from any lot line.
e. Noncommercial message signs posted on private property must have the permission of the property owner.
f. Noncommercial message signs may not be illuminated.
g. Noncommercial message signs cannot be used as a temporary off-premises sign.
10. Not-For-Profit Community Event Signs:
a. Not-for-profit community events are permitted temporary signs. Signs allowed for not-for-profit community events cannot be used as temporary offpremises
signs, which are prohibited, that direct attention to a for-profit commercial activity.
b. When located on private property, permission from the property owner is required. When located on public property, permission from the Village or
other applicable authority is required.
c. Signs for not-for-profit community events are limited to six (6) square feet in area.
d. Signs for not-for-profit community event are limited to the following display periods:
(1) When the sign for not-for-profit community event advertises an event that has a specific start and end time: a total display period of thirty (30)
days prior to the start of the event, the time period of the event, and three (3) days following the end of the event.
(2) All other attention-getting device advertises (non-time specific): Thirty (30) days.
11. Parking Lots And Structures; Additional Signs: Parking lots and structures are permitted additional signs, whether such parking lots or structures
are a principal or ancillary use.
a. An additional sign is permitted at each entrance/exit, driveway intersection, drive-through lane, and other circulation points.
b. Signs are limited to four (4) square feet in area.
c. A freestanding sign is limited to six feet (6') in height and must be five feet (5') from any lot line that abuts a street.
d. Signs located at an entrance/exit, driveway intersection, drive-through lane, and other circulation points may be internally or externally illuminated.
12. Real Estate Activity Sign: When a structure or lot is offered for sale, lease, or rent, such lot is permitted an additional temporary sign as follows:
a. Real estate activity signs are permitted in all districts. Real estate signs must be located on the site of the property for sale, lease, or rent.
b. Real estate signs are limited to one (1) per street frontage.
c. Real estate activity signs may be constructed as either freestanding, wall, or window signs.
d. Real estate activity signs are limited to sixteen (16) square feet in residential districts and thirty two (32) square feet in all other districts.
e. Freestanding signs are limited to five feet (5') in height and must be located within five feet (5') from any lot line.
f. Real estate activity signs may not be illuminated.
g. Real estate activity signs must be removed within five (5) days of final closing, lease, or rental. If such real estate signs are used in conjunction
with a promotional event related to the sale, lease or rent, such signs may be installed forty eight (48) hours prior to event and must be removed
within twenty four (24) hours of the end of the event.
13. Window Sign:
a. Window signs are permitted for all non-residential uses in all districts.
b. All window signs, whether temporary or permanent, are limited to no more than thirty percent (30%) of the surface of each window area. Window
area is counted as a continuous surface until divided by an architectural or structural element. Mullions are not considered an element that divides
window area.
c. Up to five percent (5%) of window area may be illuminated, including any neon or LED sign, but this area is included in the maximum total area of
thirty percent (30%). Flashing or animation is prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 489/524
WINDOW SIGNS
(Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-10: SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED - PERMANENT AND TEMPORARY SIGNS:
This section describes the types of signs allowed with a sign permit. Specific regulations on each sign type may include further restrictions on which
districts and/or uses within a district may utilize these sign types.
A. Attention-Getting Device:
1. Attention-getting devices are permitted for non-residential uses in the non-residential districts.
2. Each establishment may have one (1) freestanding and one (1) wall-mounted attention-getting device installed or mounted simultaneously.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 490/524
3. Attention-getting devices are limited to the following display periods:
a. When the attention-getting device advertises an event that has a specific start and end time: a total display period of thirty (30) days prior to the
start of the event, the time period of the event, and three (3) days following the end of the event.
b. All other attention-getting device advertises (non-time specific): Thirty (30) days.
c. A maximum of four (4) display periods per year is permitted with a minimum of thirty (30) days between displays.
4. Attention-getting devices for multi-tenant sites are subject to the following rules:
a. The display period and separation period apply to each establishment individually rather than the site as a whole.
b. For multi-tenant sites, the property owner(s) and/or tenants must coordinate display of attention-getting devices among tenants.
5. Freestanding attention-getting devices are subject to the following:
a. One (1) freestanding attention-getting device is allowed for every seventy five feet (75') of street frontage. There must be a fifteen foot (15')
separation between freestanding attention-getting devices.
b. Freestanding attention-getting devices are limited to a maximum height of fifteen feet (15') and thirty two (32) square feet in area.
c. Freestanding attention-getting devices must be located a minimum of five feet (5') from a lot line, as measured from the outermost portion of the
sign. No part of a freestanding attention-getting device may extend over the lot line.
6. Wall-mounted attention-getting devices are limited to thirty two (32) square feet.
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 491/524
B. Awning Sign:
1. Awning signs are permitted for multi-family dwellings and non-residential uses in any district.
2. Awning signs must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet six inches (7'6").
3. Awning signs may encroach into the public right-of-way but must be located at least two feet (2') from the curb line.
4. Awning signs must be made of a durable, weather-resistant material such as canvas, canvas-like material, nylon, vinyl-coated fabric, or permanent
building material such as metal.
5. Sign copy on any awning sign surface is limited to twenty five percent (25%) of each surface area. A valance is considered a separate surface area.
6. Solid awnings are permitted lettering attached to and located above the top of the awning to a maximum height of twenty four inches (24").
7. Awning signs may be externally illuminated and lighting must be focused on the printed area.
8. Back-lit awnings are prohibited.
AWNING SIGN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 492/524
C. Blade Sign (Projecting Signs):
1. Blade signs are permitted for non-residential uses in the districts indicated in table 10-1, "Blade Signs", of this section. Table 10-1 of this section also
indicates permitted blade sign area maximums.
TABLE 10-1
BLADE SIGNS
District Maximum Area
R-1 Prohibited
R-2 Prohibited
R-3 Prohibited
R-4 Prohibited
R-5 Prohibited
R-6 Prohibited
B-1 16 square feet
B-2 24 square feet
B-3 32 square feet
O-1 16 square feet
O-2 24 square feet
O-3 32 square feet
I 32 square feet
OS Prohibited
IB 16 square feet
2. One (1) blade sign is permitted per establishment with frontage on a street. For a corner lot, one (1) blade sign is permitted for each street frontage.
3. Blade signs may encroach into the public right-of-way but must be located at least two feet (2') from the curb line.
4. Blade signs must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet six inches (7'6"). No blade sign affixed to a building may project higher than
the building height, including the sign support structure.
5. Blade signs must be constructed of wood or simulated wood, metal, durable, weather-resistant material like canvas, canvas-like material, nylon or
vinyl-coated fabric, plastic, or high-density urethane (HDU) foam board or similar durable foam construction. Blade signs constructed of canvas or
similar material must be mounted so that they are held taut between support posts.
6. Blade signs may be internally or externally illuminated. If externally illuminated, all lighting must be directed onto the sign face from above.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 493/524
BLADE SIGN
D. Canopy Sign: Canopy signs are divided into the following types: non-structural and structural.
1. Non-Structural Canopy Signs:
a. Non-structural canopy signs are permitted for multi-family dwellings and non-residential uses in all districts.
b. Non-structural canopy signs must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet six inches (7'6").
c. Non-structural canopy signs may encroach into the public right-of-way but must be located at least two feet (2') from the curb line. Support posts
must maintain a minimum separation of five feet (5') between posts and five feet (5') between the posts and any building wall.
d. Non-structural canopy signs must be made of a durable, weather-resistant material such as canvas, canvas-like material, nylon, or vinyl-coated
fabric.
e. Sign copy on any canopy sign surface is limited to twenty five percent (25%) of each surface area.
f. Non-structural canopy signs may be externally illuminated and lighting must be focused on the printed area.
g. Back-lit canopies are prohibited.
NON-STRUCTURAL CANOPY SIGN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 494/524
2. Structural Canopy Signs:
a. Structural canopy signs are permitted as follows:
(1) Structural canopy signs attached to the principal structure are permitted for multi-family dwellings. Freestanding structural canopy signs are
prohibited.
(2) Structural canopy signs attached to the principal structure are permitted for non-residential uses. Freestanding structural canopy signs are
prohibited.
(3) Freestanding structural canopy signs are permitted for non-residential uses in the B-3 and I Districts.
b. Structural canopy signs attached to the principal structure may encroach into the public right-of-way but must be located at least two feet (2') from
the curb line. Support posts must maintain a minimum separation of five feet (5') between posts and five feet (5') between the posts and any
building wall.
c. Freestanding structural canopy signs are subject to the setback requirements of the district where they are located or ten feet (10') from any lot
line, whichever is greater. Freestanding structural canopy signs are limited to a maximum height of twenty five feet (25').
d. All structural canopy signs attached to a building must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet six inches (7'6"). Freestanding
structural canopy signs must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen feet (15').
e. For structural canopies attached to a building, sign copy is limited to twenty five percent (25%) of each surface area. Such signs are permitted
lettering attached to and located above the top of a structural canopy to a maximum height of twenty four inches (24").
f. For freestanding structural canopies, sign copy is limited to a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the area of each facade. No sign may be
mounted above the top of the roof of the structural canopy, but a sign mounted on the structural canopy facade may extend a maximum of twelve
inches (12") above the roofline.
g. Structural canopy signs must be made of permanent building material, such as metal, brick, stucco, or concrete.
h. Structural canopy signs may be internally or externally illuminated. If externally illuminated, the lighting must be focused on the sign. In addition,
freestanding structural canopies for gas stations are permitted an illuminated band along each facade of the canopy. The illuminated band is
limited to twenty percent (20%) of the overall height of the facade of the canopy.
STRUCTURAL CANOPY SIGN (BUILDING-MOUNTED)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 495/524
STRUCTURAL CANOPY SIGN (FREESTANDING)
E. Electronic Message Sign:
1. Electronic message signs are permitted in commercial districts abutting the Route 12 and Route 22 roadways and the IB District on sites that are a
minimum of one (1) acre in size. The following exception applies:
a. Motor vehicle service stations in any district are permitted an electronic message sign to display copy graphic that is required to be displayed by
law, such as fuel prices. Only motor vehicle service stations located in commercial districts abutting the Route 12 and Route 22 roadways are
permitted an additional electronic message sign, however the total sign area of the electronic message signs, including copy required by law,
cannot exceed that permitted by this section.
2. Electronic message signs are permitted as part of a ground sign - standard, ground sign - multi-tenant retail center, wall sign, or marquee sign and
are subject to the requirements for those sign types within that district.
3. Electronic message signs must be a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the lot line of any residential district. This is measured from sign face to
the residential lot line, including any public right-of-way.
4. Electronic message signs must be integrated into the larger sign structure. The electronic component is limited to a maximum of seventy percent
(70%) of the total area of a sign.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 496/524
5. Only one (1) electronic message sign per lot is permitted. For the purposes of this regulation, a multi-tenant development where the development as
a whole is comprised of separate lots of record, the entire development, including outlot parcels and inline development, is considered one (1) lot.
6. Each message or image displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of four (4) seconds. Multi-color messages and static
images are permitted. Any change in an electronic message must be instantaneous, without scrolling, fading in, dropping in, or similar moving copy
changes.
7. Electronic message signs cannot operate as a commercial off-premises sign, that is to direct attention to a specific business, product, service,
entertainment event or activity, or other commercial activity that is not sold, produced, manufactured, furnished, or conducted at the property upon
which the sign is located.
8. Electronic message signs must display static text messages only, with no animation or effects simulating animation or video. Any scrolling, flashing,
spinning, revolving, or shaking animation, or movement of the message or any component of the sign is prohibited. Any message change sequence
must be accomplished immediately by changing from one (1) screen to another without transition by means of, for example, fade or dissolve mode.
Video display screens are prohibited.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN
F. Ground Sign:
1. Ground Sign Types: Ground signs are regulated as the following types in this title:
a. Ground signs - standard are permitted for multi-family dwellings and non-residential uses in any district.
b. Ground signs - multi-tenant retail center are permitted for multi-tenant retail centers in any district.
c. Ground signs - residential subdivision are permitted for residential subdivisions in any district.
2. General Ground Sign Regulations: The following regulations apply to all ground signs:
a. When the ground sign is designed with the base of the ground sign structure installed at grade, the monument base must be designed as an
integral part of the sign structure. The width of the top of the sign face must be a minimum of seventy percent (70%) and a maximum of one
hundred thirty percent (130%) of the width of the base.
b. In order to create flexibility for ground signs installed where the ground is not level, structural (non-decorative) posts may extend out of the ground
but are limited to a maximum of six inches (6") above the adjacent ground where they are installed.
c. A ground sign may be designed with decorative posts that are part of the overall sign structure and sign design, and such decorative posts may
extend out of the ground for a maximum of two feet (2') above the adjacent ground where they are installed.
d. Ground signs must be set back five feet (5') from any lot line. No ground sign may project into, over, or otherwise encroach on a public right-ofway.
e. Ground signs may be internally or externally illuminated. If externally illuminated, all light must be directed onto the sign face.
f. Ground signs must be constructed of brick, wood or simulated wood, stone, concrete, metal, plastic, or high-density urethane (HDU) foam board or
similar durable foam construction. The base on which a ground is principally supported should typically be constructed of masonry material.
GROUND MONUMENT SIGN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 497/524
3. Ground Signs - Standard: Ground signs - standard are subject to the following limitations on sign area, sign height, and sign number:
a. One (1) ground sign - standard is permitted per street frontage. When a lot has over one hundred fifty feet (150') of street frontage, an additional
ground sign is permitted for each additional access point to the lot along that frontage.
b. Ground sign - standard height and area are limited to the maximums indicated in table 10-2, "Ground Signs - Standard", of this section.
c. Any business or office district with frontage along Route 12 and IL Route 22 is permitted a ground sign that meets the standards of the B-3 District,
as shown in table 10-2 of this section.
TABLE 10-2
GROUND SIGNS - STANDARD
District Maximum Area
Maximum
Height
R-1 Prohibited -
R-2 Prohibited -
R-3 Prohibited -
R-4 Prohibited -
R-5 Prohibited -
R-6 Prohibited -
B-1 24 sq. ft. 12'
B-2 24 sq. ft. 12'
B-3 Less than 200' of lot frontage and less than 2 acres of lot area: 50 sq. ft.
200' or more of lot frontage and 2 acres or more of lot area: 120 sq. ft.
12'
O-1 24 sq. ft. 12'
O-2 24 sq. ft. 12'
O-3 50 sq. ft. 12'
I 36 sq. ft. 12'
OS 36 sq. ft. 12'
IB 50 sq. ft. 12'
4. Ground Signs - Multi-Tenant Retail Center: Ground signs - multi-tenant retail center are subject to the following sign area, sign height, and sign
number permissions:
a. One (1) ground sign - multi-tenant retail center is permitted per street frontage of a lot. An additional ground sign is permitted for each additional
access point to the lot, however a minimum separation of fifty feet (50') is required between ground signs. For the purposes of this regulation, a
multi-tenant development where the development as a whole is comprised of separate lots of record, the entire development, including outlot
parcels and inline development, is considered one (1) lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 498/524
b. Ground signs - multi-tenant retail center permissions are as follows:
(1) Maximum sign area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet of area per sign.
(2) Maximum sign height of twelve feet (12').
5. Ground Signs - Residential Subdivision: Ground signs - residential subdivision are subject to the following sign area, sign height, and sign number
permissions.
a. One (1) ground sign - residential subdivision is permitted for each access point to the development. A minimum separation of fifty feet (50') is
required between ground signs.
b. Ground signs - residential subdivision are permitted a maximum sign area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet per sign and a maximum sign
height of eight feet (8') per sign.
6. Ground Sign Landscaping: All ground signs must be landscaped at the base of the sign in accordance with the following:
a. Landscape must extend a minimum of two feet (2') from the sign base on all sides with small shrubs a minimum of eighteen inches (18") in height
at planting in a single row around the perimeter of the sign base. The remainder of the required landscape area must be planted with trees,
perennials, or other live groundcover.
b. If a ground monument sign is designed with a decorative base and such decorative base extends to the ground, the single row of shrubs around
the perimeter of the sign base is not required. Landscape must extend a minimum of two feet (2') from the sign base around a minimum of fifty
percent (50%) of the perimeter of the sign base, and must be planted with shrubs, trees, perennials, or other live groundcover.
c. If landscape is required on a site, ground sign landscape is included in the total amount of landscape required on a site. Where a sign is installed
in any landscape area of a site, the specific landscape requirements of this section do not apply and the sign landscape must be integrated into the
overall site landscape plan. Sign landscape must be shown on the landscape plan.
d. All landscape must be maintained in good condition, and free and clear of rubbish and weeds.
GROUND SIGN LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
(NON-DECORATIVE BASE)
GROUND SIGN LANDSCAP E REQUIREM ENTS
(DECORATIVE BASE)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 499/524
G. Marquee:
1. Marquees are permitted for commercial uses in B-3 District.
2. Marquees must be supported solely by the building to which they are attached. No exterior columns or posts are permitted as supports.
3. The roof of a marquee may not be used for any purpose other than to form and constitute a roof and must be constructed of noncombustible
material.
4. Water from the roofs of a marquee may not drain, drip, or flow onto the surface of a public right-of-way. Sufficient downspouts, drains, and gutters
must be installed as part of each marquee to prevent water from the roof of the marquee from flowing onto the surface of a public right-of-way.
5. Marquees must be erected over a building entrance and are limited to the width of the building entrance plus an additional five feet (5') on each side
of the entrance doors covered by the marquee.
6. All marquees must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet (8'), and the roof of the marquee structure must be erected below the second
floor windowsill, and must not conceal any significant architectural features or ornamentation of the building.
7. Marquees may encroach into the public right-of-way but must be located at least two feet (2') from the curb line.
8. Marquees are permitted lettering attached to and located above the roof of a marquee to a maximum height of forty eight inches (48").
9. Marquees are permitted an electronic message component if the district allows electronic message signs. Marquees are also permitted a
changeable message board as part of the marquee structure. However, the marquee may only have either a changeable message board sign or an
electronic message sign.
10. Marquees may be internally illuminated.
11. Marquees bare-bulb illumination outlining is prohibited.
MARQUEE SIGN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 500/524
H. Menuboard:
1. Menuboards are permitted for all drive-through facilities in any district.
2. Menuboards are limited to a maximum of two (2) per drive-through lane.
3. Menuboards are limited to seventy five (75) square feet in sign area and eight feet (8') in height. The menuboard may be designed as separate
freestanding signs grouped together and may include the use of preview boards designed as separate freestanding signs installed a distance earlier
in the drive-through lane, however the total area of all signs must not exceed seventy five (75) square feet.
4. Menuboards are permitted an additional ten (10) square feet of sign area for temporary signs attached to the top or sides of the menuboard.
5. Menuboards must be located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from any residential district lot line. This is measured from sign face to lot line, including
any public right-of-way.
6. Menuboards may be internally illuminated. Menuboards may also contain an electronic screen for interaction with each customer.
MENUBOARD
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 501/524
I. Suspended Signs: These standards also apply to signs suspended or mounted under awnings, canopies, galleries, or arcades.
1. Suspended signs must be attached to the underside of an awning, canopy, gallery, or arcade. Suspended signs must not project beyond the awning,
canopy, gallery, or arcade.
2. Suspended signs must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet (7').
3. A maximum of one (1) suspended sign is permitted per business establishment with frontage where the awning, canopy, gallery, or arcade is
located.
4. Suspended signs are limited to a maximum of six (6) square feet in area.
5. Suspended signs must be securely fixed to the awning with metal supports.
6. Suspended signs must be made of wood, metal, plastic, or high-density urethane (HDU) foam board or similar durable foam construction.
SUSPENDED SIGN
J. Wall Sign:
1. Wall signs are permitted for all non-residential uses in any district.
2. Wall signs are permitted on all facades of a structure. On a site consisting of multiple structures, each structure is permitted wall signs per the
regulations of this section. The square footage from different structures cannot be combined to create a larger sign on any one (1) structure.
3. The maximum size of a wall sign is established at one and one-half (11/2) square feet per linear foot of building wall where the wall sign will be
mounted or forty (40) square feet, whichever is greater. The square footage from different facades cannot be combined to create a larger sign on any
one (1) facade.
4. In a multi-tenant structure, each tenant is permitted a wall sign of one and one-half (11/2) square feet per linear foot of business frontage or forty (40)
square feet, whichever is greater, for each tenant. The square footage from different tenants cannot be combined to create a larger sign than allowed
by this section.
5. The number of individual wall signs on a facade is not limited, however the cumulative sign area of all signs on that facade cannot exceed the
maximum allowable sign area per subsection J3 of this section.
6. Wall signs may be internally or externally illuminated. If externally illuminated, all light must be directed onto the sign face.
7. Wall signs must be safely and securely attached to the building wall. Wall signs must project less than eighteen inches (18") from the building wall.
Wall signs may encroach into the public right-of-way no more than eighteen inches (18").
8. No wall sign affixed to a building, including sign support structure, may project beyond the ends or top of the wall or higher than the roofline of the
structure to which it is attached.
9. Wall signs must be constructed of wood or simulated wood, metal, durable, weather-resistant material like canvas, canvas-like material, nylon or
vinyl-coated fabric, plastic, or high-density urethane (HDU) foam board or similar durable foam construction. Wall signs constructed of material must
be mounted so that they are held taut against the wall. Painted wall signs are prohibited.
10. Wall signs are permitted on architectural appurtenances, such as chimneys or penthouses, which are part of the structure. Wall signs must not
cover any window, windowsill, transom sill, or significant architectural feature of the structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 502/524
WALL SIGN
(Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-11: SUMMARY OF PERMITTED SIGNS:
Table 10-3, "Summary Of Permitted Signs", of this section catalogs the types of permitted signs, both permanent and temporary, and indicates whether
such sign requires a sign permit. This table is provided for reference purposes; in the case of any conflict with the regulations of this title, the specific sign
regulations control over this table.
TABLE 10-3
SUMMARY OF PERMITTED SIGNS
P = Permanent
T = Temporary
Sign Type
Exempt/No
Permit Required1
Permit
Required2 Sign Type
A-frame sign * T
Attention getting device * T
Awning sign * P
Blade sign (projecting signs) * P
Canopy sign * P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 503/524
Construction activity * T
Electronic message sign * P
Flag * P
Government sign * P, T
Ground sign * P
Holiday decorations * T
Light pole banner * P, T
Marquee * P
Memorial * P
Menuboard * P
Multi-tenant building entryway * P
Noncommercial message sign * T
Not-for-profit community event * T
Parking lot/structure * P
Real estate activity * T
Wall sign * P
Window sign * P, T
Notes:
1. Section 12-1-9 of this chapter.
2. Section 12-1-10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-12: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Relation To Other Laws And Regulations: Where there is a conflict between this title and other Village statutes, ordinances, or regulations, the more
restrictive statute, ordinance, or regulation controls.
B. Revocation And Termination Of Permit: The Village Manager may revoke any sign permit where there has been a violation of the provisions of this title
or misrepresentation of fact on the sign permit application. Upon termination or revocation of a sign permit, the sign must be removed without cost or
expense of any kind to the Village.
C. Inspection: The Village may inspect all signs at any time. The purpose of the inspection is to ascertain whether the structure is secure or insecure,
whether in need of repair or removal, whether it is in conformance with the sign permit and/or sign variance approval, or otherwise in violation of the
provisions of this title.
D. Illegally Constructed Signs: If a sign is determined to have been constructed illegally without a required sign permit, the Village Manager will serve
notice to the property owner that such sign must be removed within thirty (30) days of notice for permanent signs or twenty four (24) hours for
temporary signs. If the sign is not removed within the required time period, the Village Manager may enforce this order through permitted enforcement
procedures.
E. Illegally Placed Signs: Any sign placed on public property or within the public right-of-way without authorization will be removed immediately by the
Village without notice.
F. Penalties: Any person who violates this title may be fined for each offense. Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense for the
purposes of the penalties and remedies available to the Village. The accumulation of penalties for violations, but not the obligation for payment for
violations already committed, ceases upon correction of the violation. Each violation, and each day that such violation continues, is subject to a fine as
established in the Village Code. (Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-13: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. A nonconforming permanent sign and sign structure may remain in use so long as it remains otherwise lawful and has not been damaged or destroyed
to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of its value prior to the damage. A nonconforming permanent sign and sign structure that is damaged or
destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its value prior to the damage, or if it the sign and/or sign structure has been removed, cannot
be restored or repaired unless it conforms to all applicable regulations for the district. Sign owners must supply the Village Manager with a repair cost
estimate of the damaged sign and an estimate of the cost of a new identical sign.
B. All temporary nonconforming signs must be removed or brought into conformance within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 504/524
C. The sign face of an existing nonconforming permanent sign may be replaced, but the structure cannot be altered to accommodate such change. A
change of a sign face requires a sign permit.
D. No nonconforming sign and sign structure may be relocated, in whole or in part, to any other location on the same or other lot, unless the entire sign
and sign structure conforms to all regulations applicable to the lot where the sign is relocated.
E. No nonconforming sign can be altered or enlarged in a way that increases the nonconformity of the sign or sign structure. This does not include normal
maintenance and cleaning, or changing of the sign face. (Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-2017)
12-1-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision of this title is adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that
judgment does not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this title. The effect of the judgment is confined to the section, paragraph,
subdivision, clause, sentence or provision immediately involved in the controversy in which judgment or decree was rendered. (Ord. 2017-4-198, 4-17-
2017)
Title 13
COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Chapter 1
FEE SCHEDULE
13-1-1: FEES:
If a Code section is not listed, then section 1-3-2 of this fee schedule shall apply.
ADMINISTRATION
1-3-2 General penalty $25.00 - $750.00
1-6-14E2 Code of conduct conviction of elected officials and Village Clerk, Trustees, and President:
Each violation $100.00 - $500.00
Subsequent conviction for same violation $250.00 - $500.00
1-8-18 Adjudication hearing violations:
1-8-18A Standing, parking, vehicle condition - fine $ 20.00
Standing, parking, vehicle condition - late penalty 50.00
Automated traffic law violation - fine (red light camera) 100.00
Automated traffic law violation - late penalty (red light camera) 100.00
Violation of title 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 of this Code - fine 750.00
Violation of title 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 of this Code - late penalty 750.00
1-8-18B Standing, parking, vehicle condition - violation penalty 5.00
Automated traffic law violation or violation of title 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 of this Code penalty 40.00
1-8-18C1 Late penalty for failure to complete traffic education program Not to exceed $10.00
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
3-1-22 Business machines:
Automatic vending/video game terminal
(each)
$ 25.00
Coin operated device (each) 25.00
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 505/524
Fuel oil dealer 100.00
3-1-22 Businesses licenses per square foot:
0 - 2,000 65.00
2,001 - 5,000 100.00
5,001 - 10,000 200.00
10,001 - 50,000 400.00
50,000+ 800.00
3-2-17F Taxicab rates:
First 1/7 mile $0.50 plus $0.10 for each additional 1/7 mile or fraction thereof for trips within the
corporate limits of the Village
Waiting time Not more than $9.00 per hour
Tobacco violations:
3-2-18I General penalty $25.00 - $500.00
3-2-18J Citation payment:
First offense within 10 days $ 25.00
Second offense within 10 days 50.00
Third offense within 10 days 100.00
First offense after 10 days 50.00
Second offense after 10 days 100.00
Third offense after 10 days 200.00
Liquor licenses:
3-3B-
11A1
Liquor license administrative processing
fee
250.00
3-3B-
11A2
Early bird renewal discount (A, B, C, N, P,
and Y)
250.00
A - Restaurant 2,350.00
A-1 - Outdoor add-on 250.00
B - Retail sales 1,750.00
B-1 - Annual tasting add-on 1,500.00
B-2 - Single event add-on 50.00
C - Retail sales convenience 1,750.00
E - Club 150.00
F - Single private event 50.00
G - Single public event 100.00
G-1 - Multiple public event 250.00
H - Complimentary dispensing of beer and
wine
250.00
K - Gift boutique 250.00
M - BYOB corkage 1,000.00
N - Craft distillery 1,000.00
O - Off-site catering 200.00
P - Craft brewery 1,600.00
R - Outdoor concession/beer garden 200.00
V - Video gaming 2,500.00
Y - Brewpub 1,500.00
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 506/524
3-3B-
20C3c
Video gaming terminals annual fee 25.00
3-3C-20E
Alcohol violations:
First violation $250.00 - $750.00
Second violation within 12 month period $500.00 - $750.00
Third or subsequent violations within 12
month period
$750.00
General penalty $25.00 - $750.00
Liquor license offenses:
3-3E-5A First offense $50.00 - $1,000.00
Second and subsequent offenses $100.00 - $1,000.00
3-3E-5B Citation payment within 10 days $ 50.00
Citation payment from 11 - 15 days 60.00
Citation payment more than 15 days 100.00
Solicitation violations:
3-4-13A General penalty 500.00
3-4-13B Citation fee before 10 days 50.00
Citation fee after 10 days 60.00
3-5-8H Gas Utility Tax failure to make a
return/fraudulent return
$100.00 - $700.00
Electric Utility Tax rate:
3-5-9A Kilowatt hours used/consumed in a month:
First 2,000 0.61 cents per kilowatt hour
Next 48,000 0.40 cents per kilowatt hour
Next 50,000 0.36 cents per kilowatt hour
Next 400,000 0.35 cents per kilowatt hour
Next 500,000 0.34 cents per kilowatt hour
Next 2,000,000 0.32 cents per kilowatt hour
Next 2,000,000 0.315 cents per kilowatt hour
Next 5,000,000 0.31 cents per kilowatt hour
Next 10,000,000 0.305 cents per kilowatt hour
In excess of 20,000,000 0.30 cents per kilowatt hour
3-5-9I Failure to make return/fraudulent return $100.00 - $700.00
3-7-4B Adult entertainment license administrative
processing fee
$200.00
3-7-18 Adult use violation Not more than $500.00
3-9-3D Sales license renewal fees:
Business occupying less than 5,000 gross
square feet
$25.00
Business occupying 5,000 gross square
feet or more
75.00
3-9-6A Fraudulent sales penalty $100.00 - $1,000.00
Annual contractor registration:
3-10-3 Annual contractor registration $100.00
3-10-8 First violation General penalty
Second violation 1.5 times the general penalty
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 507/524
Third and subsequent violations 2 times the general penalty
Fire suppression:
3-11-3 Annual registration fee $100.00
3-11-7 Fire suppression violation:
General penalty - first violation General penalty
Second violation 1.5 times general penalty
Third violation 2.0 times general penalty
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Hazardous material discharge:
4-1A-
10A2
Cleanup/abatement minimum charge $50.00
4-1A-
10A3
Paid within 60 calendar days of invoice 5% of costs incurred by Village
Paid after 60 calendar days but within 75 calendar days
of invoice
10% of costs incurred by Village
Paid after 75 calendar days but within 90 calendar days
of invoice
15% of costs incurred by Village
Paid after 90 calendar days of invoice 25% of costs incurred by Village plus 1% for each 10 days or fraction
thereof thereafter
4-1A-10B
Ambulance fees:
Village residents $1,200.00
Non-residents of Village or Lake Zurich Rural Fire
Protection District
1,350.00
Additional fee for all $12.00/mile
4-2-1-4D
Graffiti penalty $25.00 - $100.00
4-2-1-5E
Open burning:
First offense $ 50.00
Second offense 100.00
Third and subsequent offenses 500.00
Vehicle deliveries and noisemaking violations:
4-2-1-
7F1
"No truck traffic" violations: General penalty
4-2-1-
7F2
Citation payment within 10 days:
First offense $ 25.00
Second offense 50.00
Third and subsequent offenses 100.00
Citation payment after 10 days:
First offense 50.00
Second offense 100.00
Third and subsequent offenses 200.00
4-3-11 General penalty for refuse transportation $25.00 - $500.00
Commercial solid waste hauling and recycling:
4-3B-5A Licensed hauler violation:
First violation $500.00
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 508/524
Second violation 750.00
4-3B-5B Registered hauler violation:
First violation 500.00
Second violation 750.00
POLICE REGULATIONS
5-2-3C Rabies regulations violation $25.00 - $200.00
5-2-9C3a Animal impoundment fee $25.00
Animal violations:
5-2-10A Violation of section 5-2-7 or 5-2-8 of this Code Not more than $750.00
5-2-10B Payments to avoid prosecution:
Within 10 days:
First offense $ 25.00
Second offense 50.00
Third and subsequent offenses 100.00
After 10 days:
First offense 50.00
Second offense 100.00
Third and subsequent offenses 200.00
5-4-9A Security alarm charges:
4 - 5 occurrences in 1 calendar year $50.00 each time
6 - 9 occurrences in 1 calendar year $75.00 each time
10+ occurrences in 1 calendar year $100.00 each time
5-4-9B Non-resident charge per response $200.00
5-4-13 Security alarm systems violations $50.00 - $500.00
5-5-8A False fire alarm charges:
4 - 5 occurrences in 1 calendar year $100.00 each time
6+ occurrences in 1 calendar year $250.00 each time
5-5-10 Fire alarm systems violations $50.00 - $500.00
TRAFFIC CODE
6-1B-5 General traffic penalty $25.00 - $750.00
6-2A-7E
Obedience to railroad signal violation $500.00 or 50 hours of community service
6-4A-
23C
School bus regulations:
First violation $150.00
Second or subsequent violation 500.00
6-4A-
24D
Excessive engine idling:
First violation of section 50.00
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 509/524
Second or subsequent violation within 12 month period 150.00
6-4C-3F
Overweight/oversize vehicle permit revision 10.00
6-4C-4 Police escorts:
Fee per hour per officer assigned 40.00
Minimum charge 80.00
Vehicle fees:
Special detail from police and fire Refer to FEMA schedule for equipment fees and current
employee costs
6-4C-8B
Reinstatement of permit:
Reinstatement after suspension $50.00
Reinstatement after revocation 75.00
6-4C-9A
Single vehicles:
1A - 2 axle vehicle: 48,000 lbs. gross/25,000 lbs. on 1 axle $15.00 single/$25.00 round
2A - 2 axle vehicle: 54,000 lbs. gross/28,000 lbs. on 1 axle $20.00 single/$35.00 round
3A - 3 or more axle vehicle: 60,000 lbs. gross/20,000 lbs. on 1
axle/40,000 lbs. on tandem
$25.00 single/$45.00 round
4A - 3 or more axle vehicle: 68,000 lbs. gross/21,000 lbs. on 1
axle/48,000 lbs. on tandem
$30.00 single/$55.00 round
5A - 4 or more axle vehicle: 72,000 lbs. gross/34,000 lbs. on 2
axles/40,000 lbs. on 2 axles
$35.00 single/$65.00 round
6A - 4 or more axle vehicle: 76,000 lbs. gross/44,000 lbs. on 2
axles/44,000 lbs. on 2 axles
$40.00 single/$75.00 round
6-4C-9A
Combination vehicles:
1B - 5 axle vehicle: 88,000 lbs. gross/34,000 lbs. on 2 axles/44,000 lbs.
on 2 axles
$25.00 single/$45.00 round
2B - 5 axle vehicle: 88,000 lbs. gross/44,000 lbs. on 2 axles/44,000 lbs.
on 2 axles
$30.00 single/$55.00 round
3B - 6 or more axles: 100,000 lbs. gross/48,000 lbs. on 2 axles/48,000
lbs. on 3 axles
$35.00 single/$65.00 round
4B - 6 or more axles: 100,000 lbs. gross/44,000 lbs. on 2 axles/54,000
lbs. on 3 axles
$40.00 single/$75.00 round
5B - 6 or more axles: 110,000 lbs. gross/44,000 lbs. on 2 axles/54,000
lbs. on 3 axles
$45.00 single/$85.00 round
6B - 6 or more axles: 120,000 lbs. gross/48,000 lbs. on 2 axles/60,000
lbs. on 3 axles
$50.00 single/$95.00 round
7B - 6 or more axles: 143,000 lbs. gross/54,000 lbs. on 2 axles/78,000
lbs. on 3 axles
$60.00 single/$115.00 round
8B - 7 or more axles: 162,000 lbs. gross/75,000 lbs. on 3 axles/75,000
lbs. on 3 axles
$70.00 single/$135.00 round
9B - 8 or more axles: 187,000 lbs. gross/75,000 lbs. on 3 axles/100,000
lbs. on 4 axles
$80.00 single/$155.00 round
6-4C-9D
Size fee schedule (over dimension):
1C - 10' wide and 14'6" high and 70' long:
Single $15.00
Round 25.00
Limited continuous use permit $100.00 for 10 trips
2C - 12' wide and 14'6" high and 85' long:
Single $20.00
Round 25.00
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 510/524
Limited continuous use permit $150.00 for 10 trips
3C - 14' wide and 15' high and 100' long:
Single $30.00
Round 55.00
Limited continuous use permit Not available
4C - 18' wide and 16'6" high and 120' long:
Single $50.00
Round 95.00
Limited continuous use permit Not available
5C - >18' wide and >16' high and >120' long:
Single $100.00
Round 195.00
Limited continuous use permit Not available
6-4C-11
General penalty for overweight and overdimension vehicles:
General fee $750.00
6-4D-
18A
Vehicle equipment citations:
Payment in full within 10 days of citation $20.00
Payment in full after 10 days but within 20 days of citation 40.00
6-4D-
18B
Fines forwarded for collection:
Payment in full within 10 days of first notice 30.00
Payment in full not received within 10 days 50.00
6-8B-2C
Overnight parking permit 50.00
6-8C-6 Snow removal violation 75.00
6-8D-6C
Pre-tow sticker unauthorized removal Up to $750.00
6-8D-7 Pre-tow notice failure to move or repair violation $250.00
6-8D-
13A
Towing fee $125.00 or $500.00 if over 4 tons
6-8D-
13B
Impoundment fee $30.00 per day or $100.00 per day if over 4 tons
6-8D-
13C
Vehicle lockout non-residents $50.00
6-8E-2A
Parking citation fine:
Payment in full within 10 days 20.00
Payment in full after 10 days but within 20 days 40.00
6-8E-2C
Parking fines forwarded for collection:
Payment in full within 10 days of first notice 30.00
Payment in full not received within 10 days 50.00
6-9-2A Vehicle administrative tow fee Not to exceed $400.00
6-9-6 Vehicle seizure and impoundment administrative penalty $400.00
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 511/524
7-1-5-2G Mailboxes on public right-of-way regulation violations $50.00 - $200.00
7-1-5-2H Payment to avoid prosecution:
0 to 5 days $25.00
6 to 15 days 50.00
16 to 25 days 75.00
7-1-8C1 Motorized skateboards redemption fee 100.00
7-1-8D Payment to avoid prosecution:
0 to 10 days 10.00
11 to 20 days 20.00
21 to 30 days 50.00
7-1A-2
Public ways and property:
To open, tunnel, or excavate any public space $2.00 per linear foot
Openings Of 25
Square Feet
Or Less Price
Per Opening
Openings Of 25
Square Feet
Or More Price
Per Square Foot
P.C. concrete pavement:
6" thick $ 75.00 $2.75
8" thick 95.00 3.00
10" thick 115.00 3.25
Bituminous concrete 40.00 1.50
P.C. concrete walks and sidewalks 40.00
Concrete curb and/or curb and gutter 75.00
7-3-6G Lion's Park parking lot violations $2.00 - $20.00
7-3-7A Violation of sections 7-3-1 and 7-3-2 of this Code Not more than $750.00
7-3-7B Payment to avoid prosecution:
Within 10 days:
First offense $ 25.00
Second offense 50.00
Third and subsequent offenses 100.00
After 10 days:
First offense 50.00
Second offense 100.00
Third and subsequent offenses 200.00
7-4-5-1G General watercraft violations $50.00 - $300.00
7-4-9E Private property launch of watercraft violation:
Motorized watercraft Not less than $300.00
Non-motorized watercraft (rowboats, canoes, paddleboats and similar) Not less than $50.00
7-4-13A Lake of Lake Zurich and beaches violations Not more than $750.00
7-4-13B Payment to avoid prosecution:
Within 10 days $50.00 up to $300.00
Within 11 to 15 days $60.00 up to $300.00
After 15 days Amount of citation
7-5-5 Fee for each square foot of street openings $ 15.00
Water meters:
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 512/524
7-5-6A4 Tampering fee 750.00
7-5-6A5 Obstruction fee 250.00
7-5-6D Testing fee 100.00
7-5-6E Temporary metering 50.00
7-5-6F3 Failure to schedule meter replacement (monthly) 95.00
7-5-6F4 Failure to provide access on 2 consecutive appointments (monthly) 95.00
7-5-7G5 Restoration of service reconnection fee 1,500.00
7-5-7G8 Cross connections violations $100.00 - $1,000.00
Water and sewer connection fees:
7-5-9A Base fees within corporate limits:
1" $ 2,500.00 $ 3,500.00 $ 6,000.00
1.5" 3,500.00 5,000.00 8,500.00
Less than 4" 10,000.00 14,000.00 24,000.00
Less than 6" 18,000.00 28,000.00 46,000.00
Less than 8" 24,000.00 40,000.00 64,000.00
8" or more 36,000.00 50,000.00 86,000.00
7-5-9B Base fees outside corporate limits:
1" 3,125.00 4,375.00 7,500.00
1.5" 4,375.00 6,250.00 10,625.00
Less than 4" 12,500.00 17,500.00 30,000.00
Less than 6" 22,500.00 35,000.00 57,500.00
Less than 8" 30,000.00 50,000.00 80,000.00
8" or more 45,000.00 62,500.00 107,500.00
Water and sewer service fees:
7-5-9C Irrigation fees for connection (corporate limits): Irrigation Supply Fee
1" $ 2,500.00
1.5" 3,500.00
Less than 4" 10,000.00
Less than 6" 18,000.00
Less than 8" 24,000.00
8" or more 36,000.00
7-5-9D Irrigation fees for connections (out of corporate limits): Irrigation Supply Fee
1" $ 3,125.00
1.5" 4,375.00
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
Code
Section Subject
Fees/Fine
Water
Connection
Fee
Sewer
Connection
Fee
Total
Base Fee
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 513/524
Less than 4" 12,500.00
Less than 6" 22,500.00
Less than 8" 30,000.00
8" or more 45,000.00
7-5-9E Multiple unit connection fee schedule (corporate limits):
Multiple residential unit development $5,000 x # of units greater than 1
Multiple non-residential tenant development $5,000 x # of units greater than 1
Multiple residential tenant developments $3,000 x # of units greater than 1
Multiple bed developments with 10 or fewer rooming units $3,000 x # of units greater than 1
Multiple bed developments with 11 or more rooming units $2,000 x # of units greater than 1
7-5-9F Multiple unit connection fee schedule (out of corporate limits):
Multiple residential unit development $6,250 x # of units greater than 1
Multiple non-residential tenant development $6,250 x # of units greater than 1
Multiple residential tenant developments $3,750 x # of units greater than 1
Multiple bed developments with 10 or fewer rooming units $3,750 x # of units greater than 1
Multiple bed developments with 11 or more rooming units $2,500 x # of units greater than 1
7-5-11G, 7-
5-12G, 7-5-
13C
General late penalty 10% of billed amount
7-5-16B1 Delinquent bill administrative charge $20.00
7-5-17 Charge for disconnection and reconnection/shut off fee 70.00
7-5-20D Water conservation violation:
First offense $25.00 - $50.00
Second offense within same calendar year $150.00 - $500.00
Third or subsequent offense within same calendar year $400.00 - $500.00
7-5-21 Service charges for residents:
Water - operations and maintenance per 1,000 gallons $ 7.00
Water - debt service per 1,000 gallons 2.10
Water - capital improvements per 1,000 gallons 4.90
Water - Lake County treatment 4.00
Irrigation only - operations and maintenance per 1,000 gallons
5.20
Irrigation only - debt service per 1,000 gallons 1.45
Irrigation only - capital improvements per 1,000 gallons 2.35
Sanitary sewer service only flat charge per month 79.40
Minimum basic charge based upon 2,000 gallons per month 36.00
Combined water/sewer rate per 1,000 gallons 18.00
7-5-21 Service charges for non-residents:
Water - operations and maintenance per 1,000 gallons 18.50
Water - debt service per 1,000 gallons 4.00
Water - capital improvements per 1,000 gallons 4.50
Water - Lake County treatment 4.00
Irrigation only - operations and maintenance per 1,000 gallons
10.40
Irrigation only - debt service per 1,000 gallons 1.00
Irrigation only - capital improvements per 1,000 gallons 2.85
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 514/524
Sewer - operations and maintenance per 1,000 gallons 8.00
Sewer - debt service per 1,000 gallons 3.00
Sewer - capital improvements per 1,000 gallons 2.80
Sewer - Lake County treatment 4.00
Minimum basic charge based upon 2,000 gallons per month 62.00
Sanitary sewer only flat charge per month 105.00
Irrigation services only base fee 14.25
Combined water/sewer rate per 1,000 gallons 31.00
7-5-21 Miscellaneous utility fees:
Senior/handicap flat rate discount 14.24
Utility tag fee 20.00
Hydrant use fee Subject to Public Works
7-5A Sewer use and sewage pretreatment:
Annual permit fee 750.00
Annual permit issued after November 1st 375.00
Compliance inspection - cost per inspection $65.00 and costs incurred by Village
Publication for significant non-compliance Costs incurred by Village
Surcharge on significant industrial users - pollutant and
concentration Rate Per Pound
BOD:
201 - 500 (mg/L) $0.40
501 - 800 (mg/L) 1.60
NH3N:
26 - 80 (mg/L) 2.40
81 - 150 (mg/L) 9.60
TSS:
201 - 500 (mg/L) 0.40
501 - 800 (mg/L) 1.60
7-5A Sewer use and sewage pretreatment violation:
General violation - each day violation is present $100.00 - $500.00
Intergovernmental fines against Village Costs incurred to Village
Damage to Village wastewater system Costs incurred to Village
7-6-3-2D Protected private tree permit fee $50.00
7-6-5-2 Tree regulations violations $25.00 - $750.00
Construction of utility facilities in ROW:
7-7-4F Application fee $500.00
7-7-4G Inspection fees Actual costs to Village
7-8-5D Permits for small wireless facilities:
Request to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the
installation of a new utility pole
$1,000.00
Request to collocate a single small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure
650.00
Request to collocate multiple small wireless facilities on
existing utility poles or wireless support structures addressed
in a single application
$350.00 per small wireless facility
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 515/524
7-8-13A Small wireless facilities collocation on Village-owned utility pole
in right-of-way
Higher of $200.00 per year per small wireless facility; or actual,
direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use
of space on pole
7-8-16 Small wireless facilities collocation on Village utility poles
pending dispute resolution
Not more than $200.00 per year per pole
BUILDING REGULATIONS
8-1-21 General Building Code violation $50.00 - $750.00
8-1-22 Failure to obtain permit required under title 8, "Building Regulations", of this Code 2 times the full cost of the
building or other permit for
such work
8-2-2B Building permit administration fee $ 35.00
8-2-4, 8-
2-5
Plan review and permit fees:
Residential (per unit):
New building construction:
Base fee 275.00
Principal building permit fee:
0 to 1,200 square feet 1,210.00
1,201 to 2,600 square feet 1,540.00
2,601 to 5,500 square feet 2,420.00
5,501 to 10,000 square feet 3,300.00
10,001 to 50,000 square feet $5,500.00 plus $10.00 for
each 100 square feet in
excess of 25,000 square
feet
50,001 to 100,000 square feet $8,250.00 plus $4.00 for
each 100 square feet in
excess of 65,000 square
feet
More than 100,000 square feet $10,450.00 plus $1.50 for
each 100 square feet in
excess of 100,000 square
feet
Electrical:
0 to 1,000 square feet $ 83.00
1,001 to 2,000 square feet 110.00
2,001 to 3,000 square feet 143.00
3,001 or more square feet 176.00
Electric service permit fees:
0 to 100 amps 83.00
101 to 200 amps 110.00
201 to 400 amps 149.00
401 to 1,000 amps 231.00
More than 1,000 amps 451.00
Plumbing:
Single-family $83.00 plus $20.00 per
fixture
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 516/524
Multiple-family $110.00 plus $18.00 per
fixture
Water meter fees Set by Manager of Public
Works
Sewer and water connection fees See subsections 7-5-9A
and B in this fee schedule
Lake County connection fees As determined by Lake
County through the Lake
Zurich Engineering
Department
Mechanical $83.00
Heating:
Single-family:
0 to 1,000 square feet $66.00 plus $50.00 per
appliance
1,001 to 2,000 square feet $110.00 plus $50.00 per
appliance
2,001 square feet or more $143.00 plus $50.00 per
appliance
Multiple-family for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof $83.00
Air conditioning:
Single-family:
0 to 1,000 square feet $66.00 plus $50.00 per
appliance
1,001 to 2,000 square feet $110.00 plus $50.00 per
appliance
2,001 square feet or more $143.00 plus $50.00 per
appliance
Multiple-family for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof $ 83.00
Fireplace:
Prefabricated 165.00
Masonry 220.00
Room additions, porches, in-ground pools, interior remodeling:
Base fee:
0 to 400 square feet 72.00
401 to 1,000 square feet 105.00
More than 1,001 square feet 138.00
Project size - permit fee:
0 to 600 square feet 44.00
601 to 1,000 square feet 66.00
More than 1,000 square feet $94.00 plus $10.00 for each
500 square feet or any
fraction over 1,000 square
feet
Electric:
0 to 400 square feet $ 17.00
401 to 1,000 square feet 22.00
More than 1,001 square feet 28.00
Electric permit fees:
0 to 1,000 square feet 72.00
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 517/524
1,001 to 2,000 square feet 99.00
2,001 or more square feet 132.00
Electric service:
0 to 100 amps 72.00
101 to 200 amps 99.00
201 to 400 amps 138.00
401 to 1,000 amps 220.00
More than 1,000 amps 440.00
Plumbing:
0 to 400 square feet 17.00
401 to 1,000 square feet 22.00
More than 1,001 square feet 28.00
Plumbing permit fees:
Single-family $44.00 plus $15.00 per
fixture
Multiple-family $83.00 plus $18.00 per
fixture
Mechanical:
0 to 400 square feet $17.00
401 to 1,000 square feet 22.00
1,001 to 3,000 square feet 55.00
More than 3,001 square feet 83.00
Accessory structures 44.00
All others 22.00
Heating:
Single-family $55.00 per appliance;
$55.00 ductwork only
Multiple-family for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof $83.00
Air conditioning:
Single-family $55.00 per appliance;
$55.00 ductwork only
Multiple-family for each 1,500 square feet or portion thereof $ 83.00
Fireplace:
Prefabricated 110.00
Masonry 165.00
Residential special projects - permit fees:
Patios and service walks 39.00
Decks, gazebos, porches, and sheds 72.00
Roofing, siding, windows and other:
Siding, windows, and other 72.00
Roofing 40.00
Swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas:
Aboveground 72.00
Inground 138.00
Driveways (single-family residential) $83.00 per approach
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 518/524
Demolition:
Interior $ 200.00
Entire structure 1,000.00
Moving of building 220.00
Fences 39.00
Temporary signs 39.00
Water service inspections 35.00
Water meter installation $35.00 plus cost of meter
Sewer tap inspection $35.00
Water for construction (single-family residential) 35.00
Lawn sprinklers $28.00 plus $15.00 per
fixture plus $2.00 per
sprinkler head
Retaining walls 2' or more in height $0.50 per square foot
Parking lots:
Sealing, restriping, and resurfacing:
0 to 2,000 square feet $ 55.00
Over 2,001 square feet 110.00
Paving, new lots or portions thereof $0.02 per square foot
Exterior underground electric/site wiring $39.00
Excavations in the right-of-way:
Involving pavement $15.00 per square foot
Sewer repairs or water service repairs $83.00
Foundation only permit 25% of permit fee
Administrative fee $35.00 per permit
Commercial, industrial, and all other:
New building construction including additions:
0 to 3,000 square feet $ 385.00
3,001 to 10,000 square feet 770.00
10,001 to 30,000 square feet 1,430.00
30,001 to 50,000 square feet 2,090.00
50,001 to 100,000 square feet 3,960.00
100,001 to 300,000 square feet 6,600.00
More than 300,000 square feet 9,900.00
Construction of new buildings and additions to existing buildings - permit fees:
Principal building fees for new construction:
0 to 2,000 square feet 770.00
2,001 to 4,000 square feet 1,100.00
4,001 to 8,000 square feet 1,980.00
8,001 to 20,000 square feet $2,750.00 plus $15.00 for
each 100 square feet in
excess of 10,000
20,001 to 40,000 square feet $5,500.00 plus $10.00 for
each 100 square feet in
excess of 25,000
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 519/524
40,001 to 80,000 square feet $8,250.00 plus $4.00 for
each 100 square feet in
excess of 50,000
More than 80,000 square feet $10,450.00 plus $1.50 for
each 100 square feet in
excess of 100,000
Electrical 25% of fee
Electrical permit fees $55.00 for each 1,000
square feet or fraction
thereof
Electric service:
0 to 100 amps $ 83.00
101 to 200 amps 165.00
201 to 400 amps 248.00
401 to 1,000 amps 330.00
More than 1,000 amps 605.00
Plumbing 25% of fee
Plumbing permit fees $110.00 plus $20.00 per
fixture
Water meter fees Set by Manager of Public
Works
Sewer and water connection fees See subsections 7-5-9A
and B in this fee schedule
Lake County connection fees As determined by Lake
County through the Lake
Zurich Engineering
Department
Mechanical 25% of fee
Heating $55.00 for each 1,000
square feet or fraction
thereof, plus $50.00 per
appliance
Air conditioning $55.00 for each 1,000
square feet or fraction
thereof, plus $50.00 per
appliance
Footing and foundation review (for separate permit) 25% of the full building
review fee
Alterations, build-outs and remodeling including new spaces in new buildings and existing spaces in
existing buildings:
0 to 3,000 square feet $66.00 per 1,000 square
feet or fraction
3,001 to 10,000 square feet $77.00 per 1,000 square
feet or fraction
10,001 to 50,000 square feet $88.00 per 1,000 square
feet or fraction
More than 50,000 square feet $110.00 per 1,000 square
feet or fraction
Remodels, tenant build-outs, etc., of commercial and industrial uses:
Principal building fee:
0 to 1,000 square feet $ 165.00
1,001 to 2,000 square feet 275.00
2,001 to 5,000 square feet 440.00
5,001 to 10,000 square feet 770.00
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 520/524
10,001 to 25,000 square feet 1,100.00
25,001 to 50,000 square feet 1,320.00
50,001 to 100,000 square feet 1,650.00
More than 100,000 square feet 2,200.00
Electrical 30% of fee
Electrical permit fees $55.00 for each 1,000
square feet or fraction
thereof
Electric service:
0 to 100 amps $ 83.00
101 to 200 amps 165.00
201 to 400 amps 248.00
401 to 1,000 amps 330.00
More than 1,000 amps 605.00
Plumbing 30% of fee
Plumbing permit fees $110.00 plus $20.00 per
fixture
Water meter fees Set by Manager of Public
Works
Sewer and water connection fees See subsections 7-5-9A
and B of this fee schedule
Lake County connection fees As determined by Lake
County through the Lake
Zurich Engineering
Department
Mechanical 30% of fee
Heating $55.00 for each 1,000
square feet or fraction
thereof plus $50.00 per
appliance
Air conditioning $55.00 for each 1,000
square feet or fraction
thereof plus $50.00 per
appliance
All other reviews: All other reviews not related to other construction, including, but not limited to:
Electric services, parking lots: sealing, restriping, resurfacing, paving, new lots, underground and site
wiring, permanent signs/awnings, lawn sprinkler systems, retaining walls, temporary signs, construction
trailers, hood and duct systems, accessory structures (fences, sheds, trash enclosures, etc.)
$ 55.00
Flat rate permit fees for special projects (commercial):
Patios and service walks 77.00
Decks, gazebos, porches, and sheds 138.00
Roofing 165.00
Driveways $83.00 per approach
Demolition:
Underground tanks $ 150.00
"White box" 350.00
Structure 2,500.00
Moving of building 550.00
Fences and trash enclosures 110.00
Signs, canopies or awnings: 55.00
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 521/524
Nonilluminated $0.83 per square foot
Illuminated $1.00 per square foot
Temporary signs $55.00
Water service inspections 55.00
Water meter installation $50.00 plus cost of meter
Sewer tap inspection $55.00
Water for construction $110.00 plus meter rates
Temporary use permit $110.00
Retaining walls $0.50 per square foot
Parking lots:
Sealing, restriping $165.00
Resurfacing 330.00
Paving, new lots, or portions thereof $0.05 per square foot
Exterior underground electric/site wiring $66.00 plus $5.00 per
fixture
Elevators $65.00 plus actual cost of
consultant and
administrative fees
Fire Department plan review and permit fees:
Fire alarm system:
Fire Department plan review and permit/inspection fee $300.00 plus $10.00 per
device
Automatic fire sprinkler system:
Single-family residential fee (13 D) $200.00 flat rate
Commercial and multi-family $225.00 plus $6.00 per
head
Other fire suppression systems (H&D, FM200, etc.) $300.00 flat rate
Preliminary fire plan review $150.00
Fire Department operational permits as described in section 8-9-2 of this Code 50.00
Professional plan review Consultant fees including
administrative fees
Occupancy permits:
A. Final residential new construction additions, alterations, and single-family attached and detached $ 83.00
B. Temporary residential 165.00
C. All others:
1. 0 to 5,000 square feet 165.00
2. 5,001 to 10,000 square feet 248.00
3. 10,001 to 50,000 square feet 358.00
4. More than 50,001 square feet 495.00
5. Temporary 2 times fee for subsections
C1 through C4 of this fee
schedule
D. Reinspections:
Residential $ 83.00
All other 165.00
8-2-6A Site performance cash deposit:
All building construction when temporary certificate of occupancy is required:
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 522/524
0 to 2,500 square feet and single-family residence 1,500.00
2,501 to 5,000 square feet 3,000.00
5,001 to 75,000 square feet 5,000.00
75,001 and larger square feet 10,000.00
All building construction when a final occupancy is required:
Residential (detached) 100.00
All others 500.00
Construction deposits:
Residential (detached) 100.00
All others 250.00
All work within any public right-of-way. Deposit returned after approval by Public Works 1,000.00
All work in a paved roadway (deposit returned 1 year after completion) and approval by Public Works
$2,500.00 or 10% of
evaluation of work
whichever is higher
Permanent sign $100.00
8-6-2
(108.5)
Mechanical Code stop work order violation $50.00 - $750.00
8-9-2
(109.4.1)
Fire Code re-inspection fees - third and subsequent re-inspections $75.00 each
8-13-2
(108.5)
Fuel Gas Code stop work order violation $50.00 - $750.00
ZONING
9-9-1C4d(3) Zoning violations - vehicles:
First, second and third citations:
Within 10 days $ 10.00
Between 10 and 20 days 20.00
Fourth, fifth and sixth citations:
Within 10 days 25.00
Between 10 and 20 days 50.00
Seventh, eighth, and ninth citation:
Within 10 days 50.00
Between 10 and 20 days 100.00
10th and subsequent citations:
Within 10 days 100.00
Between 10 and 20 days 200.00
9-23C-3 General zoning violation $25.00 - $750.00
Summons by certified mail Not to exceed $750.00
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 523/524
10-7-9 Land development violation $25.00 - $500.00
10-7-
10B
Subdivision plat review:
Number of lots:
1 to 25 $50.00
26 to 50 $50.00 plus $1.00 for each lot in excess of 25
51 to 100 $50.00 plus $1.00 for each lot in excess of 50
101 to 200 $50.00 plus $1.00 for each lot in excess of 100
Over 200 $50.00 plus $1.00 for each lot in excess of 200
10-7-
11B
Engineer plan review:
Minimum fee $500.00
Estimated construction cost of improvement 3%
10-7-
11C
Engineering inspections Minimum of $500.00 or 2% certified estimated construction cost
10-9-1 Village staff application fee:
Annexation:
Pre-annexation $250.00
Annexation $1,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof
Preliminary zoning reviews:
Residential $ 75.00
Non-residential 100.00
Inspector 50.00/hour
10-9-1 Zoning Board of Appeals application fee:
Variations
Residential (existing) $125.00 plus $125.00 if any work commenced prior to issuance of permit
Residential (new development) $175.00, plus $250.00 if any work commenced prior to issuance of permit
Non-residential $475.00, plus consultants' fees and $500.00 if any work commenced prior to
issuance of permit
10-9-1 Zoning Code application:
Text amendment $450.00, plus consultants' fees
Map amendment $575.00, plus consultants' fees
Special use permits:
Residential $450.00
Non-residential $875.00, plus consultants' fees
Special use permit amendments:
Residential $300.00
Non-residential $550.00, plus consultant fees
Site plan reviews:
Residential (existing) $125.00
Residential (new development) 175.00
Non-residential $450.00, plus $150.00 per acre or fraction thereof and plus consultants' fees
Exterior appearance reviews:
0 - 50' of structure frontage $300.00
50 - 200' of structure frontage 400.00
Non-residential 600.00
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=373 524/524
Planned unit developments:
Residential $300.00 per lot or dwelling, whichever greater, plus consultants' fees
Non-residential $2,000.00, plus $300.00 per lot, plus consultants' fees
Subdivision plan applications:
Subdivision applications:
Preliminary plan approvals:
Residential $300.00 per lot or dwelling, whichever greater, plus consultants' fees
Non-residential $450.00 per lot or dwelling, plus consultants' fees
Final plat approvals $250.00
Plat amendments:
Residential $450.00 per lot or dwelling, plus consultants fees
Non-residential $750.00 per lot or dwelling, plus consultants fees
10-9-1B
Subdivision plans, subdivision plats, and planned
unit developments review fees
1.5% of estimated costs of site development for plan review and 2% of estimated
costs of site development for inspection services
10-9-1B
Other projects, multiple-family and non-residential
review fees:
Under $50,000.00 6.5% of estimated costs of site development
$50,000.00 to $250,000.00 5.0% of estimated costs of site develop-ment
$250,001.00 to $750,000.00 4.0% of estimated costs of site develop-ment
More than $750,000.00 3.0% of estimated costs of site development
10-9-1B
Other projects, single-family residential (subdivided
prior to May 1, 1997) review fees
$250.00 per site
FLOOD CONTROL
11-1-16 Flood control violations $100.00 - $500.00 plus all legal and engineering costs and expenses involved in litigation
(Ord. 2018-12-279, 12-3-2018)
Code
Section
Subject Fee/Fine
Code
Section Subject Fee/Fine