6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 1/307
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
THE VILLAGE OF LYONS
COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
ORDINANCE
NUMBER 03-05-19-O1
AN ORDINANCE INCREASING ISSUANCE OF DUPLICATE LICENSE VEHICLE STICKER FEES AND AMENDING SECTION 9-
1-6
OF THE LYONS VILLAGE CODE
CHRISTOPHER GETTY, President
IRMA QUINTERO, Village Clerk
PATRICIA ALONZI
TERESA ECHEVERRIA
DAN HILKER
PAUL MARCHIORI
GREG RAMIREZ
JAMES VESELSKY
Trustees
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 2/307
ORDINANCE NO. 03-05-19-O1
AN ORDINANCE INCREASING ISSUANCE OF DUPLICATE LICENSE VEHICLE STICKER FEES AND AMENDING SECTION 9-1-6 OF THE LYONS VILLAGE
CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lyons, Cook County, Illinois as follows:
SECTION 1: Section 9-1-6 of the Lyons Village Code is amended by increasing the issuance of a duplicate vehicle sticker fee from two dollars ($2.00) to five
dollars ($5.00)
SECTION 2: If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other provisions
of this ordinance.
SECTION 3: All ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
SECTION 4: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
ADOPTED this 5th day of March 2019, pursuant to a roll call as follows:
APPROVED by the President on March 5th, 2019.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 3/307
THE VILLAGE OF LYONS
COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
ORDINANCE
NUMBER 08-16-16-M1
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF
THE VILLAGE OF LYONS AT SECTIONS 1-6-3; 1-7-2; 1-8-3; AND 4-2-3
IN THE VILLAGE OF LYONS, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
CHRISTOPHER GETTY, President
THOMAS F. SHEAHAN, Deputy Clerk
PATRICIA ALONZI
TERESA ECHEVERRIA
DAN HILKER
PAUL MARCHIORI
GREG RAMIEREZ
JAMES VESELSKY
Trustees
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lyons on 8/16/16
ODELSON & STERK, LTD. - Village Attorneys - 3318 West 95th Street - Evergreen Park, Illinois 60805
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 4/307
ORDINANCE NO. 08-16-16-M1
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF
THE VILLAGE OF LYONS AT SECTIONS 1-6-3; 1-7-2; 1-8-3; AND 4-2-3
IN THE VILLAGE OF LYONS, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
WHEREAS, the compensation of elected officials is set by the corporate authorities; and
WHEREAS, the elected officials are prohibited from receiving an increase or decrease in their compensation during their term of office; and
WHEREAS, the laws of the State of Illinois provide that the compensation of elected officials must be set at least 180 days prior to the next
election.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINEDby the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lyons, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 1-6-3 shall be amended to delete ATen Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($10,500.00)" and insert ATwelve Thousand Five
Hundred Dollars ($12,500.00) effective with the newly elected officials taking office, and subject to the longevity schedule as follows:
a. After serving eight (8) years, counting prior years served, the Village President’s salary will be $25,000.00 per year; after serving ten (10)
years, counting prior years served, the Village President’s salary will be $30,000.00 per year; and, after serving twelve (12) years, counting prior years
served, the Village President’s salary will be $45,000.00 per year.
b. There will be a three percent (3%) increase per annum on the salaries listed above.@
SECTION 2. Section 1-7-2 shall be amended to delete AFour Thousand Five Hundred Fifty Dollars ($4,550.00)” and insert “Seven Thousand Six
Hundred Dollars ($7,600.00) effective with the newly elected officials taking office, and subject to the longevity schedule as follows:
a. After serving four (4) years, counting prior years served, the Trustee’s salary will be $9,200.00 per year; after serving eight (8) years,
counting prior years served, the Trustee’s salary will be $10,800.00 per year; after serving ten (10) years, counting prior years served, the Trustee’s salary
will be $12,500.00 per year; and, after serving twelve (12) years, counting prior years served, the Trustee’s salary will be $15,500.00 per year.
b. There will be a three percent (3%) increase per annum on the salaries listed above.@
SECTION 3. Section 1-8-3 shall be amended to delete “Four Thousand Four Hundred Fifty Dollars ($4,450.00)” and insert “Seven Thousand Four
Hundred Dollars ($7,400.00) effective with the newly elected Clerk taking office, and subject to the longevity schedule as follows:
a. After serving four (4) years, counting prior years served, the Village Clerk’s salary will be $9,000.00 per year; after serving eight (8) years,
counting prior years served, the Village Clerk’s salary will be $10,600.00 per year; after serving ten (10) years, counting prior years served, the Village
Clerk’s salary will be $12,000.00 per year; and, after serving twelve (12) years, counting prior years served, the Village Clerk’s salary will be $14,500.00
per year.
b. There will be a three percent (3%) increase per annum on the salaries listed above.@
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 5/307
SECTION 4. Section 4-2-3 shall be amended to delete “Seven Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($7,500.00)” and insert “Seven Thousand Five
Hundred Dollars ($7,500.00) effective with the newly elected officials taking office, and subject to the longevity schedule as follows:
a. After serving eight (8) years, counting prior years served, the Liquor Control Commissioner’s salary will be $12,500.00 per year; after
serving ten (10) years, counting prior years served, the Liquor Control Commissioner’s salary will be $15,000.00 per year; and, after serving twelve (12)
years, counting prior years served, the Liquor Control Commissioner’s salary will be $25,000.00 per year.
b. There will be a three percent (3%) increase per annum on the salaries listed above.@
SECTION 5. The Village will pay the full health insurance benefits and full participation in the IMRF for the newly elected and reelected officials at
the April 4, 2017 election.
SECTION 6. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the
other provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 7. All ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
SECTION 8. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
ADOPTED this 16th day of August, 2016, pursuant to a roll call as follows:
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
THE VILLAGE OF LYONS
COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
ORDINANCE
NUMBER 12-09-15-05
AN ORDINANCE SETTING THE COMPENSATION FOR CERTAIN APPOINTED BOARD AND COMMISION OFFICIALS
IN THE VILLAGE OF LYONS,
COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
CHRISTOPHER GETTY, President
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 6/307
DAWN CAMPOS, Clerk
PATRICIA ALONZI
TERESA ECHEVERRIA
DAN HILKER
PAUL MARCHIORI
GREG RAMIEREZ
JAMES VESELSKY
Trustees
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lyons on 12/9/15
ODELSON & STERK, LTD. - Village Attorneys - 3318 West 95th Street - Evergreen Park, Illinois 60805
ORDINANCE NO. 12-09-15-O5
AN ORDINANCE SETTING THE COMPENSATION FOR CERTAIN
APPOINTED BOARD AND COMMISION OFFICIALS IN THE
VILLAGE OF LYONS, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
WHEREAS, the Village President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Lyons (the ACorporate Authorities@) are empowered to determine
and set the compensation, if any, for appointed members of Village boards and commissions;
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities have determined that appointment to and service on the Village Zoning Board of Appeals, the Plan
Commission, and the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners requires a significant amount of time dedicated to the carrying out the duties assigned in
the Code and statutes to the respective bodies; and
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities have determined it is in the best interest of the Village to set compensation for those members and
commissioners appointed to serve on those respective bodies.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lyons, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
Section 1. That the above recitals are incorporated herein and made a part hereof, as if fully set forth in their entirety.
Section 2. Subsection E. of Title 13, Chapter 3, Section 1-2 (“13-3-1-2: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS”) of the Code of Ordinances of the Village
of Lyons, Illinois, is hereby created to read, as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 7/307
“E. Compensation: Beginning January 1, 2016, the Chair of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be paid annually five thousand one hundred dollars
($5,100.00), and all other members shall be paid annually four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00).”
Section 3. Subsection E. of Title 13, Chapter 3, Section 1-3 (“13-3-1-3: PLAN COMMISSION”) of the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Lyons,
Illinois, is hereby created to read, as follows:
“E. Compensation: Beginning January 1, 2016, the Chair of the Plan Commission shall be paid annually three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), and all
other commissioners shall be paid annually two thousand one hundred dollars ($2,100.00).”
Section 4. Section 5. of Title 2, Chapter 1 (“BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS”) of the Code of Ordinances of the Village of Lyons,
Illinois, is hereby created to read, as follows:
“2-1-5: COMPENSATION:
Beginning January 1, 2016, the Chair of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be paid annually three thousand nine hundred dollars
($3,900.00), and all other commissioners shall be paid annually three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).”
Section 5.If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other
provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 6. All ordinances, resolutions, motions or orders in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section 7. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
(Intentionally Left Blank)
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Lyons, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 04-17-18-O2, passed April 17, 2018.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Village Of Lyons
Ordinance Number 02-17-09-02
An Ordinance Adopting The Code Of Ordinances
For The Village Of Lyons, Cook County, Illinois
Whereas, the village of Lyons, Illinois desired to reorganize and codify the code of ordinances for the village to make it easier for elected officials,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 8/307
employees, businesses, and residents to utilize and understand the village's codified ordinances; and
Whereas, the village approved a contract (resolution 06-19-07-R1) with Sterling Codifiers to complete the reorganization and codification of the village's
code of ordinances and provide bound and electronic versions of the code once the recodification was completed; and
Whereas, the village has received the new code of ordinances and after reviewing them wants to adopt the recodified code of ordinances (attached hereto
as exhibit A) as the official village code for the village of Lyons, Cook County, Illinois.
Now, Therefore, Be It Ordained by the president and board of trustees of the village of Lyons, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
Section 1: From and after February 17, 2009, the village code of the village of Lyons, Cook County, Illinois, as prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances (attached hereto and incorporated
herein as exhibit A), under the direction of the governing body of the village, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of
the village as enacted by the president and board of trustees.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting
provisions of the official village code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official village code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official village code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the village code.
Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the official village code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the village to be
misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval
and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
Passed This 17th day of February, 2009 by a roll call vote of the president and board of trustees:
Ayes:
Nays:
Absent:
Abstain:
Approved this 17th day of February, 2009
David A. Visk, Village President
Attested and filed this 17th day of February, 2009
Gary D. Benedik, Village Clerk
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
LYONS VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the village board of trustees, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of Lyons. This code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the LYONS VILLAGE CODE and is hereby published by authority of the board of trustees and shall be
supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the village as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any
section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general
penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal documents. (2009 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 9/307
The village code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of the
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (2009
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place
in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the village code. (2009
Code)
1-1-4: TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION:
Unless otherwise provided by state statute, the territorial jurisdiction for the enforcement of the provisions of this code is hereby extended to any
unincorporated portion of Cook County up to one mile beyond the municipal boundaries of the village of Lyons. (2009 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the village clerk when directed so to do by order of the village board of trustees.
(2009 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES; SPECIAL ORDINANCES EXCEPTED:
All general ordinances of the village passed by the president and board of trustees prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as
are included in this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections),
and excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
A. Tax levy ordinances.
B. Appropriation ordinances.
C. Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations.
D. Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations.
E. Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants.
F. Salary ordinances.
G. Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places.
H. Improvement ordinances.
I. Bond ordinances.
J. Ordinances relating to elections.
K. Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the village.
L. All special ordinances. (1965 Code § 1-2-1; amd. 2009 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 10/307
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of section 1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such matters,
in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances with respect to such provisions only. (1965 Code § 1-2-2)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance
takes effect.
B. Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing
provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any
penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or
provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this code. (1965 Code § 1-2-3; amd. 2009 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted by reference or any
codes or portions of codes adopted herein, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted by reference or any
codes or portions of codes adopted herein. The board of trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2009 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
A. Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the president and board of trustees may be fully carried out.
B. Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
C. Computation Of Time: The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
unless the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a
Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded.
D. Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other village officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
E. Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
F. Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
G. May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
H. Or; And: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 11/307
I. Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical
words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to
such meaning.
J. Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
K. Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of the village of Lyons".
L. Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
M. Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to village ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1965 Code § 1-4-1; amd. 2009 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meanings repugnant thereto:
ACTION: Shall include suits, prosecutions and all judicial proceedings.
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
BOARD OR BOARD OF TRUSTEES: Unless otherwise indicated, the village board of trustees of the village of Lyons.
CODE: The village code of the village of Lyons.
COUNTY: The county of Cook, state of Illinois.
COURT: Includes justices of the peace as well as all courts of record.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
IN THE VILLAGE OR WITHIN THE VILLAGE: Means and includes all territory over which the village now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the
exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or omission within the provisions of this code. The term does not require
any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or
omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the village, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the village.
OATH: Shall be deemed to include an affirmation, and the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed".
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: Any person who holds a written or an oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone
or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association or any city or state or any subdivision thereof; and includes any trustee, receiver,
assignee or personal representative thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
PRESIDENT: The president of the village of Lyons.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 12/307
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace all chattels real.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SEAL: The seal of the village of Lyons.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a
matter of right, for purposes of traffic.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
VILLAGE: The village of Lyons in Cook County, state of Illinois, except as otherwise provided.
WHOLESALER OR WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise,
articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act, or make the
omission referred to. The term does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person or, in case such person is unable to write, by
such person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year unless otherwise expressed. (1965 Code § 1-4-1; amd. 2009 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the village code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2009 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY1:
A. General Penalty Imposed: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this code, any person found to have been in violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this code shall be fined in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such fine,
penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. A penalty
for each offense may include a requirement that the offending party perform some reasonable public service work such as, but not limited to, picking up
litter in public parks or upon public highways or performing maintenance of public facilities. A violation hereof may be established by a preponderance
of the evidence.
B. Acts Consistent With Criminal Laws Of State; Misdemeanor: If, by the terms of an ordinance, an act that would be consistent with the criminal laws of
the state is declared to be a misdemeanor, the penalty therefor shall be for a period of incarceration in a penal institution other than the penitentiary not
to exceed six (6) months. The matter shall be prosecuted under the rules of criminal procedure of the state, and the village shall be required to
establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
C. Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established by
state statute for the same offense. (1965 Code § 1-3-1; amd. 2009 Code)
1-4-2: CITATIONS:
The code enforcement officer and his assignees may, in lieu of filing a complaint in court, issue P tickets for violation of village ordinances dealing with
building codes, zoning codes, property maintenance, health, sanitation and other nontraffic ordinances. Tickets shall carry a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00)
and will be processed, handled and settled as outlined in section 9-2-3 of this code. (1965 Code § 10-2-4; amd. 2009 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 13/307
A. Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each
and every separate section.
B. Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this
code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2009 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee
is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1965 Code § 1-3-5)
1-4-5: LICENSE REVOCATION AUTHORIZED:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any license previously issued to him by the village may be revoked as provided by
ordinance. (1965 Code § 1-3-3)
1-4-6: DISPOSITION OF FINES:
The village treasurer is hereby required to place all monies received by him as fines into the general fund. (1965 Code § 1-16-1)
Footnote 1: 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-1.1.
Chapter 5
ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS
1-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise:
BUILDING DIRECTOR: A full time village employee whose duties include the inspection or examination of structures or property in the village to determine
if zoning or other code violations exist.
CODE: Any municipal ordinance, law, housing or building code or zoning ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire
prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures in the village, or any municipal ordinance that requires, after
notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles or the abatement of nuisances from private
property.
HEARING OFFICER: A municipal employee or an officer or agent of the village, other than a building director or law enforcement officer, whose duty is to:
A. Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code violation exists.
B. Hear testimony and accept evidence from the building director, the building owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code
violation.
C. Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing.
D. Issue and sign a written findings, decision and order stating whether a code violation exists.
PROPERTY OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a structure. (1965 Code § 11-1-1)
1-5A-2: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT:
A. Department Established; Function: The corporate authorities of the village have adopted this article and established a code hearing department within
an existing code enforcement agency or as a separate and independent agency in the municipal government. The function of the hearing department is
to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner set forth in this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 14/307
B. Adjudicator Appointed: The adjudicator shall be appointed by the village manager. (1965 Code § 11-1-2)
1-5A-3: HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
This article does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce the provisions of this code. (1965 Code § 11-1-3)
1-5A-4: INSTITUTING CODE HEARING PROCEEDINGS:
A. Violation Noted On Form: When the building director finds a code violation while inspecting a structure, he shall note the violation on a multiple copy
violation notice and report form, indicating the name and address of the structure owner, the type and nature of the violation, the date and time the
violation was observed, the names of witnesses to the violation, and the address of the structure where the violation is observed.
B. Hearing Date Set By Code Hearing Department: The violation report form shall be forwarded by the building director to the code hearing department
where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the
form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported by the building director.
C. Distribution Of Copies Of Violation Report: One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing department and
shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the building director so that he may prepare evidence of the code
violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail on the owner of the
structure, along with a summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing. If the village in which the structure is situated has an ordinance
requiring property owners to register with the village, service may be made on the owner by mailing the report and summons to the owner's address
registered with the village. If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service
may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is found not
less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is scheduled. (1965 Code § 11-1-4)
1-5A-5: SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS:
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of the building director or the attorney for the village,
or the owner or his attorney, issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If, on the date set for the hearing, the owner
or his attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the owner in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a code violation. (1965 Code § 11-1-5)
1-5A-6: CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this article except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary
to protect the rights of the owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by the hearing officer under this
article shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. The case for the village may be presented by the building director, by any other municipal employee or by an
attorney designated by the village. However, in no event shall the case for the village be presented by an employee of the code hearing department. The
case for the dwelling owner may be presented by the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative. (1965 Code § 11-1-6)
1-5A-7: HEARING; EVIDENCE:
At the hearing, the hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code
violation in the structure indicated. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this article. (1965
Code § 11-1-7)
1-5A-8: RIGHTS OF OCCUPANTS:
No action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an
occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation hearing. (1965 Code § 11-1-8)
1-5A-9: DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a defense to a code violation charged under this article if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the hearing
officer's satisfaction that:
A. The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the time of the hearing, the violation has been remedied or removed.
B. The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants, and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling
free of such violation, the current occupants continue to cause the violation.
C. An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry by the owner or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the code
violation. (1965 Code § 11-1-9)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 15/307
1-5A-10: FINDINGS, DECISION, ORDER:
A. Determination: At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing
whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings,
decision and order shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact,
and an order ordering the owner to correct the violation or dismissing the case in the event a violation is not proved. If a code violation is proved, the
order may also impose the sanctions that are provided in the code for the violation proved.
B. Service To Owner Of Notice Of Findings: A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be served on the owner within five (5) days after it is issued;
service shall be in the same manner as the report form and summons are served pursuant to section 1-5A-4 of this article.
C. Payment Of Fine: Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in this code, unless the
corporate authorities provide otherwise. (1965 Code § 11-1-10)
1-5A-11: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
A. Compliance With Statute: The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit court of Cook County, and the
provisions of the administrative review law, and all amendments and modifications thereto1, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and
shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the final findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this article.
B. Judgment On Findings, Decision And Order:
1. Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
2. After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of Cook County for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision
and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a
proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied
by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-31.1 and this article. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided by section 2-203 of the code of civil
procedure2 or by certified mail, return receipt requested; provided, that the total amount of fines, other sanctions and costs imposed by the findings,
decision and order does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order were
entered in accordance with the requirements of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1 and this article, and that the property owner had an
opportunity for a hearing under this article, and for judicial review as provided in this article: a) the court shall render judgment in favor of the village
and against the property owner for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same effect
and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and b) the court may also issue such other orders and
injunctions as are requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a code violation. (1965 Code § 11-1-11)
1-5A-12: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER AND PROPERTY:
A. Order Attached To Owner And Property: The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the village as the result of a finding of a
code violation under this article shall attach to the property, as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a code violation against one
owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property is subject to the
findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this article. (1965 Code § 11-1-12)
B. Civil Liability For Rentals In Excess Of Number Permitted:
1. The owner of a building located in the village who, directly or indirectly, has collected, or caused to be collected, rentals from an occupant of that
building during a period in which the number of apartments or family units in that building exceeded the number permitted for that building by an
ordinance of the village, is liable to any such occupant in an amount equal to not more than three (3) times the amount of any rentals paid by any
such occupant, or in his behalf, after January 1, 1970, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees. If the occupant is a recipient of public
aid under article III, IV, or VI of the Illinois public aid code, approved April 11, 1967, as amended3, in whose behalf vendor payment of the rental was
made by the Illinois department of public aid, the department of human services (acting as successor to the department of public aid under the
department of human services act4) or the village, as the case may be, the liability as herein provided is to the Illinois department of public aid, the
department of human services (acting as successor to the department of public aid under the department of human services act) or the village
making the vendor payment of the rental. (1965 Code § 11-1-12; amd. 2009 Code)
2. For the purposes of this subsection, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
FAMILY UNIT: A room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. The fact that
any such family unit is used or intended to be used with cooking or eating accommodations in common with another family unit in any such building
does not affect liability hereunder.
OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a building.
C. Accrual Of Liability Following Notice To Violator: No liability accrues under this section until thirty (30) days after the owner of record of a building has
been notified in writing that such owner is in violation of any such municipal ordinance. Such notice shall be personally served upon such owner of
record or sent by registered mail to the last known address of such owner. (1965 Code § 11-1-12)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 16/307
Footnote 1: 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
Footnote 2: 735 ILCS 5/2-203.
Footnote 3: 305 ILCS 5/3-1 et seq., 5/4-1 et seq., or 5/6-1 et seq.
Footnote 4: 20 ILCS 1305/1-1 et seq.
ARTICLE B. VIOLATIONS OTHER THAN BUILDING AND TRAFFIC CODES
1-5B-1: APPLICABILITY:
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2 applies only to municipalities that are nonhome rule units. Nothing in this article allows a nonhome rule municipality to
pursue any remedies not otherwise authorized by statute. (1965 Code § 11-4-1; amd. 2009 Code)
1-5B-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CODE: Any municipal ordinances except for: a) building code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to article A of this chapter; and b) any offense
under the Illinois vehicle code1 or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles, and except for any reportable offense
under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code2.
HEARING OFFICER: A municipal employee or an officer or agent of the village, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
A. Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code violation exists;
B. Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code violation;
C. Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
D. Issue and sign a written findings, decision and order stating whether a code violation exists. (1965 Code § 11-4-2)
1-5B-3: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT:
A. Establishment Of Department; Function: There is hereby established a code hearing department. The function of the hearing department is to expedite
the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner set forth in this article. (1965 Code § 11-4-3; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Adjudication Of Violations; Exceptions: The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation of a municipal ordinance except for: 1) building code
violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1 (building code violations as defined therein3); and 2) any offense
under the Illinois vehicle code4 or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles, and except for any reportable offense
under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code5. (1965 Code § 11-4-3)
1-5B-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING OFFICERS:
A. Training Program: Prior to conducting proceedings under this article, hearing officers shall successfully complete a formal training program that includes
the following:
1. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing they will conduct;
2. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations they will administer;
3. Observation of administration hearings; and
4. Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and issuing final orders.
B. Qualifications: In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years. (1965
Code § 11-4-9)
1-5B-5: HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The village is not precluded from using other methods to enforce the provisions of this code. (1965 Code § 11-4-4; amd. 2009 Code)
1-5B-6: INSTITUTING CODE HEARING PROCEEDINGS:
A. Violation Noted On Form: When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code violation finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall
note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates: 1) the name and address of the defendant; 2) the type and nature of
the violation; 3) the date and time the violation was observed; and 4) the names of witnesses to the violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 17/307
B. Hearing Date Set By Code Hearing Department: The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department where a docket number
shall be stamped on all copies of the report, and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing
date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported.
C. Distribution Of Copies Of Violation Report: One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing department and
shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the village in the case so that he or
she may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served
by first class mail to the defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing. (1965 Code § 11-4-5)
1-5B-7: SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS:
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give
testimony at the hearing. If, on the date set for hearing, the defendant or his or her attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in
default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation. (1965 Code § 11-4-6)
1-5B-8: CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this article except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary
to protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by the hearing officer under
this article shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. The case for the village may be presented by an attorney designated by the village or by any other
village employee; except, that the case for the village shall not be presented by an employee of the code hearing department. The case for the defendant
may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any other agent or representative of the defendant. (1965 Code § 11-4-7; amd. 2009 Code)
1-5B-9: HEARING; EVIDENCE:
At the hearing, the hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony and shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code
violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this article. (1965 Code § 11-4-8)
1-5B-10: FINDINGS, DECISION, ORDER:
A. Determination: At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as
to whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings,
decision and order shall include: 1) the hearing officer's findings of fact; 2) a decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings
of fact; and 3) an order that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not proved. A monetary sanction for a violation under this article
shall not exceed that which is provided for in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, that being a fine not greater than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each separate date during which the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
B. Service To Defendant Of Notice Of Findings: A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be served on the defendant within five (5) days after it is
issued. Service shall be in the same manner that the report form and summons are served as per section 1-5B-6 of this article. (1965 Code § 11-4-10)
C. Overdue Fine; Penalty Assessment: An overdue penalty or fine shall be subject to fifteen percent (15%) per annum interest and subject to collection
action. All fines and penalties collected shall be deposited in the general revenues of the village minus any fees generated by a lawfully contracted
collection agency. (1965 Code § 11-4-10; amd. 2009 Code)
1-5B-11: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit court of Cook County. The provisions of the administrative
review law6 and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision and order of a
hearing officer under this article. (1965 Code § 11-4-11)
1-5B-12: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER:
A. Debt To Village; Collection: Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as
such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law. (1965 Code § 11-4-12)
B. Proceedings In District Court: After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the administrative review law may be sought for a final
determination of the code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of Cook County for the purpose of obtaining a judgment
on the findings, decision and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions and orders against a
person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be
accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2 and this article. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for by section 2-203 of
the code of civil procedure7 or by certified mail, return receipt requested; provided, that the total amount of fines, other sanctions and costs imposed by
the findings, decision and order does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and
order was entered in accordance with the requirements of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2 and this article and that the defendant had an
opportunity for a hearing under this article and for judicial review as provided in this article: (1965 Code § 11-4-12; amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 18/307
1. The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus
costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
2. The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a
code violation. (1965 Code § 11-4-12)
Footnote 1: 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
Footnote 2: 625 ILCS 5/6-204.
Footnote 3: See article A of this chapter.
Footnote 4: 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
Footnote 5: 625 ILCS 5/6-204.
Footnote 6: 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
Footnote 7: 735 ILCS 5/2-203.
Chapter 6
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
1-6-1: ELECTION AND TERM:
The village president shall be elected for a term provided by statute and shall be president of the board of trustees. (1965 Code § 1-5-1)
1-6-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village president shall have such powers and perform the duties as follows:
A. Generally: He shall sign all commissions and permits issued by the board of trustees and grant all licenses, except as otherwise provided by law and
ordinance, and he shall perform other acts as may be required by law. (1965 Code § 1-5-3)
B. Supervision: He shall supervise the conduct of all officers of the village, examine the grounds of all reasonable complaints made against any of them,
and cause all their violations of duty and other neglects to be reported to the board for correction. (1965 Code § 1-5-4)
C. Signature Authorized: He is hereby authorized to sign, in behalf of the village, all instruments necessary to the prompt prosecution or defense of any or
all actions brought by or against the village, including bonds for injunction. (1965 Code § 1-5-6)
D. Presiding Officer: He shall preside at all meetings of the board, and, except as otherwise provided by state statute, shall have the same powers and
perform the same duties as the mayor of a city. He shall devote to the duties of his office whatever time the faithful discharge thereof may require.
(1965 Code § 1-5-7)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 08-16-16-M1 - SALARIES. Go to new ordinance.
1-6-3: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the village president shall be ten thousand five hundred dollars ($10,500.00) per annum effective May 1, 2013, and an additional
increase of two percent (2%) per annum thereafter to be divided into equal monthly installments payable each month. (1965 Code § 1-5-9; amd. Ord. 12-
07-11-O6, 12-7-2011)
1-6-4: PRESIDENT PRO TEM:
During a temporary absence or disability of the village president, the board of trustees shall elect one of its number to act as president pro tem, who,
during such absence or disability, shall possess the powers of the village president. (1965 Code § 1-5-8)
Chapter 7
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-7-1: ELECTION; TERM; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of trustees shall consist of six (6) members, who shall be elected to office for the term as provided by statute. The board shall be the legislative
department of the village government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be delegated to it by statute. (1965 Code § 1-6-1)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 08-16-16-M1 - SALARIES. Go to new ordinance.
1-7-2: OATH AND COMPENSATION1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 19/307
The members of the board of trustees shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute, and shall receive four thousand five hundred fifty dollars
($4,550.00) per annum effective May 1, 2013, and an additional increase of two percent (2%) per annum thereafter. (1965 Code § 1-6-2; amd. 2009 Code;
Ord. 12-07-11-O6, 12-7-2011)
1-7-3: BOARD MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the finance committee of the board of trustees shall be held on the first and third Tuesday of each month
beginning at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. The regular meetings of the board of trustees shall be held on the first and third Tuesday of each month beginning
at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. The meeting place of the board of trustees shall be in the boardroom in the village hall unless otherwise specified by the
board of trustees. (Ord. 12-17-14-O1, 12-17-2014)
B. Special Meetings:
1. Special meetings may be held at any time, on call of the president or any three (3) or more trustees; such call shall be in writing, duly signed, and
shall be presented to the village clerk, who shall proceed immediately to prepare notices of the same, and shall cause them to be served on the
president and members of the board of trustees. Said service shall be made by placing the notice in the elected official's normal correspondence box
and by personal or telephonic notification. Such notices shall describe, in brief, the nature or object of the call. (1965 Code § 1-6-4)
2. Public notice of any special meeting, except a meeting held in the event of a bona fide emergency, or of any rescheduled regular meeting, or of any
reconvened meeting, shall be given at least forty eight (48) hours before such meeting, which notice shall also include the agenda for the special,
rescheduled, or reconvened meeting, but the validity of any action taken by the corporate authorities which is germane to a subject on the agenda
shall not be affected by other errors or omissions in the agenda. (2009 Code)
3. At every special meeting, the call for the same shall be read and afterward filed by the clerk; and no business other than that proposed by call shall
be in order at such meeting. Provided, however, that the notice and call required herein shall be considered waived as to the president or any
member of the board of trustees who is actually present and participates in the business of any such special meeting2. (1965 Code § 1-6-4)
1-7-4: QUORUM:
A majority of the elected voting members, being the trustees and village president, shall constitute a quorum to do business, but no ordinance shall be
passed except upon a favorable vote of the majority of the elected voting members, as provided by statute. (1965 Code § 1-6-5)
1-7-5: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
A. Robert's Rules Of Order: So far as the same is not inconsistent with this code or statutes of the state of Illinois, proceedings of the board shall be
conducted as nearly as may be reasonable under the then most current edition of "Robert's Rules Of Order". (1965 Code § 1-6-7)
B. Testimony Or Comments:
1. It is the policy of the village board to permit comments by members of the public at regular board meetings on agenda items before a vote is taken.
The village board permits comments by members of the public at regular board meetings on any village issue at the end of the meeting.
2. No person shall address the village board without first securing the recognition of the village president.
3. Each person desiring to address the village board shall approach the podium, state his or her name and address for the record, state the subject,
state whom he or she is representing if he or she represents an organization or other persons, and shall limit his or her remarks to three (3) minutes.
All remarks shall be addressed to the village board as a whole and not to any member thereof. No questions shall be asked of a village board
member or a member of the village staff.
4. In order to expedite village business and to avoid repetitious presentations, whenever any group of persons wishes to address the village board on
the same subject matter, it shall be in order for the village president to encourage that a spokesperson be chosen from the group to address the
village board. If additional matters are to be presented by any other members of the group, the president may limit the number of such persons and
limit the presentation to information not already presented by the group spokesperson.
5. Village residents shall be given priority in addressing the village board and all comments total shall be limited to thirty (30) minutes in duration.
Visitors' statements and comments shall be limited to matters relating to the village; language of a lewd, insulting or provocative nature shall not be
permitted; and participants shall conduct themselves in an orderly and civil manner. (Ord. 10-20-09-03, 10-20-2009)
1-7-6: RECORDS:
A. Boards And Commissions, Certified Record: Every board and commission created by the board of trustees shall keep a true and accurate record of all
its proceedings. A copy of this record, certified by the clerk of the board or commission or by two (2) members thereof, shall be filed with the village
clerk and shall become part of the records of the village. (1965 Code § 1-6-8)
B. Tape Recordings: All tape recordings made by village boards and village commissions of their meetings are for assistance in transcribing minutes and
are not the official record of the village. Minutes prepared from these tapes will be approved by a majority vote of the board or commission and are the
official village records. Recording tapes may be disposed of by the village after the minutes have been approved by the board or commission. (1965
Code § 1-6-8; amd. 2009 Code)
1-7-7: STANDING COMMITTEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 20/307
A. The following shall be the standing committees of the board of trustees:
1. Finance Committee: The finance committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions of the following areas: finance department,
purchasing and personnel departments, personnel evaluation and council rules.
2. Public Safety Committee: The public safety committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions of the following areas: police
department, fire department, civil defense and animal control.
3. Public Works Committee: The public works committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions of the following areas: building
department, street and alley department, maintenance department, sewer department and public buildings, equipment and property.
4. Committee On Permits And Licenses: The permits and licenses committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions associated with
business permits and licenses.
5. Committee On Ordinances And Resolutions: The ordinances and resolutions committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions of the
following areas: legal, zoning ordinances and resolutions.
6. Committee On Community Events: The community events committee shall have the responsibility to oversee various community events sponsored
or promoted by the village.
B. The village president shall appoint the members of the standing committees and shall appoint the chairman thereof.
C. Each trustee shall be a member of two (2) standing committees and the chairman of one standing committee. Vacancies on any committee shall be
filled as herein provided for original appointments. (Ord. 05-17-11-O4, 5-17-2011)
1-7-8: VIDEO RECORDING POLICY:
A. Location Of Equipment, Village Boardroom: All persons who are nonvillage personnel using video recording equipment during meetings in the village
boardroom are to set up behind the last row of seats and clear of any doors in an area designated by the village board for video recording equipment.
To prevent a tripping hazard from extension cords, individuals using video equipment shall have their own power source or connect directly to an outlet.
The outlet on the west wall of the village boardroom shall be reserved for the official village video photographer. Tripods shall be positioned so as to not
create a tripping hazard for the audience. Loose wires shall be contained under a tripod or as close to the village video photographer as possible.
Chairs or benches shall not be used to stand on, or as equipment tables. (1965 Code § 1-6-9; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Location In Other Rooms; Witnesses May Refuse To Testify: When meetings are held in rooms other than the village boardroom, an area will be
designated by the chair conducting the meeting for video recording equipment. Witnesses giving testimony at these meetings may refuse to be
recorded if they so choose. (1965 Code § 1-6-9)
C. Violation; Penalty: Any person violating the terms and conditions of this section shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. In
addition, the village may take whatever action it may deem appropriate to enforce the terms of this section, including an action for injunction. All
attorney fees and costs incurred by the village in enforcing the terms of this section shall be paid by the violator. (1965 Code § 1-6-9; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 8
VILLAGE CLERK
1-8-1: ELECTION AND TERM:
The village clerk shall be elected for a term as provided by statute. (1965 Code § 1-7-1)
1-8-2: DUTIES:
The village clerk shall have and perform the following duties:
A. Issue notices to the members of the board of trustees when directed to do so. He shall also issue notices of the meetings of the board of trustees.
B. Duly direct to the village president all ordinances and resolutions in his charge which may be required to be approved or otherwise acted upon by the
president, together with all papers on which the same are founded.
C. Keep the corporate seal of the village, and all papers belonging to the village.
D. Attend all meetings of the village board, and keep a full record of its proceeds in the journal.
E. Receive all communications addressed to the board. The clerk shall cause all ordinances imposing any fines, penalties, imprisonment or forfeiture, or
making any appropriations to be published in such newspaper as the board shall designate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 21/307
F. File with the county clerk each year after its passage the annual tax levy ordinance.
G. Record and maintain all ordinances passed by the village board, and all other records of the village not otherwise specifically statutorily reserved to the
custody of any other officer.
H. Perform such other additional duties as now are, or hereafter may be, prescribed by the statutes of the state and provisions of this code. (1965 Code
§ 1-7-3)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 08-16-16-M1 - SALARIES. Go to new ordinance.
1-8-3: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the village clerk shall be four thousand four hundred fifty dollars ($4,450.00) per annum effective May 1, 2013, and an additional
increase of two percent (2%) per annum thereafter. (1965 Code § 1-7-4; amd. Ord. 12-07-11-O6, 12-7-2011)
1-8-4: DEPUTY CLERK:
The village clerk may appoint an individual to serve as deputy clerk. The appointed individual shall receive no additional compensation for the discharge of
the duties of deputy clerk. (1965 Code § 1-7-5)
Chapter 9
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
1-9-1: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
A. Bonds Required: Bonds shall be furnished in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by village board, such bond to be conditioned on
the faithful performance of duties and shall indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or other acts. The cost of the bond shall
be paid by the village. (1965 Code § 1-21-1)
B. Bond Amounts: Bonds shall be in the following amounts:
Village manager $50,000.00
Director of finance 50,000.00
Clerk 10,000.00
Treasurer 50,000.00
(1965 Code § 1-21-2; amd. 2009 Code)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE MANAGER1
1-9A-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM; RESIDENCY:
A. Appointment: There shall be the office of village manager, which office shall be filled by the appointment by and approval of a majority of the board of
trustees. (1965 Code § 1-23-1)
B. Term; Contract: The office of village manager shall have an indefinite term. The conditions of the manager's appointment may be set forth in an
agreement, although such agreement may not limit the term of the manager's appointment to a definite term nor shall any such agreement extend
beyond the term of the then sitting village president.
C. Residency: The village manager need not be a resident of the village. (1965 Code § 1-23-2)
1-9A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Intent: In the event that article 5 of the Illinois municipal code2 shall hereafter be amended to enlarge or diminish the powers of the village manager, this
article shall likewise be deemed to be amended so that the village manager's powers and duties are the maximum permitted by law. (1965 Code § 1-
23-6)
B. Powers And Duties Enumerated: The powers and duties of the village manager shall be:
1. To enforce the laws and ordinances within the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 22/307
2. To appoint and remove all directors of departments. No appointment shall be made upon any basis other than that of merit and fitness; except, that if
the chief of the police department or fire department, or both of them, are appointed in the manner as provided by ordinance under section 10-2.1-4
of the Illinois municipal code3, they may be removed or discharged by the appointing authority. In such case, the appointing authority shall file with
the corporate authorities the reasons for such removal or discharge, which removal or discharge shall not become effective unless confirmed by a
majority vote of the corporate authorities.
3. To exercise control of all departments and divisions thereof now in existence or that may be created by the board of trustees, including, but not
limited to, hiring all employees, except as otherwise provided by statute.
4. To have all the powers and exercise all the duties granted elsewhere in the Illinois municipal code to municipal clerks and comptrollers with respect
to the preparation of a report of estimated funds necessary to defray the expenses of the village for the fiscal year for the consideration of the
corporate authorities prior to the preparation of the annual budget.
5. To attend all meetings of the board of trustees with the right to take part in the discussions, but with no right to vote.
6. To recommend to the board of trustees for adoption, such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient.
7. To be the authority responsible for the administration and use of village buildings and facilities.
8. To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or may be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the board of trustees. (1965 Code
§ 1-23-3; amd. 2009 Code)
9. (Rep. by Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
10. In the event of the manager's temporary absence or illness, the village president hereby delegates his authority under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/5-3-7 to the village manager to designate a qualified administrative officer of the village as the acting village manager to fulfill the manager's
responsibilities during such absence or illness. (Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009; amd. Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE TREASURER
1-9B-1: APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of village treasurer, an executive office of the village. The village manager shall fulfill the office and duties of village
treasurer. (Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009)
1-9B-2: DUTIES:
The village treasurer shall receive and deposit the monies of the village. He shall, subject to specific directions from the president and board of trustees,
distribute the village funds among authorized depositories, banks and financial institutions. He shall keep books of account, showing all sums received and
all deposits made, and he shall from time to time make a full account of all the financial transactions to the board of trustees. (1965 Code § 1-8-2)
1-9B-3: COMPENSATION:
The village treasurer shall receive as compensation for his services such amount as is budgeted in the annual budget of the village. (1965 Code § 1-8-3;
amd. 2009 Code)
ARTICLE C. CORPORATION COUNSEL AND VILLAGE PROSECUTOR
1-9C-1: CORPORATION COUNSEL:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of corporation counsel.
B. Appointment: The corporation counsel shall be appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and need not be
a resident of the village. The office of corporation counsel may be filled by a law firm or an individual and may be considered an independent contractor
of the village. (1965 Code § 1-13-1; amd. 2009 Code)
C. Duties: The corporation counsel shall attend all board meetings and shall perform for the village, for the village officials, and for all boards and
commissions such legal services as are designated by the village manager. (1965 Code § 1-13-3; amd. 2009 Code)
1-9C-2: VILLAGE PROSECUTOR:
A. Appointment: The village prosecutor shall be an officer of the village and shall be appointed by the village manager. (1965 Code § 1-13-2; amd. 2009
Code)
B. Duties: The village prosecutor shall represent the village in court for the prosecution of village ordinances relating to traffic violations, parking violations,
misdemeanors and such other matters as may be assigned to the village prosecutor by the corporation counsel. (1965 Code § 1-13-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 23/307
1-9C-3: COMPENSATION:
The corporation counsel and village prosecutor shall receive as compensation for services, an hourly legal fee as negotiated between the corporation
counsel and village prosecutor and the board of trustees. If necessary, the board of trustees shall, from time to time, budget additional funds to
compensate the corporation counsel and village prosecutor for services performed. (1965 Code § 1-13-4; amd. 2009 Code)
ARTICLE D. HEALTH OFFICER
1-9D-1: APPOINTMENT; FUNCTION; COMPENSATION:
There is hereby created the office of health officer. The health officer shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board
of trustees. He shall have the management and control of all matters and things pertaining to the health department and shall receive such salary as shall
be fixed by the village board. (1965 Code § 1-17-1; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009; Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
1-9D-2: POWERS, DUTIES AND AUTHORITY:
A. Supervision: The health officer shall have and exercise a general supervision over the sanitary condition of the village. All orders and directions
emanating from the health department shall be issued in the name of the health officer. (1965 Code § 1-17-2)
B. Powers And Duties Generally: The health officer shall have all powers and perform all duties conferred upon or assigned to him, as such, by the
provisions of this article. He shall be responsible for the enforcement of all laws, ordinances and regulations relating to public health, to sanitation and
to the abatement of nuisances. (1965 Code § 1-17-3)
C. Authority: The health officer shall, when requested by the village president or by the board of trustees, or any committee thereof, furnish advice on all
matters relating to public health and sanitation and to the prevention and control of contagious or communicable diseases. He shall have authority,
subject to the direction and control of the president and board of trustees, to enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and all orders of the president
and board of trustees relating to public health and sanitation. (1965 Code § 1-17-4)
D. Inspection; Report:
1. The health officer shall carry out and enforce the laws of the state and the provisions of this code relating to sanitation regulations.
2. He shall also inspect all plumbing within the corporate limits of the village to see that the same comply with law and the provisions of this code.
3. He shall, once each month, or more often if required, prepare and file with the president and board of trustees a written report of all acts performed
by him as health officer. (1965 Code § 1-17-5)
E. Right To Arrest: The health officer and each agent or employee thereof shall have the right and authority to arrest or cause to be arrested any person
who violates the state law or the provisions of this code relating to health and sanitation. (1965 Code § 1-17-6)
F. Enforcement Powers: The health officer and each agent or employee thereof, and the police officers of the village, shall have the power to enforce all
the laws of the state and the provisions of this code in relation to the sanitation regulations of the village. (1965 Code § 1-17-7; amd. 2009 Code)
ARTICLE E. VILLAGE VIDEO PHOTOGRAPHER
1-9E-1: APPOINTMENT:
The corporate authorities of the village may create the position of village video photographer. The village video photographer shall be appointed by the
village president, with the consent of the board of trustees. (1965 Code § 1-22-1)
1-9E-2: INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR:
The video photographer shall be an independent contractor and not considered an employee of the village. While the video photographer shall, at all
times, be subject to the general directions of the village manager or village clerk, it is expected he/she shall perform the duties without specific detailed
supervision to the extent deemed necessary and expected by a video professional. (1965 Code § 1-22-2)
1-9E-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The video photographer shall videotape all village board meetings and committee of the whole meetings, except for closed sessions or executive
sessions. He shall also tape other committee meetings designated by the village manager or village clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 24/307
B. The video recorder may, at the request of the village manager or village clerk, be called upon to provide video evidence at disaster scenes, community
events, etc. However, unless the village manager or village clerk specifically requests the video photographer attendance at said event or location, it
shall be considered voluntary and outside the scope of the duties authorized by the village. (1965 Code § 1-22-3)
1-9E-4: TAPES PROPERTY OF VILLAGE:
All tapes are the property of the village and must be turned over to the village manager or village clerk immediately following the meeting or event being
filmed. It shall be the responsibility of the village manager or village clerk to deliver the films to Cablevision for broadcast. The village manager or village
clerk shall keep an inventory of tapes, accounting for the tapes delivered to Cablevision and expediting their return from Cablevision after they have
completed their broadcast. After broadcast, the village clerk is authorized to receive said copies for a historical permanent record. (1965 Code § 1-22-4)
1-9E-5: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the video photographer shall be established on an annual basis by the village board. However, said compensation shall not exceed
one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. The video photographer is expected to provide all local transportation necessary and equipment necessary to
perform his duties. (1965 Code § 1-22-5)
ARTICLE F. VILLAGE COLLECTOR
1-9F-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
There is hereby established the office of village collector in and for the village. This office shall be appointed and have the duties as specified in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-30-15; 5/3.1-35-120; and 5/3.1-35-135. (Ord. 05-04-11-O1, 5-4-2011)
1-9F-2: APPOINTMENT:
The elected village clerk shall assume the office of village collector unless otherwise determined by the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 05-04-11-
O1, 5-4-2011)
1-9F-3: DUTIES:
The collector shall preserve all warrants returned to the collector and shall keep books and accounts in the manner prescribed by the corporate authorities.
The collector shall pay to the treasurer or finance director or other appropriate village official all monies collected from any source. The collector shall also
supervise the everyday activities of the clerical and secretarial staff of the administrative offices of the village of Lyons. The collector shall report to the
village manager. (Ord. 05-04-11-O1, 5-4-2011)
1-9F-4: COMPENSATION:
The village collector shall receive a salary of thirty four thousand dollars ($34,000.00) per year in addition to any other established salaries for any other
positions. (Ord. 05-04-11-O1, 5-4-2011)
1-9F-5: TERM:
The village collector shall serve a term of one year from May 1 to the following April 30 and continue in office unless otherwise appointed by the president
with the consent of the village board. (Ord. 05-04-11-O1, 5-4-2011)
ARTICLE G. ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT TO THE VILLAGE MANAGER AND
PRESIDENT
1-9G-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION:
There is hereby established the position of administrative assistant to the village manager and president. (Ord. 05-04-11-O2, 5-4-2011)
1-9G-2: APPOINTMENT:
The administrative assistant shall be appointed by the village manager unless otherwise determined by the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 05-04-
11-O2, 5-4-2011)
1-9G-3: DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 25/307
The administrative assistant shall perform those duties as assigned by the village manager and president concerning the everyday operation of all of the
departments of the village. (Ord. 05-04-11-O2, 5-4-2011)
1-9G-4: COMPENSATION:
The administrative assistant shall receive the compensation as set forth by the village manager with the current salary being thirty four thousand five
hundred dollars ($34,500.00). (Ord. 05-04-11-O2, 5-4-2011)
ARTICLE H. DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
1-9H-1: APPOINTMENT; DUTIES:
There is hereby created a position of deputy director of public works who shall be appointed by the village manager. The deputy director of public works
shall assist the director of public works in the management and operation of the department of public works and shall perform such duties as are assigned
him from time to time by the director of public works or the village manager. (Ord. 06-07-11-O1, 6-7-2011)
Chapter 10
ETHICS
1-10-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/5-15 and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through 430/10-40 of the state officials and employees
ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this chapter) are hereby adopted by reference and made
applicable to the officers and employees of the village to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. (2009 Code)
1-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c). (2009 Code)
1-10-3: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a). (2009 Code)
1-10-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Gifts:
1. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is hereby
prohibited.
2. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the village under the act is hereby prohibited.
B. Political Activities: The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited. (2009
Code)
1-10-5: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar violations of the
act. (2009 Code)
1-10-6: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date hereof shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be
applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action by the village president and
board of trustees. (2009 Code)
1-10-7: UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 26/307
A. If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois supreme
court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the president and board of trustees if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court.
B. If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not address the
remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act, as adopted by this chapter, shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this chapter
relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village. (2009
Code)
Chapter 11
CORPORATE SEAL
1-11-1: CONSTRUCTION:
The corporate seal of the village shall be circular in form, and be so constructed as to impress upon paper the words, "Village of Lyons, Gateway to the
West", and shall be designed to conform with exhibit A attached to ordinance 4-16-96-2. (1965 Code § 1-11-1)
1-11-2: USES; CUSTODY:
The corporate seal shall be and remain in the custody of the village clerk, and his successor in office, to be used by him in all cases provided by the
provisions of this code or the laws of the state of Illinois, and in all such other cases where, by the laws and customs of any state or nation, the use of the
corporate seal of the village becomes necessary. (1965 Code § 1-11-2)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 12-09-15-05 - COMPENSATION. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 1
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS1
2-1-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
A. There is hereby created a board of fire and police commissioners. The village president, with the consent of the board of trustees, shall appoint the
board which shall consist of three (3) members whose terms of office shall be three (3) years, and until their respective successors shall be appointed
and qualified. (1965 Code §§ 2-7-1, 2-7-2; amd. 2009 Code)
B. The village president shall appoint the first members of the board. One of the members shall be appointed to serve until the end of the current municipal
year, the second member to serve until the end of the second municipal year, and the third member to serve until the end of the third municipal year.
(1965 Code § 2-7-3)
2-1-2: QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; REMOVAL:
One of the three (3) members of the board shall be a representative citizen of the employer class, one shall be a representative citizen chosen from the
employee class, and the third shall be a representative citizen not identified with the employee class. Each shall possess the qualifications required of
other officers of the village and shall take the oath of office. Members shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written charges, and after an
opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days in his or their own defense, before a regular meeting of the corporate authorities. A majority vote of the
corporate authorities shall be required to remove any such member from office. (1965 Code § 2-7-4; amd. 2009 Code)
2-1-3: APPOINTMENT OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers and members of the fire and police departments of the village, with the exception of
the chief of police and the chief of the fire department2, unless the president and board of trustees shall by ordinance to them otherwise provide3.
Appointments to each department other than that of the lowest rank, however, shall be from the rank next below that to which the appointment is made;
except, that the chief of the police department and chief of the fire department may be appointed from among the members of the police and fire
departments, respectively, regardless of rank. (1965 Code § 2-7-5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 27/307
2-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS; PUBLICATION:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall make rules to carry out the purpose of this chapter, and rules for appointments or removals in accordance
with the provisions of state law. Said rules, published in pamphlet form, were adopted by the board of fire and police commissioners on September 25,
1995, and the village board on November 21, 1995. (1965 Code § 2-7-6)
Footnote 1: See section 1-7-6 of this code for records and tape recording requirements.
Footnote 2: See subsection 6-1-2A of this code for appointment of fire chief.
Footnote 3: See subsection 6-1-3A2a of this code for appointment of fire department members by the fire chief.
Chapter 2
E-911 BOARD1
2-2-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
A. Established; Membership; Appointment: The board of trustees hereby establishes an emergency telephone system board ("ETS board"). The ETS
board shall consist of seven (7) members, and appointments shall be made by the village manager, the makeup of which shall at all times comply with
50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/15.4, and any and all other applicable Illinois statutes as regards the Lyons ETS board membership number,
membership qualifications, membership, demographic distribution, powers, authorities, duties and responsibilities. (1965 Code § 2-14-1; amd. 2009
Code)
B. Term: Members of the board shall serve an indefinite term. (1965 Code § 2-14-2)
2-2-2: DUTIES:
A. Duties Enumerated: The duties of the ETS board shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
1. Planning a 911 system.
2. Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading or maintenance of the system, including the establishment of equipment specifications
and coding systems.
3. Receiving monies from the surcharge imposed and from any other source for deposit into the emergency telephone system fund (the "fund").
4. Authorizing all disbursements from the fund.
5. Hiring, on a temporary basis, any staff necessary for the implementation or upgrade of the system.
B. Expenditures For Certain Purposes Only: All monies received by the ETS board shall be deposited into an emergency telephone system fund. The
village treasurer shall be the custodian of the fund. All interest accruing on the fund shall remain in the fund. No expenditures may be made from such
fund except upon the direction of the ETS board by resolution passed by a majority of all members of said board. Expenditures may be made only to
pay for the costs associated with the following:
1. The design of the emergency telephone system.
2. The coding of an initial master street address guide database and update and maintenance thereof.
3. The repayment of any monies advanced for the implementation of the system.
4. The charges for automatic number identification and automatic location identification equipment, and maintenance, replacement and update thereof.
5. The nonrecurring charges related to installation of the emergency telephone system and the ongoing network charges.
6. Other products and services necessary for the implementation, upgrade and maintenance of the system and including costs attributable directly to
the construction, leasing or maintenance of any buildings or facilities or costs of personnel attributable directly to the operation of the system. The
costs attributable directly to the operation of the emergency telephone system do not include the costs of public safety agency personnel who are,
and equipment that is, dispatched in response to an emergency call. (1965 Code § 2-14-3)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION:
The board shall choose its own officers as new. (1965 Code § 2-14-4)
Footnote 1: See section 1-7-6 of this code for records and tape recording requirements.
Chapter 3
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 28/307
2-3-1: ORGANIZATION CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created the village emergency services and disaster agency to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate attack, sabotage, or other hostile
action or from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with the Illinois emergency management agency act2 (the "act"). This emergency services and
disaster agency (ESDA) shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the coordinator. (1965 Code § 2-3-1; amd.
2009 Code)
2-3-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator shall be appointed by the village manager and shall serve until removed by same. The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction and control of the village manager as provided by statute. (Ord.
04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009)
2-3-3: FUNCTIONS:
The village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the village as shall be prescribed by statute and by the state emergency operations plan and
program, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the state EMA. In addition, the village ESDA shall perform such duties outside
the corporate limits of the village as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with another political subdivision, municipality, or quasimunicipal
entity entered into as provided in the act. (1965 Code § 2-3-3; amd. 2009 Code)
2-3-4: MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the village ESDA may be designated by the director of the state EMA as members of a mobile support team created as provided in
the act. Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee, while serving within or without the village in the capacity of a mobile support
team member, shall have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities and receive the compensation incidental to their employment. (1965 Code § 2-3-4;
amd. 2009 Code)
2-3-5: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT:
The coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipalities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall
be effective until it has been approved by the corporate authorities of each political subdivision. (1965 Code § 2-3-5)
2-3-6: DISASTER EMERGENCY:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state of
Illinois of a disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the village ESDA to
cooperate fully with the state EMA and with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (1965 Code § 2-3-6; amd. 2009 Code)
2-3-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the village ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the village shall be paid for time spent performing ESDA training and duties as if they
were performing their various village duties. (1965 Code § 2-3-7)
2-3-8: STATE REIMBURSEMENT:
The village treasurer shall seek reimbursement from the state for compensation paid and the actual and necessary expenses of paid employees of the
village serving outside the village as members of a mobile support team as provided in the act and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to
ESDA activities as provided by law. (1965 Code § 2-3-8)
2-3-9: AUTHORIZATION:
The corporate authorities may, on the recommendation of the coordinator, make any purchase or enter into any contract necessary to place the village in a
position to protect the public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of any disaster, manmade or
natural. In the event of any disaster, the coordinator is authorized on behalf of the village to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may
be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to
village contracts or obligations, as authorized by the act; provided, that if the village board meets at such time, the coordinator shall act subject to the
direction and restrictions imposed by that body. (1965 Code § 2-3-9)
2-3-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity, whether compensated or noncompensated, in the village ESDA shall, before entering upon his duties,
subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator:
I, , do solemnly swear (or affirm that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 29/307
Constitution of the State of Illinois and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic:
That I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I
am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence: and that during such time as I am affiliated with the
Village of Lyons ESDA Organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or this State by force or violence.
(1965 Code § 2-3-10)
2-3-11: OFFICE SPACE DESIGNATED:
The village president is authorized to designate space in a village building for the village ESDA office. (1965 Code § 2-3-11)
2-3-12: APPROPRIATIONS:
The corporate authorities may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner provided by law, and may levy a tax not to exceed five cents
($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value of all taxable property for ESDA purposes only. However, the amount collectable under
such levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. (1965 Code § 2-3-12)
2-3-13: NOTIFICATION TO MEDIA:
Prior to conducting an exercise, the village president or his designee shall notify area media with written notification of the disaster training exercise. Such
notification shall indicate that information relating to the exercise shall not be released to the public until the commencement of the exercise. The
publication shall also contain a request that the notice be so posted to ensure that all relevant media personnel are advised of the exercise before it
begins. During the conduct of such exercise, all messages, two-way radio communications, briefings, status reports, news releases, and other oral or
written communications shall begin and end with the following statement: "This Is An Exercise Message". (1965 Code § 2-3-13; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 4
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS/PLAN COMMISSION1
(Rep. by Ord. 08-17-11-O1, 8-17-2011)
Chapter 5
BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS1
2-5-1: CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby established a building board of appeals as provided by ICC code to provide a hearing process to challenge the decision of the building
director. The building director shall be an ex officio member of the board, but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall consist of
members who are qualified by training and experience and who are not employees of the village. The board shall be composed of three (3) members that
shall be appointed from any of the following construction disciplines: an architect or engineer, an electrical engineer or licensed electrical contractor, a
licensed plumber or contractor, a mechanical engineer or licensed HVAC contractor and a licensed contractor or building director from another community.
Such appointments shall be made by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees and shall be for an indefinite period. (1965
Code § 2-16-1; amd. Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009; Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
2-5-2: DUTIES:
The building board of appeals shall function as a board of review for those challenging a decision of the building director. The board shall have no authority
to waive the requirements of this code. (1965 Code § 2-16-2)
2-5-3: FEE:
The fee to be charged to file an appeal before the building board of appeals shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). (1965 Code § 2-16-3)
2-5-4: REIMBURSEMENT:
The president and village board of trustees may reimburse members of the building board of appeals for expenses they have incurred in the course of their
duties. (1965 Code § 2-16-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 30/307
Chapter 6
HISTORICAL COMMISSION1
2-6-1: CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
A. Created; Membership: There is hereby created a Lyons historical commission which shall consist of ten (10) members including a chairperson who shall
be elected by the members. (1965 Code § 2-8-1)
B. Appointment; Terms; Residency: The members of the historical commission shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees to the following terms: two (2) for one year; two (2) for two (2) years; two (2) for three (3) years; two (2) for four (4) years and two
(2) for five (5) years. The successor to each member shall serve for a term of five (5) years, or the same member shall serve for five (5) years if he is
reappointed. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms, and all members shall be residents of the village. (1965 Code § 2-8-2; amd.
Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009; Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
2-6-2: DUTIES:
The commission shall have the duty of preserving the historical records and artifacts pertaining to the history of the village; of effecting the use of all
historical objects for educational, informational and other proper purposes; and such other related duties as may be delegated by the president and board
of trustees. (1965 Code § 2-8-3)
2-6-3: ANNUAL REPORT:
On or before December 31 of each year, the commission shall file a written report of its activities for the year and recommendations of matters for further
consideration. Such report shall be filed with the village president. (1965 Code § 2-8-4; amd. 2009 Code)
2-6-4: COMPENSATION:
The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. (1965 Code § 2-8-5)
Chapter 7
ANTIBLIGHT COMMISSION1
2-7-1: CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
A. Board Created: There is hereby created an antiblight commission for the village. (1965 Code § 2-10-1)
B. Membership: The members of the antiblight commission shall consist of:
1. One trustee of the village, appointed by the village board, to serve as liaison.
2. The village building and code director or his designee. (1965 Code § 2-10-2)
3. Eight (8) residents of the village, who shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees for terms of
four (4) years. (Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009; amd. Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
4. The village manager or his designee as ex officio. (1965 Code § 2-10-2)
2-7-2: TERMS; APPOINTMENT; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION:
A. Terms: The members of said commission serving ex officio shall serve for the terms of their respective municipal offices. The chair shall be appointed
by a majority of the commission members to serve until the chair is no longer on the board or is replaced by a vote of the majority of the commission
members. (1965 Code § 2-10-3)
B. Appointments: (Rep. by Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009)
C. Vacancies; Removals: All vacancies occurring in said commission shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term of office only, in
the same manner as the original appointments. Any member of the commission may be removed therefrom by the president, subject to ratification by
the board of trustees, for due cause shown.
D. Compensation: All members of the commission shall serve without compensation. (1965 Code § 2-10-3)
2-7-3: ORGANIZATION; PROCEDURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 31/307
A. Officers; Bylaws: The commission shall elect a vice chair, secretary and such other officers from its own membership, and shall adopt such bylaws
regulating the time, place and manner of holding its meetings and conducting its business as may, in the judgment of the commission, be proper and
necessary in carrying on the work of the commission.
B. Records And Reports: The commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection, and shall
also file an annual report with the board of trustees setting forth its transactions and recommendations. In all instances, said commission shall report
directly to the board of trustees.
C. Publicity: The commission may arrange and conduct publicity relative to its authorized activities for the purpose of public understanding. (1965 Code
§ 2-10-4)
2-7-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To work toward the correction of blighting conditions by securing the voluntary cooperation of the building owners, if possible, and when necessary, to
call for legal action to secure the results required in the enforcement of applicable ordinances.
B. The commission's authority shall include the observation of blighting conditions from all public areas, notification of owners and occupants of such
conditions, requesting voluntary compliance, and coordination of antiblight campaigns and services. (1965 Code § 2-10-5)
2-7-5: PRIVACY OF RECORDS:
The records of the antiblight commission are exempt from disclosure, where authorized by statute. Disclosure or utilization of such records in such
instances shall require authority of the antiblight commission. (1965 Code § 2-10-6)
Chapter 8
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY CONTROL BOARD/QUARRY RELATIONS COMMITTEE1
2-8-1: CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM; VACANCIES:
A. Board Created: There is hereby created an environmental quality control board/quarry relations committee (hereinafter referred to as the "board") in and
for the village. (1965 Code § 2-15-1)
B. Membership; Appointment; Term; Vacancies:
1. The chair and six (6) members shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees for a three (3) year
term. (Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009; amd. Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
2. All vacancies in the board shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term of office only. (1965 Code § 2-15-3)
2-8-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The board is charged with the responsibility for recommending plans, procedures and regulations to the village board concerning all air, water and land
environmental issues, including, but not limited to, garbage, recycling, airborne emission and discharge of other pollutants into the air, water or on
private or public property.
B. The committee shall also review village monitoring activities with regard to particulate pollution, noise pollution and blasting at the quarry site, and to
make recommendations to the village board. (1965 Code § 2-15-2)
2-8-3: COMPENSATION:
All members of the board shall serve without compensation. The president and board of trustees may reimburse members of the board for expenses they
have incurred in the course of their duties. (1965 Code § 2-15-4)
Chapter 9
RECREATION BOARD1
2-9-1: CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 32/307
A. Board Created; Membership; Officers: There is hereby created a Lyons recreation board which shall consist of seven (7) members. A member of the
board shall serve as chair, and another member shall serve as secretary. (1965 Code § 2-9-1)
B. Appointment; Terms: The members, chair and secretary of the recreation board shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent
of the board of trustees to the following terms: two (2) for one year; two (2) for two (2) years; three (3) for three (3) years. The successor for each term
shall serve for a term of five (5) years, or the same member shall serve for a five (5) year term if reappointed. (1965 Code § 2-9-2; amd. 2009 Code;
Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009; Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
2-9-2: DUTIES:
A. Adoption Of Program For Recreational Activities: The board shall have the duties of planning and adopting a program of recreational activities for all
age groups for the residents of the village and the duty to supervise said program and such other related duties as may be designated by the president
and board of trustees. (1965 Code § 2-9-3; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Annual Report: On or before December 31 of each year, the recreation board shall file a written report of its activities for the year and recommendations
of matters for further consideration. Such report shall be filed with the village president. (1965 Code § 2-9-4; amd. 2009 Code)
2-9-3: COMPENSATION:
The members of the recreation board shall serve without compensation. (1965 Code § 2-9-5)
2-9-4: PARKS AND RECREATION DIRECTOR:
A. Created; Appointment; Compensation: There is hereby created the position of parks and recreation director (the "director") who shall be appointed by
the village manager pursuant to qualifications approved by the village manager. The salary of the director shall be as determined by the village
manager from time to time and approved by the corporate authorities.
B. Duties: The director, among other duties, under the general direction of the board of trustees, the village president, and the village manager, shall be
responsible for planning, directing, promoting, scheduling and managing all village activities utilizing the recreation center and village parks. The
director shall oversee, operate, and manage the recreation department and/or a parks and recreation department, as developed by the director and the
village, and all employees and volunteers therein. The director shall serve as a liaison to the village recreation board and shall perform such duties as
are assigned to him or her from time to time by the village manager. (Ord. 09-07-2011-O2, 9-7-2011)
Chapter 10
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION1
2-10-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM; COMPENSATION:
A. Established; Membership: There is hereby established an electrical commission which shall consist of six (6) members, as follows: The building director
shall be a member and ex officio chair of the commission; of the other five (5) members, one shall be a registered professional engineer, one an
electrical contractor, one a journeyman electrician, one a representative of a company supplying electricity, and one a representative of an inspection
bureau maintained by the board of fire underwriters or, if no such representative resides in the village, then the chief of the fire department shall be a
member. (1965 Code § 2-4-1; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Appointment; Term; Compensation: Such members shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and
such appointment shall be for one year. The members of the electrical commission shall serve without compensation. (1965 Code § 2-4-1; amd. 2009
Code; Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009; Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
2-10-2: DUTIES:
The electrical commission shall recommend safe and practical standards and specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment.
They shall supervise the making of electrical inspections, and shall determine that there shall be compliance with all regulations provided in the electrical
code (title 12, chapter 5 of this code), and: (1965 Code § 2-4-2; amd. 2009 Code)
A. They shall periodically study various regulations and determine the adequacy of same to protect the residents of the village.
B. They shall approve the qualifications of applicants for registration and licensing within the village and may require applicants to submit to examination
as to knowledge and fitness to engage in the business of electrical contractor. (1965 Code § 2-4-2)
2-10-3: REIMBURSEMENT:
The president and board of trustees may reimburse members of the electrical commission for expenses they have incurred in the course of their duties.
(1965 Code § 2-4-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 33/307
Title 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
3-1-1: BUDGET OFFICER:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of the budget officer. The budget officer shall be designated by the village manager. (1965 Code § 1-
18-1; amd. Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009)
B. Powers And Duties: The budget officer shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Permit, encourage and establish the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal management procedures in
all village departments, commissions and boards.
2. Compile an annual budget in accordance with section 3-1-2 of this chapter.
3. Examine all books and records of all village departments, commissions, and boards which relate to monies received by the village, village
departments, commissions and boards, and paid out by the village, village departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts receivable,
amounts owed by or to the village, village departments, commissions and boards.
4. Obtain such additional information from the village, village departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful to the budget officer for
purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be furnished by the village, village departments, commissions, and boards in the form
required by the budget officer. Any department, commission or board which refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the
budget officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the village until such village department, commission or
board shall comply in full with the request of the budget officer.
5. Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the village, village department, commission, or board
except as authorized by the budget. (1965 Code § 1-18-2)
3-1-2: BUDGET PREPARATION AND ADOPTION:
A. Compilation And Contents Of Budget: The municipal budget officer shall compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of revenues available to
the village for the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the village and all of the village departments,
commissions and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal
management practices. Substantial conformity to a chart of accounts now or in the future recommended by the national committee on governmental
accounting, the auditor of public accounts of the state, or the division of local governmental affairs and property taxes of the department of revenue of
the state or successor agencies shall be deemed proof of such conformity. The budget shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for
the last two (2) years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. So far as is possible, the fiscal data for such two (2)
preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in a manner which is in conformity with the chart of accounts approved above. Each budget shall show the
specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made. (1965 Code § 1-18-3)
B. Passage Of Annual Budget; Effect: Passage of the annual budget by the trustees shall be in lieu of passage of the appropriation ordinance as required
by section 8-2-9 of the Illinois municipal code. The annual budget need not be published except in a manner provided for in section 8-2-9.9 of said
code. The annual budget shall be adopted by the corporate authorities before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies. (1965 Code § 1-18-4)
C. Capital Improvements, Repairs And/Or Replacements: In the preparation by the municipal budget officer of the annual budget, an amount not to exceed
three percent (3%) of the equalized assessed value of property subject to taxation by the village may be accumulated in a separate fund for the
purpose or purposes of specific capital improvements, repairs, and/or replacements of specific types of village equipment or other tangible property,
both real and personal, to be designated as the "capital improvement, repair or replacement fund". Expenditures from the capital improvement, repair
or replacement fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the capital improvement, repair or replacement will occur. Upon completion or
abandonment of any object for which the capital improvement, repair or replacement fund was expended, or should any surplus monies remain after
the completion or abandonment of any object for which the capital improvement, repair or replacement was inaugurated, then such funds no longer
necessary for capital improvement, repair or replacement shall be transferred into the general corporate fund of the village on the first day of the fiscal
year following such abandonment, completion, or discovery of surplus funds. (1965 Code § 1-18-5)
D. Revision Of Annual Budget: The village board of trustees may delegate authority to heads of departments, boards or commissions to delete, add to,
change or create subclasses within object classes budgeted previously to the department, board or commission, subject to such limitation or
requirement for prior approval by the budget officer or executive officer of the village, as the village board of trustees, upon a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the
village board then holding office, may establish. By a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the village board of trustees then holding office, the
annual budget for the village may be revised by deleting, adding to, changing or creating subclasses within object classes and object classes
themselves. No revision of the budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of the
revision. (1965 Code § 1-18-6)
E. Funds For Contingency Purposes: The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the
total budget, less the amount set aside for contingency purposes, which monies may be expended for contingencies upon a majority vote of the
trustees then holding office. (1965 Code § 1-18-7)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 34/307
F. Public Inspection, Notice And Hearing On Budget: The trustees shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently available to public inspection for at
least ten (10) days prior to passage of the annual budget, by publication in the journal of the proceedings or in such other form as the village board of
trustees may prescribe. Not less than one week after the publication of the tentative annual budget and prior to final action on the budget, the trustees
shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual budget, after which hearing or hearings the tentative budget may be further revised and
passed without any further inspection, notice or hearing. Notice of this hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation
in the village at least one week prior to the time of the hearing. (1965 Code § 1-18-8)
G. Abandonment: After adoption of the provisions of this section and section 3-1-1 of this chapter, said sections may be abandoned by a two-thirds (2/3)
majority vote of the village board of trustees then holding office. (1965 Code § 1-18-9)
3-1-3: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the village shall begin on January 1 of each year and end on December 31 next succeeding. (1965 Code § 1-12-1)
Chapter 2
RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
3-2-1: TAXES IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled and registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in the village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business while this chapter is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village in the business of
making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen as an incident
to a sale of service. Such "nonhome rule municipal retailers' occupation tax" and the "nonhome rule municipal service occupation tax" shall not be
applicable to the sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks
and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine
testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
The imposition of these nonhome rule taxes is in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.3 and 5/8-11-1.4, respectively.
(Ord. 11-19-14-O4, 11-19-2014)
3-2-2: COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois department of
revenue. The Illinois department of revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 11-19-14-O4, 11-19-2014)
Chapter 3
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
3-3-1: TAX IMPOSED:
Every corporation, company and association which is not incorporated under the laws of the state of Illinois and which is engaged in effecting fire
insurance in the village shall pay to the village treasurer the sum of two percent (2%) of the gross receipts received from fire insurance upon property
situated within the village. (1965 Code § 4-3-1)
3-3-2: TIME FOR PAYMENT:
Each designated corporation and association shall pay at the rate so prescribed upon the amount of all premiums which have been received during the
year ending on every July 1, for all fire insurance effected or agreed to be effected on property situated within the village by that corporation, company or
association, respectively. (1965 Code § 4-3-2)
3-3-3: ACCOUNTING; OATH:
Every person who acts in the village as agent or otherwise, on behalf of a designated corporation, company or association, shall render to the village clerk,
on or before July 15 of each year, a full and true account, verified by oath, of all of the premiums which, during the year ending on July 1 preceding the
report, were received by him, her or by any other person on behalf of that corporation, company or association. Said person shall specify in this report the
amounts received for fire insurance, and said person shall pay to the village treasurer at the time of rendering this report the amount as determined by the
rate fixed by this chapter for which the corporation, company or association is accountable under this section and this chapter. (1965 Code § 4-3-3; amd.
2009 Code)
3-3-4: SANCTIONS:
A. Default In Payment, Unlawful To Transact Business: If this account is not rendered on or before July 15 of each year or if the sum due remains unpaid
after that day, it shall be unlawful for any corporation, company or association so in default to transact any business in the village until the sum due has
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 35/307
been fully paid. This provision does not relieve any corporation, company or association from the payment of any loss upon any risk that may be taken
in violation of this requirement. (1965 Code § 4-3-4)
B. Action For Recovery Of Tax: The amount of this tax may be recovered from the corporation, company or association which owes said tax, or from its
agent, by an action in the name and for the use of the village as for money had and received. (1965 Code § 4-3-4; amd. 2009 Code)
3-3-5: EXAMINATION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The village clerk may examine the books, records, and other papers and documents of a designated agent, corporation, company or association for the
purpose of verifying the correctness of the report of the amounts received for fire insurance. (1965 Code § 4-3-5; amd. 2009 Code)
3-3-6: EXEMPTION:
This chapter shall not be applicable to receipts from contracts of marine insurance, even though they include insurance against fire, where the premium for
the fire insurance is not separately specified. (1965 Code § 4-3-6)
3-3-7: TRANSFER OF FUNDS; BOND REQUIREMENT:
The village treasurer shall pay the sums received from the insurance company specified in this chapter to the treasurer of the village fire department. The
treasurer of said fire department shall give a sufficient bond to the village. This bond shall be approved by the village president conditioned upon the
faithful performance by the fire department treasurer of those duties under the village ordinance establishing rules and regulations of the fire department.
The treasurer of the fire department shall receive the money so paid in and shall pay out the money upon the order of the fire department for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the department. (1965 Code § 4-3-7)
Chapter 4
HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS; EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
The word "hotel" and the word "motel", within the meaning of this chapter, include every building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held
out to the public to be a place where lodging and food or apartments, or suites, or other accommodations are offered for a consideration to guests, in
which ten (10) or more rooms, apartments, or suites, or other accommodations are used for the lodging, or lodging and food, for such guests.
Accommodations within said buildings or structures which are leased to the same account for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days shall be
exempt from the tax provisions of this chapter. (1965 Code § 4-40-2)
3-4-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby established, levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting, leasing or letting of rooms in a motel or hotel in the village at a rate
of three percent (3%) of the gross rental receipts from such rental, leasing or letting. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be
borne by the user, lessee or tenant of said rooms. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. (1965 Code § 4-40-1)
3-4-3: PAYMENT AND COLLECTION:
The owner and operator of each hotel or motel and the person to whom the license to operate said hotel or motel shall have been issued by the village
shall bear, jointly and severally, the duty to collect the tax from each user, lessee or tenant of rooms in such hotel or motel. Every person required to collect
the tax levied by this chapter shall secure said tax from the user, lessee or tenant of a room or rooms at the time that he collects the price, charge or rent
to which it applies. (1965 Code § 4-40-3)
3-4-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Village Treasurer: The village treasurer is hereby designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of the
village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the village treasurer to collect all amounts due the village from the owners, operators and licensees of
hotels and motels in the village.
B. Filing Of Tax Return: A sworn quarterly hotel and motel occupancy tax return shall be filed by each owner, operator, or licensee of each hotel or motel in
the village on forms prescribed by the village treasurer, showing all receipts from each renting, leasing, or letting of rooms during the preceding quarter.
C. Quarterly Payments: Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the village of all taxes due and owing for the quarter covered by the return, and
shall be filed and paid no later than the fifteenth of the month following the end of each calendar quarter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 36/307
D. Inspection Of Books And Records: The village treasurer, or any person certified by him or his deputy or representative, may enter the premises of any
hotel or motel for the purposes of inspection and examination of its books and records for the proper administration of this chapter, and for the
enforcement of collection of the tax hereby imposed. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the village treasurer or his duly
authorized deputy or representative in the discharge of his duties hereunder. (1965 Code § 4-40-4)
3-4-5: FAILURE TO PAY OR COLLECT TAX:
A. Action To Enforce Collection: Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes herein provided, or when any owner, operator, or licensee of a hotel or
motel in the village shall fail to collect the tax hereby imposed from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the same, the village
attorney (or special attorney designated by the board of trustees) shall, upon request of the board of trustees, bring or cause to be brought an action to
enforce the collection and payment on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Hearing; Notice: If the village president, after a hearing held by or for him, shall find that any hotel or motel owner, operator or licensee has wilfully
evaded his responsibility to collect the tax imposed by this chapter, he may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by such tax evader. Said person
shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, to be held not less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place thereof. The notice shall
be signed by the village president and either delivered personally or sent by certified mail with proper postage prepaid to said hotel or motel owner,
operator, or licensee at said party's last known place of business. The notice shall be deemed to have been given on the date personally served, and if
mailed, on the date of the mailing. Any suspension or conviction resulting from such hearing shall not relieve or discharge any civil liability for
nonpayment of the tax due. (1965 Code § 4-40-5)
3-4-6: LATE PAYMENT; INTEREST:
In the event of failure by any responsible person to pay the village treasurer the tax required hereunder within thirty (30) days after the same shall be due,
interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax at the prime rate as established by the financial industry. (1965 Code § 4-40-6; amd. 2009 Code)
3-4-7: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the village and
shall be credited to and deposited in a special fund of the village, to be used solely for the promotion of tourism, conventions, and other special events
within the village, or otherwise for the attraction of overnight visitors to the village. (1965 Code § 4-40-7)
3-4-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any provision of
this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first offense, and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one hundred eighty (180) day period; each day of violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. (1965 Code § 4-40-8)
Chapter 5
SIMPLIFIED TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
3-5-1: TAX RATE:
The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed under the provisions of sections 5-25 and 5-30 of the simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act1, P.A. 92-0526, is five percent (5%). (2009 Code)
3-5-2: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
The tax imposed under this chapter shall take effect for all gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on and after September 17, 2002. (2009
Code)
Chapter 6
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
3-6-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
ORDINANCE. (2009 Code)
3-6-2: SCOPE; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 37/307
A. Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village procedures in connection with all of the village locally imposed and administered taxes.
B. Application Of Provisions; Conflicting Provisions: This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village tax
ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (2009 Code)
3-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act1.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village president is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the "local tax administrator" to act in the "local tax administrator's" stead. The
"local tax administrator" shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the "local tax administrator" shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency
or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of
such tax is placed, and with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered
tax to the village.
VILLAGE: The village of Lyons, Illinois. (2009 Code)
3-6-4: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing and mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local administrator. The notice shall be sent by U.S. registered or certified mail.
(2009 Code)
3-6-5: DELINQUENT NOTICES, PAYMENTS, REMITTANCES OR OTHER FILINGS:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date; or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid. (2009 Code)
3-6-6: APPLICATION OF TAX PAYMENTS:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a) first, to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second, to
the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third, to the penalty for the applicable period. (2009 Code)
3-6-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. Written Protest Required: The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that
a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall
not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if
the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
B. Statute Of Limitations: The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar year in which
payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person
who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.
C. Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund, together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 38/307
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest, and penalties overpaid, and as
applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the
taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for a refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the
date of the overpayment to the date of mailing a refund check or the grant of a credit. (2009 Code)
3-6-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
A. Information Required: Each notice shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Time For Conducting Audit:
1. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours, and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
2. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than
thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agree to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days,
approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
C. Taxpayer's Books And Records:
1. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of
entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the
English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
2. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available his books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer (or tax
collector) fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's liability.
D. Overpayments: If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
E. Payment To Improper Entity: In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify
the local governmental entity imposing such tax. (2009 Code)
3-6-9: APPEALS:
A. Contents Of Notice Regarding Taxes Due: The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance
of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following
information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
B. Request For Hearing: The taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file
with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 39/307
C. Hearing Scheduled; Notice: If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing
and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and
petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. Time Limit For Filing Hearing Request: If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination,
audit or assessment shall become a final bill, due and owing, without further notice.
E. Reopening, Extension Of Hearing Request: Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability
along with interest accrued as of the date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for
hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the
expiration of the forty five (45) day period.
F. Conduct Of Hearing; Decision:
1. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under this section, the local tax administrator shall
conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
2. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
3. At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
4. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing.
The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (2009 Code)
3-6-10: PAYMENT REQUIRED; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
A. Time For Payment: In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must
be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
B. Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be five
percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
C. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of
five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the
tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice
of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to ten percent (10%) of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is
imposed by the controlling ordinance.
D. Abatement Of Penalties: The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to
file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (2009 Code)
3-6-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) working day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract
with the local tax administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (2009 Code)
3-6-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
A. The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
B. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
C. If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village, the
tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the calendar
year in which the return for the applicable period was due, or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed, whichever
occurs later.
D. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 40/307
3-6-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local
tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month for all periods prior to the filing
of the application, but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due under this section,
a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax interest, or penalty for any period before the date the
application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax
along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case, the
application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary
disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of
all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (2009 Code)
3-6-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES; COPIES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet
will satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village clerk's office. (2009
Code)
3-6-15: REVIEW OF LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayer for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the
local tax administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (2009 Code)
Footnote 1: 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
Chapter 7
FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, property and services,
at a place for eating for prepared food furnished at the place for eating. Gross receipts do not include amounts paid for federal, state and local taxes,
including the tax levied by this section and do not include amounts paid as gratuities for the employees of the place for eating.
OWNER: Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the operation of a place for eating.
PLACES FOR EATING OR PLACE FOR EATING: All premises located within the corporate limits of Lyons where prepared food is sold at retail for
immediate consumption, with seating provided for consumption of said prepared food on the premises, whether consumed on premises or not, and
whether or not such places for eating use is conducted along with any other use(s) in a common premises or business establishment including, but is not
limited to, those establishments commonly called a restaurant, eating place, drive-in restaurant, buffet, bakery, banquet facility, cafeteria, cafe, lunch
counter, fast food outlet, catering service, coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor, ice cream parlor,
tearoom, delicatessen, hotel, motel, or club, or any other establishment which sells at retail prepared food for immediate consumption.
PREPARED FOOD: Means and includes any solid, liquid (including both alcoholic and nonalcoholic liquid), powder or item used or intended to be used for
human internal consumption, whether simple, compound or mixed, and which has been prepared for immediate consumption.
SOLD AT RETAIL: To sell for use or consumption in exchange for a consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other nature, and
not for resale, with said transaction being subject to either the Illinois retailers' occupation tax1 or the Illinois service occupation tax2. (Ord. 04-16-14-O1, 4-
16-2014)
3-7-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A. There is hereby levied and imposed upon owners of places for eating a tax at the rate of one percent (1%) of gross receipts received for prepared food
sold at retail by the owner on or after June 1, 2014.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 41/307
B. The owner of a place for eating may collect an amount from persons who purchase prepared food at the place for eating which shall reimburse the
owner for the tax imposed on the owner by this chapter.
C. The tax levied by this chapter shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
D. In the event the prepared food is sold at retail on credit, an owner shall not be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this chapter on such a sale until
the owner receives payment for the sale. (Ord. 04-16-14-O1, 4-16-2014)
3-7-3: BOOKS AND RECORDS; INSPECTION; CONTENTS:
The village manager or any person designated by the village manager as the village manager's deputy or representative, may enter the premises of any
place for eating for inspection, examination, copying and auditing of books and records including, but not limited to, Illinois retailers' occupation tax and
Illinois service occupation tax returns filed with the Illinois department of revenue, in order to effectuate the proper administration of this chapter, and to
assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. To the extent reasonably possible, said entry shall be done in a manner that is
least disruptive to the business of the place for eating. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the village manager or the
village manager's duly designated deputies or representatives in the discharge of their duties in the performance of their duties pursuant to this chapter. It
shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the village manager or the village manager's deputies or
representatives shall at all times have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing the amount of gross receipts received during that day.
(Ord. 04-16-14-O1, 4-16-2014)
3-7-4: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUE BY OWNER; DELINQUENCY:
A. The owner or owners of each place for eating shall file tax returns showing the gross receipts received during each calendar month period upon forms
prescribed by the village manager. Returns for each calendar month shall be due on or before the twentieth day of the next calendar month (e.g., the
return for January shall be due on or before February 20; the return for February shall be due on or before March 20; etc.). Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in the event that the owner of the place for eating is allowed to file Illinois retailers' occupation tax and Illinois service occupation tax returns
with the Illinois department of revenue at intervals which are greater than monthly, said owner shall be allowed to file tax returns relative to the tax
imposed by this chapter with the village at said greater intervals. At the time of the filing of said tax returns, the owner shall pay to the village all taxes
due for the period to which the tax return applies.
B. If, for any reason, any tax due pursuant to this chapter is not paid when due, penalties and interest thereon shall be imposed at the rate of one and onehalf
percent (1.5%) per month.
C. Owners filing tax returns pursuant to this chapter shall, at the time of filing such return, pay to the village the amount of the tax imposed by this chapter,
less a commission of one percent (1%) of the amount of the tax, which is allowed to reimburse the owners for the expenses incurred in keeping
records, billing, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village upon request. No commission may be claimed by an
owner for taxes not timely remitted to the village. (Ord. 04-16-14-O1, 4-16-2014)
3-7-5: TRANSMITTAL OF EXCESS TAX COLLECTIONS:
If any owner collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby, but which amount is purported to be the collection of said tax, or if an
owner collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax so imposed herein and does not for any reason return the same to the purchaser
who paid the same before filing the return for the period in which such occurred, said owner shall account for and pay over those amounts to the village
along with the tax properly collected. (Ord. 04-16-14-O1, 4-16-2014)
3-7-6: REGISTRATION:
Every owner maintaining a place for eating in the village shall register with the village by June 1, 2014, or the date of becoming such an owner, whichever
is later. (Ord. 04-16-14-O1, 4-16-2014)
3-7-7: COLLECTION:
Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this chapter, the village attorney shall, upon request of the village manager, bring or cause to be
brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 04-16-14-O1, 4-16-2014)
3-7-8: SUSPENSION OF LICENSES:
If the village manager, after a hearing held by the village manager or the village manager's designee, finds that any owner has wilfully avoided the
payment of any tax imposed by this chapter, the village manager may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by such tax owner. The owner shall have
an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than ten (10) days after being mailed notice of the time when and the place where the
hearing is to be held, addressed to him at his last known place of business. Any suspension or revocation of any license(s) shall not release or discharge
the owner from his civil liability for the payment of the tax nor from prosecution for such offense. (Ord. 04-16-14-O1, 4-16-2014)
3-7-9: PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 42/307
A. Any owner found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with or unlawfully resisting or opposing the enforcement of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the first offense, and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
subsequent offense.
B. Each day upon which an owner shall continue any violation of this chapter, or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof, shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
C. Any owner subjected to the penalties provided for by this subsection shall not be discharged or released from the payment of any tax due. (Ord. 04-16-
14-O1, 4-16-2014)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL BUSINESS AND LICENSING PROVISIONS; FEES
4-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall manage, conduct, or carry on, directly or indirectly, any trade, business, occupation or employment enumerated in section 4-1-3 of this
chapter without first having obtained a license therefor. The license fee required shall be as indicated in section 4-1-3 of this chapter. (1965 Code § 4-1-1)
4-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Contents Of Application: Any person desiring a license for any of the trades, businesses or occupations enumerated in section 4-1-3 of this chapter
shall make application in writing therefor to the village clerk setting forth with particularity the full name and residence of the applicant and the purpose
of the business for which the license is asked; and upon receipt of such application and the payment by such applicant to the village clerk of a license
fee specified in section 4-1-3 of this chapter, the village president shall order a license to be issued to the applicant, signed by the village president,
authorizing the said applicant to engage and carry on the trade, business or occupation therein desired. (1965 Code § 4-1-3; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 04-
21-09-04, 4-21-2009; Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
B. Certificate Of Occupancy; License Issuance; Conditions:
1. The village president, upon determining that the building director has approved a certificate of occupancy for a business, and that all required fees
are paid, shall issue an initial business license. The village president shall thereafter renew each license annually upon payment of the proper fees
and a determination that the business retains a current certificate of occupancy and is not in default of any fees or financial obligations to the village.
2. The village president may place conditions upon any business license that are required to preclude nuisances, hazardous conditions, and promote
the health, safety and welfare of the community. Such conditions may include a limitation on hours of operation.
C. License Denial; Causes: The village president may deny any license application for one or more of the following reasons: (1965 Code § 4-1-3; amd.
Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009; Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
1. False, insufficient, inaccurate or misleading information on the license application.
2. Noncompliance with any state, county or local regulation.
3. Conviction within the past five (5) years of any owner, partner or corporate officer for a felony offense directly relating to the type of business applied
for; e.g., an auto body shop applicant may be denied if the owner has been convicted of auto theft during the preceding five (5) years, etc.
4. Where a certificate of occupancy has not been issued.
5. Where there is an outstanding warrant for the arrest of any business owner, officer or agent.
6. Where there exists substantial cause to believe that the issuance of the license will be injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the building,
occupants or community. (1965 Code § 4-1-3)
4-1-3: LICENSE FEES; CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES:
The license fees established for the various trades, businesses, occupations, and employments, shall be as follows:
A. Fee Based On Number Of Employees: Where five (5) or more employees are employed, where indicated by an asterisk (*), an additional fee of five
dollars ($5.00) per person employed in excess of five (5) shall be added to the annual, weekly, or daily license fee, as the case may be.
B. Licensing Of Individual Machines: Where there are individual machines that are required to be licensed, the additional fee shall be as indicated in
subsection E of this section. (1965 Code § 4-1-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 43/307
C. Fees For Various Classes Of Licenses: The license fees shall be divided into classes and the annual fees for each class shall be as follows:
Class License Fee
A $ 10.00
B 25.00
C 75.00
D 150.00
E 250.00
F 500.00
G 2,500.00
H 1,000.00
(1965 Code § 4-1-2; amd. 2009 Code)
D. Special License Fee Class: There shall be a special license fee class for the following trades, businesses or occupations:
1. Filling stations1.
2. Flammable liquids storage2. The license fees shall be as follows:
a. For container or containers, tank or tanks in one and the same premises from which liquids listed in section 4-14-5 and/or section 4-14A-1 of this
title shall be drawn directly upon the making of such sales of such liquid to purchasers at such filling stations or the storage thereof: Twenty five
dollars ($25.00).
b. For each portable wheel tank: Twenty five dollars (25.00).
c. For each location having a total capacity of tanks or containers not exceeding five thousand (5,000) gallons: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
d. For each location having a total capacity of tanks or containers of more than five thousand (5,000) gallons and not exceeding ten thousand
(10,000) gallons: Ninety dollars ($90.00).
e. For each location having a total capacity of tanks or containers of more than ten thousand (10,000) gallons and not exceeding fifteen thousand
(15,000) gallons: One hundred thirty dollars ($130.00).
f. For each location having a total capacity of more than fifteen thousand (15,000), at the rate of:
Each one thousand (1,000) gallons, or fraction thereof, in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons: Fifteen dollars ($15.00).
g. License fees shall be paid for total capacity of tanks or containers which shall be used at any time during said year to contain any of the liquids
mentioned in section 4-13-5 and/or section 4-13A-1 of this title.
3. Food and beverage permit.
a. Any trade, business or occupation involving the manufacture, storage, distribution, transportation, or sale of food or beverage will be required to
have inspections per the following schedule:
Class 1. Business in which food is prepared or handled on premises shall be inspected three (3) times per year.
Class 2. Business in which food is not handled directly, such as gas stations, vending machines, etc., shall be inspected twice per year.
Class 3. Special events of short duration such as carnivals, festivals and fairs shall be inspected prior to operations. (1965 Code § 4-1-2)
b. The cost per each inspection shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00), which will be charged as part of the annual license fee of the business. Any
additional follow up inspections as a result of problems with the original inspections or because of customer complaints shall be billed separately at
seventy five dollars ($75.00) per inspection.
E. Fees For Specific Trades, Businesses And Occupations: The trades, businesses, occupations or employment for which a license and fee are required
are as follows:
Type Of Activity License Fee Class
Amusements
Amusement device C
Amusement device - poker machine (per machine) E
Amusement park F
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 44/307
Amusement parlor E
(Plus per machine) C
Automatic musical instrument (per machine) C
Automatic vending machines ($0.01) A
Automatic vending machines ($0.05 and over) C
Baseball batting machines (per machine) B
Bowling alleys (per alley) B
Circuses or tent shows (per day) F
Gun clubs, shooting range or shooting galleries D
Miniature golf C
Roller or ice skating rinks C
Theaters (not over 500 seats) D
Auto And Vehicle3
Auto car wash C
(Plus per stall) A
Auto and truck paint shops (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Auto, truck, trailer or motorcycle sales, new or used and repair business (5 or less employees) D
(More than 5 employees) E plus *
Auto accessories C
Auto ignition shop C
Auto repair shop (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Cartage or trucking (25 or less employees) D
(More than 25, but less than 100 employees) E
(More than 100 employees) F
Vehicle storage lot C
Vehicle towing C
Storage garages (25 cars or less) D
(Over 25 cars, but not more than 100 cars) (5 employees or less) E
(More than 5 employees) E plus *
Renting, leasing or lending motorcycles and motor drive cycles B
Building Contractors
Building moving E
(Or per job) D
Carpentry C
Cement or concrete C
Demolition D
(Or per job) C
Drain and basin C
Electrical (registration fee) as provided by state statute
Excavator C
Fencing C
General (additional bond required; see section 4-7A-3 of this title) D
Glazing C
Heating, ventilation and air conditioning C
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 45/307
Insulation C
Masonry D
Painting and decorating C **
Paving, bituminous or concrete D
(Or per job) C
Plastering, lathing, drywall C
Plumbing C
Roofing D
(Or per job) C
Sheet metal C
Siding, gutter, fascia, awning D
(Or per job) C
Structural iron D
Tile, marble, mosaic C **
Truck painting and cleaning C **
Other Building Activities
Building supply store C
Catch basin cleaners C
(Or per day) B
Contractor's storage yard D
Electrical supply store C
Explosives storage (additional bond required; see section 6-6-2 of this code) D
Lumberyard: new or used (5 or less employees) D
(More than 5 employees) D plus *
Material storage D
Sandstone, cement yards D
Stone quarrying G
Surety Bond: All building contractors listed above, except those indicated by a double asterisk (**) shall, before performing any work in the village,
provide to the building director a license and permit bond in the sum of $10,000.00 with sureties approved by the corporate authorities, conditioned
that the applicant shall well and faithfully observe all the provisions of the building code, zoning regulations and all other codes or regulations of the
village relating to the activities engaged in under or by virtue of the authority given in the building permit issued for each job, and that he will pay all
costs involved to correct any and all work improperly done to bring it into compliance with all village codes and regulations.
Food And Food Service Establishments
Bakeries (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Catering C
Confectionery C
Fish and seafood markets (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Fruit and vegetables C
Groceries and delicatessens C
Ice cream dealers C
Meat markets C
Milk sales (per vehicle) C
Restaurants (drive-in) C
Restaurants (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) D
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 46/307
Vehicles carrying foodstuffs for vending C
Miscellaneous
All other zoning district B uses C
All other zoning district I uses D
Animal grooming C
Animal kennels (see title 8, chapter 5 of this code)
The annual license fee for each kennel or cattery shall be based on the number of animals which are proposed to be kept in the establishment or
premises as follows:
Not to exceed 5 animals C
6 to 10 animals D
11 to 20 animals E
21 to 30 animals D plus E
Over 30 animals F
In computing the number of animals, those under 6 months of age shall not be counted. Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter
shall be exempt from the payment of the dog or cat registry fee for each and every dog or cat which is kept in any kennel or cattery as defined in
title 8, chapter 5 of this code.
Arborist (additional liability insurance required; see subsection 5-7-3B of this code) C
Auction and auctioneers (surety bond required per day) D
Barbershops (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Baton school B
Beauty shop (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Boat sales and accessories D
Boiler and heating plant dealers (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Camera and photographer supplies C
Camping equipment sales C
Canvassers C
(Or per day) B
Christmas trees (cut evergreen trees) (additional bond required; see section 4-20-2 of this title) C
Cobblers B
Curio shop C
Day nursery school C
Discount store C
Distributor of handbills or advertising media D
(Or per day) B
Distributor of products B
Drugstore C
Dry cleaning (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Dry goods stores (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Electrical appliance (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Entertainment C
Feed stores C
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 47/307
Firearms sales C
Florists, retail (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
General business C
General store (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Greenhouses or florists, wholesale (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Hardware stores (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Home occupations A
Interior decorating C
Jewelers C
Junk dealers (Surety bond required)
Auto wreckers E
(Per wagon or truck) C
(Per store or yard) F
Landscaping C
Launderettes C
Laundries C
Liquor, alcoholic (See subsection 4-2-5E of this title)
Motels, hotels; motor inns (per rental unit) A
(Minimum) D
Music stores (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
News dealers, vendors, newsstands C
Newspaper dispensing devices C
Newspapers and magazine companies C
Outdoor advertising (See section 12-11A-5 of this code)
Paint stores C
Pet shops C
Petroleum products (See subsection D2 of this section4)
Photographers C
Pool and recreational equipment C
Poultry sales; live and dressed C
Printing establishments (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Sales and service C
Scavengers (additional bond required; see subsection 5-5C-5B of this code) H
Shoe stores (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Sign shops (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Solicitors D
(Or per day) B
Note: The word "solicitor", as referred to in this section, shall not include any other specific business entailing soliciting which is specifically
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 48/307
enumerated and contained herein.
Sporting goods stores C
Stationery and book shops C
Storage and warehouses (25 or less employees) C
(More than 25, but less than 50 employees) D
(More than 50, but less than 100 employees) E
TV and radio sales and repair C
Table water distributor C
Taxicab company (additional bond or insurance required; see subsection 4-15-4C of this title) D
(Per vehicle) B
Taxidermist C
Tobacco dealer, retail F
Trailer camp; tourist camp (20 or less units or spaces) F
(Plus per each unit or space over 20) B
Tree trimming C
Tropical fish sales B
Undertakers (each place of business) D
Upholstering (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 employees) C plus *
Vehicle storage lot D
Veterinary hospital C
Video gaming (See section 4-2-22 of this title)
Water softener service C
Workshops; manufacturers (5 or less employees) C
(More than 5 but less than 25 employees) D
(More than 25 but less than 100 employees) E
(More than 100 employees) F
(1965 Code § 4-1-2; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 03-16-10-03, 3-16-2010; Ord. 07-18-12-O1, 7-18-2012)
4-1-4: PAYMENT; LICENSE EXPIRATION:
A. Annual:
1. All licenses requiring annual payments shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year. New business license applicants applying after
November 1 of any calendar year shall have the option of paying a fifty percent (50%) fee for a license to expire on December 31 of the current
calendar year or the license fee plus twenty five percent (25%) for a license to expire on December 31 of the following year.
2. All licenses requiring annual payments which are issued for a period of one year, commencing on January 1 and expiring December 31 of each such
year, are due and payable by February 15. After February 15, a fifteen percent (15%) penalty will be added to the annual payment.
B. Daily: All licenses payable on a daily basis shall be issued for the day requested and shall be only in full force and effect for said day as issued.
C. Weekly: All licenses payable on a weekly basis shall be issued on the day requested and shall expire on the seventh day thereafter and shall be in full
force and effect for only the one week after issuance. (1965 Code § 4-1-4)
4-1-5: SURETY:
Whenever in this chapter any provision is contained requiring surety by the licensee, said surety shall be in the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), payable to the village. (1965 Code § 4-1-6)
4-1-6: BRING YOUR OWN BOTTLE PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 49/307
A. Prohibition: No owner, proprietor, member, officer, agent or employee thereof, of any establishment inviting or permitting public patronage, including,
without limitation, restaurants, banquet halls, cabarets, theaters or any other place for eating or amusement, or of any club permitting use by club
members and guests, shall permit the consumption or possession of alcoholic liquors on the premises, and no person shall permit alcoholic liquor to be
consumed in or brought into such establishment, except those establishments specifically licensed for sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on the premises,
and no type of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted to be consumed in or brought into such an establishment except those types of alcoholic liquors
permitted by such license. (1965 Code § 4-41-1)
B. Penalty: Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (1965 Code § 4-41-2)
4-1-7: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; PENALTY:
A. License Revocation Or Suspension; Penalty:
1. The village president shall be charged with the administration of this section. The village president may suspend or revoke any business license
issued under the provisions of this chapter, after a determination that the licensed business, its owner, employees or agents, have violated any terms
of the license or ordinances that regulate the business or use in question or provide minimum standards for property maintenance, signs, building
construction, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire safety, noise, dust or other emissions.
2. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the village president may instead levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, beginning on
the day the violation is first discovered by the village.
B. Hearing; Notice: However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the village
president with a seven (7) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained
in such notice. The seven (7) day notice provision shall begin to run the day following the delivery by certified mail or by personal service.
C. Determination By President; Issuance Of Order: The village president, within seven (7) days after such hearing, shall cause a written order to be issued
setting forth the findings of the hearing and the amount of a fine, if any; the period of suspension, if any; or that the license has been revoked. A copy of
said order shall be served on the licensee.
D. Payment Of Hearing Costs: Any licensee determined to have violated any of the terms of the license or ordinances which deal with the license shall pay
to the village the costs of the hearing including attorney fees. The village president shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing,
and the licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification by the village president. Failure to pay said costs within thirty
(30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation. (1965 Code § 4-1-5; amd. Ord. 04-21-09-
04, 4-21-2009; Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
Chapter 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
COMMISSIONER: The Lyons liquor control commissioner designated in section 4-2-3 of this chapter, as well as any committee or other agency appointed
by the said commissioner.
LICENSED PREMISES: The place or location described in a local liquor license where alcoholic liquor is allowed to be stored, displayed or offered for
sale. Not included are sidewalks, streets, parking areas and grounds adjacent to any such place or location.
LICENSEE: A person holding a local liquor license.
LICENSEE, AGENT OF: Any owner, partner, director, officer, manager, employee or authorized agent of a licensee but only while engaged in the business
of such licensee or present on the licensed premises of such licensee.
LIQUOR CONTROL ACT: The Illinois liquor control act1 of 1934.
LIQUOR LAWS: This chapter and all other village ordinances, resolutions, regulations and rules relating to alcoholic liquor; the liquor control act and all
regulations issued thereunder; all federal, state and local laws imposing or pertaining to fees and taxes relating to alcoholic liquor; and all other federal and
state legislation, regulations and rules applicable to the sale or use of alcoholic liquor within the village.
LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE: A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
MINOR: A person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or other group acting as a unit, including any executor, administrator,
trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law.
STATE LIQUOR LICENSE: A license issued by the Illinois liquor control commission pursuant to the provisions of the liquor control act. (1965 Code § 4-5-
1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 50/307
4-2-2: APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS:
A. State Law Adopted: All of the provisions, including all words and phrases, of the liquor control act and the rules and regulations issued by the Illinois
liquor control commission pertaining to local control of alcoholic liquor, as the same may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated into
and declared to be a part of this chapter as if expressly set forth herein.
B. Compliance With All Regulations Required: Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or release any person from compliance with the requirements of any
other applicable federal, state or local code, ordinance, regulation, or rule. (1965 Code § 4-5-2)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 08-16-16-M1 - SALARIES. Go to new ordinance.
4-2-3: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. President Designated Commissioner: The village president is hereby designated as the Lyons liquor control commissioner, and said president or his or
her designee shall be charged with the administration of the appropriate provisions of the Illinois liquor control act of 1934, as amended, and of such
village ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor presently or hereinafter enacted.
B. Conduct Monthly Hearings; Compensation: The local liquor control commissioner shall conduct all hearings on a date mutually convenient to the parties
or upon a date chosen at the direction of the commissioner. The commissioner shall receive a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for hearings if
hearings are conducted on violations of this chapter. Beginning with the 2013 term of office the liquor commissioner shall receive a salary of seven
thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) per year and no fee for specific hearings.
C. Powers, Functions And Duties: The commissioner shall have the following powers, functions, and duties:
1. To administer within the village all liquor laws.
2. To appoint a person or persons to assist him or her in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided.
3. To conduct hearings as provided in this chapter for the purpose of fulfilling any of the enumerated powers, functions and duties of the commissioner;
to hear testimony and take proof of information in the performance of his or her duties; and for such purposes, to issue subpoenas effective in any
part of the state of Illinois.
4. To examine or cause to be examined, under oath, any licensee and any applicant for a local liquor license or for a renewal thereof and to examine or
cause to be examined the books and records of any such licensee or applicant.
5. To receive fees for local liquor licenses and pay the same forthwith to the village director of finance.
6. To require two (2) sets of fingerprints of any applicant for a local liquor license or for a renewal thereof, one for the village files and one to deliver to
the Illinois department of state police, and for purposes of obtaining such fingerprints, to collect from the applicant and properly deliver such fee as
may be required by the Illinois department of state police.
7. To grant or renew local liquor licenses in accordance with the provisions of the liquor laws.
8. To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a local liquor license to any applicant or premises that the commissioner has determined to be
ineligible therefor in accordance with the provisions of the liquor laws.
9. To keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all local liquor licenses and to furnish the village clerk with a copy thereof; and on the issuance of
any new local liquor license, or the revocation or suspension of any existing local liquor license, to give notice of such action to the village clerk within
three (3) days after such action.
10. To lawfully enter, or to authorize any law enforcement officer to lawfully enter, at any time, any licensed premises to determine whether any of the
provisions of the liquor laws have been or are being violated, and at the time of such entry, to examine such licensed premises in connection with
such determination.
11. To receive complaints from citizens that any of the provisions of the liquor laws have been or are being violated and to act on such complaints in the
manner provided in this chapter and the other liquor laws.
12. To examine any licensee on whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served.
13. To suspend for cause for not more than thirty (30) days any local liquor license, to revoke for cause any local liquor license, and to levy fines
against any licensee, all in accordance with the liquor laws.
14. In lieu of suspension or revocation, the commissioner may instead levy a fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation; each day on which a violation continues shall be a separate violation. No licensee shall be fined
more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) during the annual term of such licensee's local liquor license.
15. To provide an annual report to the board of trustees that will provide, at minimum:
a. The current number of licenses issued in each category and the names and addresses of the licensees and establishments;
b. The number of licenses available in each category;
c. An up to date listing of liquor ordinance violation fines for the preceding and current calendar year, including the date of the fine, the offense, the
amount of the fine, the name and address of the individual and establishment being fined, and the date and amount paid by each offender;
d. A summary of pending applications, including the name, telephone number, home address, address of proposed licensed location, type of license
and action taken to date regarding the application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 51/307
16. To notify the Illinois secretary of state when a club incorporated under the Illinois general not for profit corporation act2 or a foreign corporation
functioning as a club in Illinois under a certificate of authority issued under that act has violated the liquor control act by selling or offering for sale at
retail alcoholic liquor without a retailer's license. (Ord. 12-07-11-O7, 12-7-2011)
4-2-4: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A. Local And State Licenses Required: It shall be unlawful for any person not having a current, valid village liquor license and a current, valid state liquor
license to sell or offer for sale in the village any alcoholic liquor.
B. Sale In Violation Of License Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, or dispense in the village any alcoholic liquor except in
the manner authorized by, and in compliance with, the terms and restrictions of the liquor laws and such licensee's local liquor license.
C. Licenses For Separate Premises: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, or dispense in the village any alcoholic liquor without having
a village retail liquor dealer's license for each location, place or premises where the seller is located.
D. Display Of License: Every licensee shall cause his or her current local liquor license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises. (1965 Code § 4-5-5)
4-2-5: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
A. Classes Of Licenses: Local liquor licenses shall be classified as follows:
1. Class A License: Such license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor which may or may not be consumed upon the licensed premises.
2. Class B License: Such license shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine for consumption only upon the licensed premises.
3. Class C License: Such license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor in nationally organized, nonprofit, civic, fraternal or veterans associations or
organizations or to local clubs who have a valid liquor license issued prior to the effective date hereof. Such liquor shall be sold for consumption upon
their premises to members of the organization and their guests only. The liquor control commissioner may waive this fee.
4. Class T License: Such license shall authorize the sale of draft beer, bottle beer, wine or other alcoholic liquors for temporary periods of time, the
dates and times of which shall be specified on the license. The Liquor Control Commissioner may waive this fee.
5. Class R License: Such license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in restaurants. A Class R license shall be issued only to those
applicants which possess a restaurant license issued by the Village. No restaurant, licensed as such, shall sell alcoholic liquor except with meals.
6. Class L License: Such license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor which may not be consumed upon the licensed premises.
7. Class LB License: Such license shall authorize the retail sale of bottle beer and wine only, which may not be consumed upon the licensed premises.
8. Class G License: Such license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the licensed premises in a "beer garden", porch or
other area which is not fully enclosed within a building on property owned or controlled by the holder of a Class A or Class R license.
9. Class LA License: Such license shall primarily authorize the retail sale of liquor which may not be consumed on the licensed premises and the
secondary retail sales of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises. Said license shall be issued to businesses that are basically liquor
stores which contain a smaller bar area for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. (Ord. 12-07-11-O7, 12-7-2011)
10. Class H License; Microbrewery: A Class H license shall entitle the licensee to manufacture beer products on the licensed premises and to make
sales at retail of alcoholic liquor, including, but not limited to, the manufactured beer products, for consumption on or off the licensed premises. A
Class H licensee may also conduct beer sampling and tasting without the requirement of food service. Nothing in the issuance of a Class H license
pursuant to this section shall be considered to relieve the licensee of any responsibility for complying with all applicable State and Federal
regulations relating to the manufacture and/or sale of beer products or other alcoholic beverages and all applicable business and other regulations of
the Village.
11. Class I License; Winery: A Class I license shall entitle the licensee to manufacture, bottle and sell up to fifty thousand (50,000) gallons of wine on
the licensed premises and to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor, including, but not limited to, the manufactured wine, for consumption on or off
the licensed premises. A Class I licensee may also conduct wine sampling and tasting without the requirement of food service. Nothing in the
issuance of a Class I license shall be considered to relieve the licensee of any responsibility for complying with all applicable State and Federal
regulations relating to the manufacture and/or sale of wine or other alcoholic beverages and with all applicable business and other regulations of the
Village. (Ord. 01-20-15-O1, 1-20-2015)
B. Number Of Licenses: So that the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Village shall be protected and temperance in the consumption of
alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted, the lawful license of any establishment shall be renewed or reissued upon compliance with all State
and Federal requirements and of the provisions of this Code. The maximum number of licenses to be issued in each classification is as follows: (Ord.
12-07-11-O7, 12-7-2011)
Type Quantity
Class A 10
Class B 4
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 52/307
Class C 1
Class R 6
Class L 2
Class LB 4
Class G 5
Class LA 1
Class H 1
Class I 0
(Ord. 04-17-18-O2, 4-17-2018)
C. Term: Local liquor licenses shall be operative and valid, unless terminated, revoked, or suspended, for a term of one year commencing on January 1 of
each year and terminating on December 31 of that same year. Local liquor licenses issued after January 1 of any year shall be operative and valid,
unless terminated, revoked, or suspended, for a term commencing on the date of issuance and terminating on December 31 of that same year.
D. License A Personal Privilege Only: Every local liquor license shall be purely a personal privilege and shall not constitute property. No local liquor license
shall be subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall any local liquor license be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or
subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. No local liquor license shall descend by the laws of testate or intestate succession. Every local liquor
license shall cease on the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of the licensee; provided, however, that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee and the trustee of the estate of any bankrupt or insolvent licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may
continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court and may exercise the privileges of the deceased, bankrupt, or
insolvent licensee until the original expiration date of such licensee's local liquor license but no longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy,
or insolvency of such licensee.
E. License Fees: Every applicant for a local liquor license or local liquor license renewal shall pay the following fees to the Village at the time of filing such
application: (Ord. 12-07-11-O7, 12-7-2011)
1. Administrative processing fee, nonrefundable: Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
2. Annual license fee per class:
Class Of License Fee
A $2,200.00 per year
B 2,000.00 per year
C 250.00 per year
R 1,600.00 per year
L 1,600.00 per year
LB 1,500.00 per year
G 800.00 per year
LA 2,450.00 per year
T 100.00 per day
H 3,450.00 per year
I 3,600.00 per year
(Ord. 03-06-18-O2, 3-6-2018)
4-2-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; APPLICANT AND BUSINESS MANAGER:
A. Application Generally: Applications for local liquor licenses shall be made to the Commissioner on a form prescribed by the Commissioner, shall be in
writing; shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by one of the partners on behalf of all partners if a partnership, or by a duly authorized agent
if a corporation; and shall be verified by an oath or affidavit. Each application shall specifically identify the applicant and the licensed premises to which
a local liquor license would be issued.
B. Background Information: Each application shall include the following background information:
1. The name, including nicknames and aliases, residence address, telephone number, social security number and date of birth of the sole proprietor,
general or limited partners, officers, directors, and shareholders owning five percent (5%) or more of the common stock, members and managers, of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 53/307
any applicant, and of the person or people who will run the day to day operations of the licensed establishment, along with a recent photograph of
each of the foregoing people, clearly showing their faces.
2. In the case of an individual, the citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her
naturalization. In the case of a corporation, the date and place of incorporation and the objects for which it was formed and proof that it is a
corporation in good standing and authorized to conduct business in the State of Illinois.
3. The character of business of the applicant.
4. The length of time that the applicant has been in the business of the character specified in response to subsection B3 of this section.
5. The location and description of the premises for which a local liquor license is sought and the specific name of the business that is to be operated
under such local liquor license.
6. The names of each governmental body from which the applicant has received a liquor license within ten (10) years immediately prior to the date of
the present application.
C. Statements Required: If the applicant is an individual, that individual shall subscribe to all of the statements set out below.
If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall subscribe to all of the statements set out below; provided, however, that if the applicant is organized
as a limited partnership, then the statement concerning active involvement provided in subsection C16 of this section shall be required only of all
general partners.
If the applicant is a corporation, each director and officer thereof and every person owning or controlling more than five percent (5%) of the voting
shares of such corporation shall subscribe to all of the statements set out below.
If the business for which a local liquor license is sought will be managed by a manager or agent, every such manager or agent shall subscribe to all of
the statements set out below.
1. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has a current, valid state liquor license for the premises covered by the application.
2. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
3. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law or local ordinance concerning the
manufacture, possession, sale, or dispensation of alcoholic liquor or has ever forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any
such violation.
4. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any state or federal law or regulation or has
ever forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
5. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has had any liquor license revoked that was issued under state or federal law or under the ordinances
of any municipality prior to the date of the present application.
6. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has had suspended any liquor license issued under state or federal law or under the ordinances of
any municipality within one year immediately prior to the present application.
7. A statement as to whether or not the applicant is a village employee or a law enforcement official of any government or government agency.
8. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax
period.
9. A statement as to whether or not a federal gaming device stamp has been issued for the current taxable year with respect to the premises for which
the local liquor license is sought.
10. A statement as to whether or not the premises for which a local liquor license is sought comprises a store or other place of business where the
majority of customers are under the age of twenty one (21) years or where the principal business transacted consists of the sale of schoolbooks,
school supplies, food, lunches, or drinks for such customers.
11. A statement as to whether or not the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises for which a license is sought will violate any village ordinance,
including this chapter.
12. A statement as to whether or not the premises for which a license is sought is within one hundred feet (100') of any property line of any school
(other than an institution of higher learning), hospital, senior citizen housing, daycare center, or nursing or personal care facility, or within one
hundred feet (100') of the nearest part of any church building used for worship or educational purposes.
13. A statement as to whether or not the applicant is a permanent resident of the village.
14. A statement as to whether or not the applicant beneficially owns the premises for which a license is sought or has a lease thereon for the full period
for which the license is to be issued.
15. A statement as to whether or not the applicant is the beneficial owner of the business to be licensed.
16. A statement as to whether or not the applicant will be personally and actively involved in the operation of the business to be licensed.
17. A statement as to whether or not the business is or will be managed by a manager or agent.
18. A statement as to the nature of the business and the amount of anticipated alcoholic liquor sales as a percentage of gross annual sales of the
business.
19. A statement that the applicant is not disqualified from receiving a license by reason of any matter or item contained in the laws of the state of
Illinois, this chapter, or any other code or ordinance of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 54/307
20. A statement that the applicant will not violate any federal or state laws, or this chapter, or any other code or ordinance of the village in the conduct
of the applicant's business.
21. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a statement as to whether or not it is qualified under the Illinois business corporations act3 to transact
business in Illinois.
22. If the business to be operated pursuant to the local liquor license is operating under an assumed name, a statement that the applicant has complied
with the Illinois assumed business name act4 and other applicable laws.
23. Such other statements or information as may be necessary to demonstrate that the applicant, the applicant's business, and the premises from
which such business will be conducted satisfy all conditions and requirements applicable to the local liquor license being sought.
D. Examination Of Applicant: At any time during the pendency of an application, the Commissioner shall have the right to compel the applicant to submit to
any examination and to produce any books and records which, in the judgment of the Commissioner, are material to the determination of whether the
applicant and the applicant's business are qualified to receive a local liquor license or whether the premises sought to be licensed is suitable for such
purposes. The Commissioner shall also have the right to require the applicant to answer any charges made in any objection to the issuance of the
license. The failure of any applicant to appear at the time and place fixed by the Commissioner for his or her examination or to produce books and
records requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be admission that the applicant is not qualified to receive a local liquor license
and a request to withdraw the application.
E. Investigation And Disclosure Of Information; Waiver Of Claims: By applying for, or providing information in support of, an application for a local liquor
license, every person so applying or providing information thereby:
1. Authorizes any person to disclose, and the Village to investigate, all information pertaining to such application.
2. Waives any and all claims against the Village; and agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Village and its elected and appointed officials, officers,
boards, commissions, attorneys, employees, and agents from any and all claims resulting from, or arising out of, or alleged to result from or arise out
of, the processing of such application and any investigation related thereto. Each such person shall consent to and sign any written authorization,
waiver, and indemnification agreement as the Village may require in connection with the processing of such application and any investigation related
thereto, but no such separate authorization, waiver or indemnification shall be required to make effective the terms of this subsection.
3. If the Liquor Commissioner has not completed his investigation, and the applicant is otherwise entitled to receive a license, the Commissioner may
issue a temporary license which may be revoked by the Liquor Commissioner upon finding that the criminal history of the applicant is in violation of
this chapter. Revocation of a temporary license shall be treated like a denial of a license application, and there shall be no stay pending appeal.
F. Denial Or Issuance Of License: If, after review of an application and all relevant facts, the Commissioner determines that the application should be
denied, the Commissioner shall notify the applicant within a reasonable time, in writing, stating the reasons for the denial, but otherwise shall issue the
local liquor license as soon as all fees required by this chapter have been paid and all other requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
G. Disposition Of Fees: The processing fee required by subsection 4-2-5E1 of this chapter shall in all cases be nonrefundable and shall be deposited in
the General Corporate Fund of the Village. If a license applied for is denied, then the annual license fee required by subsection 4-2-5E2 of this chapter
shall be returned to the applicant. If a license is granted, said annual license fee shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund of the Village.
H. Supplemental Information Following Issuance:
1. Any change in information provided on, or in connection with, any application for a local liquor license that does or might affect the right of any
licensee to continue to hold a local liquor license shall be reported in writing to the Commissioner within ten (10) days after the change. All such
changes shall be subject to review and approval by the Commissioner in the same manner as the original application. (Ord. 12-07-11-O7, 12-7-2011)
2. When any such change affects the ownership of any partnership licensee or any director, officer, manager, or person owning or controlling more than
five percent (5%) of the shares of any corporate licensee, all such persons that have not previously submitted information pursuant to the application
process shall, within ten (10) days after such change, submit all information required of a new applicant along with a nonrefundable fee of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 03-06-18-O2, 3-6-2018)
4-2-7: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No local liquor license shall be issued or renewed to:
A. A person who is not a permanent resident of the Village; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the issuance of a local liquor license
to a corporation; and provided further, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the issuance of a local liquor license to a partnership where at
least one general partner is a permanent resident of the village.
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, if the commissioner determines, after investigation, that such person has
not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper, or is keeping, a house of ill fame.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 55/307
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or any other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
G. A person whose local liquor license has been suspended more than once for cause within one year immediately prior to the present application if the
commissioner determines that the applicant is no longer worthy of the public trust.
H. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of a local liquor license, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
I. A person whose place of business is managed by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the qualifications required of an
individual licensee.
J. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law or local ordinance concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of
alcoholic liquor or who has forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such alleged violation.
K. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a local liquor license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which such local liquor license is to be issued.
L. A person who is not the beneficial owner of the business to be licensed.
M. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any state or federal law or regulation or who has forfeited his or her bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such alleged violation.
N. A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
O. A person applying for a license with respect to premises for which a federal gaming device stamp has been issued for the current taxable year.
P. A person applying for a license with respect to premises on which the retail sale of alcoholic liquor would violate any provision of this code.
Q. A person applying for a local liquor license for any premises located within one hundred feet (100') of a building being utilized for preschool, primary or
secondary school classrooms, assembly or other student occupancy; an outdoor location utilized as an accessory play area or athletic field to a public
or private daycare, preschool, elementary, middle or high school, hospital, nursing or personal care facility, or within one hundred feet (100') of the
nearest part of any church building used for worship; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply in the case of any application for a renewal
of any local liquor license when any of the aforesaid buildings or uses have been established within one hundred feet (100') of the licensed premises
after the issuance of the original local liquor license. The village board may reduce the minimum distances proscribed in this section if in conjunction
with a planned unit development; provided, that such reduction shall be part of the required PUD public hearings and granted only after a finding that
such reduction would not adversely impact the health, safety and welfare of the adjoining subject uses.
R. A person who will not be personally and actively involved in the operation of the business to be licensed.
S. A partnership, unless all members thereof shall be qualified to obtain a license; provided, however, that the requirement of active involvement in
subsection R of this section shall apply to only one such partner.
T. A corporation, if any director, officer, or manager thereof, or any person owning or controlling more than five percent (5%) of the stock thereof would not
be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence or the requirement of active involvement in subsection R
of this section.
U. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state of Illinois or is a foreign corporation that is qualified under the Illinois business corporations act5 to
transact business in the state of Illinois.
V. Any village employee, any law enforcement official, the village president, or any member of the board of trustees. (1965 Code § 4-5-8)
4-2-8: CONDITIONS FOR LICENSE ISSUANCE, MAINTENANCE, RENEWAL:
A. State License Required:
1. All local liquor licenses shall be conditioned on the acquisition and maintenance in good standing by the applicant and licensee of a state liquor
license.
2. No local liquor license shall authorize the retail sale of any alcoholic liquor until proof of acquisition of such state liquor license is furnished to the
commissioner. If any state liquor license sought or held by a licensee is refused, suspended, or revoked, then such licensee shall be deemed in
violation of this chapter, and such licensee's local liquor license shall be subject to revocation.
B. Insurance Required: All local liquor licenses shall be conditioned on the acquisition and maintenance in good standing by the applicant and licensee of
general liability insurance in the amounts of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury or death to any person and one million dollars
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 56/307
($1,000,000.00) for damage to property and dramshop liability insurance at least to the maximum amount recoverable under applicable state statutes.
Before any local liquor license may be issued, the applicant shall furnish the commissioner with a certificate from an insurance company authorized to
do business in the state certifying that the applicant has such insurance policies in force for the full period for which the local liquor license is to be
issued. The village must be named on the insurance policy, so as to cause a certificate of insurance to be issued to the village, thus serving to notify
the liquor commissioner of any change in status of said policy. However, there is no requirement to name the village as additional insured.
C. License Renewal: The renewal of any license issued under this chapter is a privilege and not a vested right of any present license holder. Further, this
renewal privilege shall not be construed as a vested right, which will, in any case, prevent the village board, by ordinance, from decreasing the number
of licenses to be issued or renewed in the village. Prior to any such licensee receiving a liquor license renewal, a renewal application, signed by the
applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent of a partnership or corporation shall be submitted to the liquor commissioner. Such application
shall contain the following statements and information:
1. The name, including nicknames and aliases, residence address, telephone number, social security number and date of birth of the sole proprietor,
general or limited partners, officers, directors, and shareholders owning five percent (5%) or more of the common stock, members and managers, of
any applicant, and of the person or people who will run the day to day operations of the licensed establishment, along with a recent photograph of
each of the foregoing people, clearly showing their face.
2. In the case of an individual, the citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her
naturalization. In the case of a corporation, the date and place of incorporation and the objects for which it was formed and proof that it is a
corporation in good standing and authorized to conduct business in the state of Illinois.
3. The location and description of the premises for which a local liquor license is sought and the specific name of the business that is to be operated
under such local liquor license.
4. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has a current, valid state liquor license for the premises covered by the application.
5. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
6. A statement as to whether or not the applicant beneficially owns the premises for which a license is sought or has a lease thereon for the full period
for which the license is to be issued.
7. A statement as to whether or not the applicant is the beneficial owner of the business to be licensed.
8. A statement as to whether or not the applicant will be personally and actively involved in the operation of the business to be licensed.
9. A statement as to whether or not the business is or will be managed by a manager or agent.
D. Cessation Or Interruption Of Business: A license shall be rendered dormant and shall abate when the licensee ceases to do business or closes his or
her place of business for a period of more than thirty (30) days without the prior written consent of the commissioner. A licensee who intends to cease
to do business or who intends to close his or her place of business for more than ten (10) days shall give the commissioner written notice of such
cessation or closing as soon as practical after the decision to cease business or close is made, but in any event, before the cessation or closing. Such
notice shall state the expected date of cessation or closing and the reason therefor. (Ord. 12-07-11-O7, 12-7-2011)
4-2-9: SALES OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:
A. Sales Restricted To Licensed Premises: A local liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only within a fully enclosed structure located on the
licensed premises and only in compliance with the terms of such local liquor license.
B. Sales To Intoxicated Persons:
1. Sales Prohibited: No licensee, and no agent of any licensee, shall sell, give, or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person who is, or who appears to
be, intoxicated.
2. Secondary Transfer Prohibited: No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to
any person who is, or who appears to be, intoxicated.
C. Free Dispensation Prohibited: No licensee or any other person shall give away or otherwise dispense free of charge, by individual drink or in any other
manner, any alcoholic liquor for commercial purposes or in connection with the sale of nonalcoholic products or to promote the sale of nonalcoholic
products. No licensee or any person shall advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off any licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited by
this subsection. This includes, but is not limited to, all advertisements using the words "free" or "complimentary" in connection with alcoholic liquor.
D. Packaging Prohibitions:
1. It shall be unlawful for any recipient of a village liquor dealer's license or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of a
licensee to divide a manufacturer's package containing more than one can or bottle of beer, malt liquor or ale, if the capacity of an individual can or
bottle is sixteen (16) ounces or less, in order to sell an individual can or bottle, except for consumption on the licensed premises.
2. It shall be unlawful for any recipient of a village liquor dealer's license or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of a
licensee to sell, give, offer, or expose for sale, or deliver an individual can or bottle of beer, malt liquor or ale with a capacity of sixteen (16) ounces or
less, except for consumption on the licensed premises. (1965 Code § 4-5-10)
4-2-10: BEER GARDENS:
A class G beer garden license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the licensed premises in a beer garden, porch or other
area which is not fully enclosed within a building on property owned or controlled by the holder of a class A or class R license. Said beer garden, porch or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 57/307
other area shall be fully enclosed by a fence (or in the case of a porch, a rail) and shall not be accessible except through the building on the licensed
premises.
A. Class G licenses for sale and consumption of alcohol in a beer garden shall be issued only for a premises that is located seventy five feet (75') or more
from a residentially zoned area or residential use. Sale of alcohol shall only be permitted between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. on all days, except Friday, Saturday and legal holidays when it must cease at eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. Consumption of
alcohol shall only be permitted between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. on all days, except Friday,
Saturday and legal holidays when it must cease at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. However, all external music from bands, groups, amplification
systems or external noise must cease at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on all days, except Friday, Saturday and legal holidays when it must cease at eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M.
B. Class G licenses for sale and consumption of alcohol in a beer garden, issued for a premises that is located two hundred fifty feet (250') or more from a
residentially zoned area or residential use, shall be permitted during the hours allowed in their regular license. However, all external music from bands,
groups, amplification systems or external noise must cease at ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. on all days, except Friday, Saturday and legal holidays
when it must cease at eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M.
C. Distances shall be measured from the nearest fence of the licensed premises to the closest residential structure.
D. The beer garden must be adequately enclosed with a minimum six foot (6') high fence, wall or enclosure to assure privacy and the control of alcoholic
liquors.
E. Floors shall be of hard surface, i.e., concrete, asphalt, wood or brick. (Ord. 12-07-11-O7, 12-7-2011)
4-2-11: ALCOHOL AWARENESS TRAINING:
Any officer, director or manager of any licensee who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic liquors shall, within six (6) months of initial employment date or
within six (6) months of the date of issuance of any new license, have successfully completed a state certified alcohol awareness program. Also, all such
certificates of completion shall be kept current and in force as per the guidelines of said program during the entire affiliation with the licensee. The licensee
shall, at time of renewal as per section 4-2-8 of this chapter, show proof of all certificates of completion required herein with each renewal application.
(Ord. 12-07-11-O7, 12-7-2011)
4-2-12: LICENSEE RESPONSIBLE FOR ACTS OF AGENTS, EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the liquor control act of 1934, as amended, and
any rules and regulations of the local liquor control commissioner or the state commission, by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of
any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner
as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally. (1965 Code § 4-5-15)
4-2-13: CLOSING HOURS:
A. Hours: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, deliver, or consume any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of any day except on Sunday, on which day it shall be unlawful to sell or offer to sell, offer for sale, deliver, or consume any
alcoholic liquor between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.; provided, however, that alcoholic liquor in the form of
packaged goods for consumption off the licensed premises may be sold commencing at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Sunday.
B. Patrons Remaining On Premises: It shall be unlawful for patrons to remain on the licensed premises for more than fifteen (15) minutes after the legal
closing hour; except, that patrons may remain on and be admitted to restaurants which are R licensed premises for the consumption of food only after
the legal closing hour. Employees, as defined herein, are permitted to remain on the licensed premises after normal closing hours while performing
their duties, but are prohibited from selling, offering for sale, delivering, or consuming any alcoholic liquor during any such after hour period. Individual
license holders, or if a corporation, the corporate officers, and any titleholder of the property on which a liquor license is held shall be permitted to
consume alcoholic beverages during the times patrons are excluded from the premises. (Ord. 12-07-11-O7, 12-7-2011)
4-2-14: PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS:
A. Sales To Minors:
1. Sales Prohibited: No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of such licensee, shall sell, give, or deliver any
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
2. Secondary Transfer Prohibited: No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to
any minor; provided, however, that this subsection A2 shall not prohibit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor in the performance of a
religious ceremony or in the home of such minor pursuant to the condonation and supervision of the parent or legal guardian of such minor.
3. Identification Required: If a licensee or any agent of a licensee believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because the prospective recipient may be a minor, then that person shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand adequate written
evidence of age.
a. For the purpose of preventing a violation of this section, any licensee, and any agent of a licensee, may refuse to sell alcoholic liquor to any
individual who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and age.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 58/307
b. For purposes of this section, "adequate written evidence of identity and age" means a document issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal
government, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal selective service act,
or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.
c. Proof that the licensee, or an agent of the licensee, demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied on adequate written evidence of identity and
age in any transaction forbidden by this section is an affirmative defense in any proceeding for the suspension or revocation of any local liquor
license based on the occurrence of such forbidden transaction. However, it shall not be an affirmative defense if the licensee, or an agent of the
licensee, accepted any written evidence of identity or age knowing it to be false or fraudulent.
B. Purchase Or Possession By Minors:
1. Purchase And Possession Prohibited: No minor shall purchase alcoholic liquor, accept a gift of alcoholic liquor, or have alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession; provided, however, that this subsection B1 shall not prohibit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor in the performance of a
religious ceremony or in the home of such minor pursuant to the condonation and supervision of the parent or legal guardian of such minor, nor the
possession of alcoholic liquor by a minor making a delivery of such alcoholic liquor pursuant to the order of the parent, legal guardian or employer of
such minor.
2. Misrepresentation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to present or offer to any licensee, or to the agent of any licensee, any written, printed, or photostatic
evidence of identity or age that is false, fraudulent, or not his or her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase, or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to have in his or her possession any false or fraudulent
written, printed, or photostatic evidence of identity or age.
3. Transfer And Alteration Of Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor to transfer, alter, or deface any written, printed, or photostatic
evidence of identity or age or to obtain any written, printed, or photostatic evidence of identity or age by means of false or fraudulent information.
4. Conveyance Of False Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish to any other person any false or fraudulent
written, printed, or photostatic evidence of identity or age. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish to any other person any evidence
of identity or age with the knowledge or intent that such evidence will be used to circumvent the provisions of this chapter.
C. Access Of Licensed Premises To Minors:
1. All licensees shall ascertain by adequate written evidence the correct age of persons entering the licensed premises to verify that no person entering
the licensed premises is under twenty one (21) years of age.
2. No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall enter or remain upon the premises of any local licensee where liquor is sold for consumption on
premises, except where food prepared and cooked in a kitchen on the premises is regularly available during certain specified and posted hours not in
violation of village or state curfew hours, in which case, persons under the age of twenty one (21) may attend such portion of the premises when food
is normally served, while accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; and except where the premises are used primarily for the consumption of food
on the premises (i.e., a full service restaurant), in which case, persons under the age of twenty one (21) may attend that portion of the premises used
primarily for the consumption of food but may not enter or remain in that portion of the premises used primarily for the sale and consumption of
alcohol liquor. Persons under the age of twenty one (21) are prohibited at all times, in all premises, from being seated at any bar.
3. Any licensee seeking to operate under the provisions of this subsection shall be required to apply to the liquor control commissioner for an inspection
of the premises. The fee for such inspection shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The inspection shall be conducted in such manner as to determine:
a. That the qualifying requirements of this subsection are met.
b. Those areas of the premises where persons under the age of twenty one (21) are allowed, including access to washrooms.
c. To establish those licensees which are full service restaurants.
4. Upon completion of said inspection, the liquor control commissioner shall issue an R liquor license for the licensees which are determined to be full
service restaurants and shall issue substitute A liquor licenses with the designation P thereon (e.g., AP) for such licensees as are otherwise qualified
hereunder, said license to have an attachment describing the designated areas for persons under twenty one (21) required hereunder.
D. Handling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of twenty one (21) to draw, pour, deliver, mix or register the sale of alcoholic liquor.
E. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian, intentionally, knowingly, or negligently, to permit any minor for whom the
parent or guardian is responsible to violate any provision of this chapter.
F. Prohibited Gatherings: It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally, knowingly, or negligently, to permit a gathering at a residence that he or she
occupies of two (2) or more persons where any one or more of such persons is a minor if:
1. The person occupying the residence knows that any such minor is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic liquor; and
2. The possession or consumption of the alcoholic liquor by such minor is not otherwise permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 12-07-11-O7, 12-7-2011)
4-2-15: LEWD ENTERTAINMENT:
A. Prohibited Conduct: No person licensed under this chapter shall permit any employee, entertainer or patron to engage in the following conduct on the
licensed premises:
1. Any performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any other sexual
acts which are prohibited by law.
2. The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling on the breasts, buttocks, anus, or genitals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 59/307
3. The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals with less than a fully opaque covering.
4. The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to the public view any portion of his or her
breasts, buttocks, genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering.
5. Display of films or pictures depicting acts, the live performance of which are prohibited by the provisions of this section.
B. Clothing Exhibition: No person licensed under this chapter shall permit any person, employee, entertainer, or patron to engage in the exhibition of any
article of clothing on the licensed premises. "Exhibition" shall mean display of clothing for the purpose of entertainment, sale or other commercial
purpose, and shall include, without limitation, lingerie shows, bathing apparel shows, wet T-shirt contests or shows, and similar events. (1965 Code § 4-
5-13)
4-2-16: SOLICITATION OF DRINKS:
No licensee or employee or agent shall solicit, induce or request any patron of the licensed premises to purchase any alcoholic beverage for himself or any
other employee or agent of the licensee. (1965 Code § 4-5-16)
4-2-17: SALE AND CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC AREAS:
No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, consumed or delivered in any park, playground, preserve, alley, public sidewalk, parkway, street or building belonging
to, or under the control of, the village or any other public entity, without obtaining a class T liquor license from the village liquor commissioner or
appropriate liquor license from the associated public entity authorized to issue such license. (1965 Code § 4-5-17)
4-2-18: GAMBLING ON PREMISES:
No person shall permit gambling on any premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor with the exception of gambling permitted under the Illinois video gaming
act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., and as authorized within the village pursuant to section 4-2-22 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-18-12-O1, 7-18-
2012)
4-2-19: HAPPY HOURS PROHIBITED:
A. Maintain Schedule Of Prices: All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and
consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multiuse establishment which holds a retailer's license
operates on its premises more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multiuse establishment shall
maintain at each such establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that establishment.
B. Prohibited Acts: No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall: (1965 Code § 4-5-18)
1. Serve two (2) or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one person for consumption by that one person, except conducting product sampling
pursuant to 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-31 or selling or delivering wine by the bottle or carafe. (1965 Code § 4-5-18; amd. 2009 Code)
2. Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at
private functions not open to the general public.
3. Sell, offer to sell or offer to serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in
subsection C5 of this section.
4. Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price
regularly charged for the drink on that day.
5. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises.
6. Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections B1 through B5 of this
section.
C. Legal Conduct: Nothing in subsection B of this section shall be construed to prohibit a licensee from:
1. Offering free food or entertainment at any time.
2. Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package.
3. Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between a hotel or multiuse establishment and another group for the holding of any
function, meeting, convention or trade show. (1965 Code § 4-5-18)
4. Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to, buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such
manner, or selling bottles of spirits, and delivered to two (2) or more persons at one time. (1965 Code § 4-5-18; amd. 2009 Code)
5. Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of the special entertainment not regularly
scheduled. (1965 Code § 4-5-18)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 60/307
4-2-20: NOTIFY POLICE OF ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES:
It shall be the duty of each licensee to immediately notify the police department of conduct on the licensed premises which disturbs, tends to disturb or
aids in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, illegal gambling, prostitution or the solicitation therefor and
the sale, delivery or use of controlled substances, and no licensee shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any licensed premises owned or possessed
by the licensee or under his control. (Ord. 07-18-12-O1, 7-18-2012)
4-2-21: VIOLATIONS, COMPLAINTS, HEARINGS AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS:
A. Violation Determined By Commissioner: The commissioner may suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke any local liquor license, or may in
lieu thereof fine any licensee for any violation of any liquor law, including the failure of the licensee to pay any license cost or fee or any tax imposed on
alcoholic liquor or the sale thereof, committed or permitted by the licensee or any agent of the licensee, or which occurs at the licensed premises, or for
which the licensee or any agent of the licensee is otherwise legally responsible.
1. Suspension, Revocation Or Fine: Except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, no local liquor license shall be revoked or suspended, and no
fine shall be imposed on any licensee, except after a public hearing before the commissioner. Such hearing shall be held not sooner than three (3)
days after written notice shall have been transmitted to the licensee at the licensed premises by a police officer or the United States mail affording
the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
2. Summary Suspension: If the commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of any licensed premises poses a threat to the
welfare of the community, then the commissioner may, on the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and, without notice
or hearing, order a licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, during which time the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to be
heard; provided, however, that if such licensee also conducts another business or businesses on the licensed premises, no closing order issued
pursuant to this subsection A2 shall be applicable to such other business or businesses.
B. Violation Determined By Court: Whenever any licensee, or any agent of a licensee, shall be found in any court to have violated any liquor law, the local
liquor license of said licensee may, in the discretion of the commissioner, be revoked.
C. Complaints:
1. Local Individuals:
a. Any resident of the village may file a complaint with the commissioner alleging that a licensee has been or is violating any liquor law.
b. Every such complaint shall be in writing, shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner, shall be signed and sworn to by the complaining
resident and shall state the particular liquor law alleged to have been violated and the facts in detail supporting such allegation.
c. If the commissioner is satisfied that there is probable cause to believe a violation has occurred, the commissioner shall set the matter for hearing
and shall serve notice on the complainant and the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charges in the complaint to
be considered at such hearing. Such hearing shall take place not sooner than three (3) days after the date on which such notice is mailed to the
licensee at the address of the licensed premises by United States mail or hand delivered by a police officer.
2. State Department Of Revenue: On complaint of the Illinois department of revenue, the commissioner shall refuse the issuance or renewal of any
local liquor license, or shall suspend or revoke any local liquor license, for any of the following violations of any tax act administered by the Illinois
department of revenue:
a. Failure to file a tax return.
b. Filing of a fraudulent return.
c. Failure to pay all or any part of any tax or penalty finally determined to be due.
d. Failure to keep proper books and records.
e. Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificate of registration.
f. Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the state department of revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability.
D. Hearings: No local liquor license shall be revoked or suspended, and no licensee shall be fined, except after a public hearing held before the
commissioner. No such hearing shall be held until at least three (3) days after the licensee has been given written notice affording the licensee an
opportunity to appear and defend. All such hearings shall be open to the public. The commissioner shall reduce all evidence to writing and shall
maintain an official record of the proceedings. Within five (5) days after the hearing, if the commissioner determines that the licensee should be
disciplined, the commissioner shall issue a written order stating the reason or reasons for such determination. The order shall state that the license has
been revoked, or the period of suspension, or the amount of the fine. The commissioner shall serve a copy of the order on the licensee.
E. Appeal From Commissioner: Appeals from the decision of the commissioner shall be taken to the Illinois liquor control commission in the manner
provided by law. Every review by the Illinois liquor control commission shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the
commissioner.
F. Payment Of Fees And Costs: Upon a final judgment and determination other than not guilty in any hearing by the local liquor control commissioner, the
local liquor control commissioner shall require, in addition to a fine, if any, the payment by the licensee of all fees and costs for all hearing sessions
concerning the matter. Fees and costs shall include the cost for attendance and transcriptions of the court reporter, fees for the local liquor control
commissioner and his or her assistants whose fee or salary has been set by the village board, fees of the village attorney incurred in connection with
the case, and fees of the attorney representing the local liquor control commissioner at the hearing(s). Final judgment and determination shall include a
mandatory payment deadline of not more than ten (10) days following the date of judgment. The liquor control commissioner shall notify the village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 61/307
manager within ten (10) days following the due date of all unpaid fines. The village manager shall conduct a business license hearing for any
establishment not having paid such fines, as authorized by this code.
G. Separate Offenses: Each day on which or during which any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter, and each separate act or transaction in
violation of this chapter, shall constitute a separate offense. (1965 Code § 4-5-12)
4-2-22: VIDEO GAMING:
A. The definitions of the Illinois video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., are incorporated and adopted into this section by reference.
B. The following activities or forms of gambling are allowed provided all applicable licenses are obtained: 1) the keeping, possession, ownership, use of a
video gaming terminal in a licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or licensed veterans'
establishment, which is licensed by the gaming board to conduct or allow such specific activities under the video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 40/1 et seq.
C. The annual license fee for each licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or licensed veterans'
establishment shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) with no proration if licensee only operates for a portion of the calendar year.
D. The annual license fee for each video gaming terminal shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) with no proration if licensee only operates for a portion of the
calendar year. No more than five (5) video gaming terminals may be located on any licensed premises.
E. All licensed establishments and each licensed gaming terminal must display the license or sticker obtained from the gaming board and/or village at all
times.
F. All limitations on hours of operation, proximity to schools, places of worship, and gambling facilities, and other restrictions, as listed in the video gaming
act, shall apply to any license issued by the village. (Ord. 07-18-12-O1, 7-18-2012)
Chapter 3
AMUSEMENTS1
4-3-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter, except as to the licensing and fees, shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the
village, whether specifically licensed elsewhere in this code or not. (1965 Code § 4-6-1)
4-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public and for admittance to which a fee is charged without having first
secured a license therefor; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by
any other ordinance of the village. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the village manager and shall comply with all of the general provisions of
the ordinance relating to such application. (1965 Code § 4-6-2)
4-3-3: RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN AMUSEMENTS:
A. Street Shows: No license shall be granted or given for any exhibition, show or other amusement to be given on a public street or sidewalk or in such
place that the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public place, except on order of the village board. (1965 Code § 4-6-
3; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Athletic Exhibitions:
1. License Required: It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race between persons, animals or vehicles, or any baseball games, boxing
or wrestling matches, or any other athletic contest or exhibition, for admission to which a fee is charged without having first procured a license
therefor.
2. Fee Based Upon Gross Receipts: The proprietor of such exhibition shall submit to the village treasurer a statement, verified under oath, of the gross
receipts of each such game, contest or race, within one week after such exhibition. At the same time, the proprietor or person exhibiting or operating
such exhibition shall pay to the village treasurer a sum equal to three percent (3%) of the gross receipts.
3. Police Presence; Right To Examine Books: Sufficient members of the police department shall be admitted free of charge to all such exhibitions for
the purpose of preserving and maintaining order, and the treasurer may post a person or any number of persons at the box office of each such
performance and may examine all of the books pertaining to such performance showing or tending to show the gross receipts.
C. Medicine Shows: It shall be unlawful to give or conduct any medicine show or performance in connection with or for the purpose of lectures on or
demonstrations of any tonic, medicine, remedy or alleged specific for human ailments. (1965 Code § 4-6-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 62/307
4-3-4: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see that every exhibition, theatrical or other public show or amusement is inspected by a member of the police
and of the fire departments, and to ensure conformity with the provisions concerning such amusements. (1965 Code § 4-6-4)
4-3-5: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Order: The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly and quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such
amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.
B. Indecent Shows: It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit, conduct or take part in any indecent show, theatrical, play, motion picture,
exhibition or other form of public amusement or show.
C. Riots: It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or
disturbance. (1965 Code § 4-6-5; amd. 2009 Code)
4-3-6: JUKEBOXES AND MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
A. Definitions: The following terms, as used in this section, shall be defined as follows unless the context indicates otherwise:
AMUSEMENT PARLOR: Any business which consists exclusively of coin operated games and amusement devices. No such "amusement parlor" shall
be operated within the village.
JUKEBOX: Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice
or other opening, or by the payment of any other consideration, operates or may be operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine which, upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or by payment of any other
consideration, may be operated by the public generally as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score, including such
devices as marble machines, pinball games, skill ball, shooting galleries, electronic games and mechanical grab machines.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation or association which owns, leases or otherwise controls the premises upon
which any jukebox or mechanical amusement device is produced, presented for public patronage or operated.
B. License Required; Exemptions:
1. No person shall engage in the business of mechanical amusement operator, or make any jukebox or mechanical amusement device available for
use by the public generally, upon the payment of consideration, without first having obtained a license therefor in accordance with this section.
2. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over twenty one (21) years of age. (1965 Code § 4-6-7)
3. No license shall be required for any jukebox or mechanical devices which are part of a public show, carnival, circus, or other such public exhibition
for which separate license is required by the village. (1965 Code § 4-6-7; amd. 2009 Code)
C. Amusement Operator License: Any business in the village that has on its premises seven (7) or more coin operated games and/or amusement devices
in conjunction with its primary business shall obtain an amusement operator license in addition to any other licenses required, including the fee charged
per machine or amusement device.
D. Arcade Supervision: Any establishment with seven (7) or more mechanical amusement devices, as described herein, shall have a supervisor twenty
one (21) years of age or older on the premises at all times when said amusement devices are available for public use or patronage. (1965 Code § 4-6-
7)
4-3-7: BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS:
A. Licenses Required; Application:
1. No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool, bagatelle, pigeonhole or similar game or table open to the public without having first
obtained a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the village clerk and shall state thereon the location of the business and
the number of tables to be used therein. (1965 Code § 4-6-8)
2. Any billiard or pool hall owner shall obtain an amusement operator license in addition to any other licenses required, including the fee charged per
table. (1965 Code § 4-6-8; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Supervision: Any establishment shall have a supervisor twenty one (21) years of age or older on the premises at all times when open for public use or
patronage.
C. Limit On Number Of Pool And Billiard Tables: No business licensee, other than a billiard parlor licensed hereunder, shall have more than three (3)
billiard or pool tables on its premises in conjunction with the operation of its primary business. (1965 Code § 4-6-8)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 63/307
4-3-8: BOWLING ALLEYS:
No person shall operate or maintain a bowling alley open to the public without having first secured a license therefor. Application for such license shall be
made to the village clerk and shall state thereon the location of the business and the number of alleys to be used. (1965 Code § 4-6-9)
4-3-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, with each and every day
that a violation is allowed to exist constituting a distinct and separate offense under the terms of this chapter. In addition, the village may take whatever
action it may deem appropriate to enforce the terms of this chapter, including an action for injunction. All attorney fees and costs incurred by the village in
enforcing the terms of this chapter shall be paid by the violator. (1965 Code title 4 ch. 6 § 2; amd. 2009 Code)
Footnote 1: See section 4-1-3 of this title for license fees.
Chapter 4
GUN CLUBS AND SHOOTING RANGES
4-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate for profit any indoor or outdoor gun club, shooting club or pistol range without a license for that purpose first had and obtained
from the village clerk and under the village seal. (1965 Code § 4-7-1)
4-4-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
When application for license is made, the chief of police shall cause to be made an inspection of the premises in or upon which it is intended to conduct or
operate such gun club, shooting club, rifle or pistol range, to determine whether or not such premises are properly located and are of sufficient size, and
that the targets and other equipment of such premises will be placed, kept, and maintained in such manner and in such condition as to produce the
maximum safety to the persons using such premises and the public at large. In the event these requirements are not met, a license shall not be issued.
(1965 Code § 4-7-2)
4-4-3: LICENSE FEE:
A license fee as set forth in section 4-1-3 of this title shall be paid to the village clerk and shall be issued for a period of not more than one year; provided,
however, that all such licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year in which such licenses shall be issued. (1965 Code § 4-7-3; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 5
RAFFLES
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
RAFFLE: A form of "lottery", as defined in section 28-2(b) of the state of Illinois criminal code of 19611, conducted by an organization licensed under this
chapter, in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance.
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on
the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except, that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest. (1965 Code § 4-46-1)
4-5-2: STATE LAW ADOPTED; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. State Law Adopted: All provisions, including all words and phrases of the state of Illinois raffles act2, and the rules and regulations contained therein,
are hereby incorporated into and declared to be a part of this chapter as if expressly set forth herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 64/307
B. Compliance With All Regulations Required: Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or release any person or organization from compliance with the
requirements of any other applicable federal, state or local code, ordinance, regulation, or rule. (1965 Code § 4-46-2)
4-5-3: LIMITATIONS:
A. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00).
B. The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00).
C. The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
D. The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold is three hundred sixty five (365).
E. This chapter shall not apply to the lottery owned and operated by the state of Illinois. (1965 Code § 4-46-3)
4-5-4: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. The number of licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for no more than five (5) raffles in one calendar year.
B. The village shall act on a license application within thirty (30) days from the date of the application.
C. Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application and which
have had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a nonprofit fundraising organization
that the village authority determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals
suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
D. The license and application must specify the areas in which the raffle ticket will be sold, the time period during which raffles or chances will be sold or
issued, and the time and location of determination of winning chances. (1965 Code § 4-46-4)
4-5-5: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
A. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
B. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
C. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
D. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under
this chapter.
E. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
F. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or guardian. A
person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his
parent or guardian. (1965 Code § 4-46-5)
4-5-6: RAFFLES MANAGER:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall
give a fidelity bond in an amount determined by the village in favor of the organization, conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his duties.
Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation. The corporate
authorities may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under this chapter; provided, that a
license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization. (2009 Code)
4-5-7: RECORDS:
Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership, and to the village, its gross
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 65/307
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section. (1965 Code § 4-46-6)
Footnote 1: 720 ILCS 5/28-2(b).
Footnote 2: 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.
Chapter 6
SOLICITORS
4-6-1: SOLICITOR'S REGISTRATION, BADGE AND FEE:
A. Registration And Badge Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, salesman, or canvasser to call from home to home in the village without first registering and obtaining a solicitor's
registration badge in the office of the village clerk.
2. Such registration shall be on forms provided by the village and shall give the solicitor's identification, signature, name of his employer, the nature of
the products or services in which he is interested and the name of the manufacturer of such products and his proposed method of operation in the
village. (1965 Code § 9-3-1)
B. Fee: The license fee for any solicitor, salesman or canvasser shall be as set forth in section 4-1-3 of this title. (1965 Code § 9-3-2)
C. Qualifications For Badge: No solicitor's badge under this chapter shall be given to any person not of good moral character.
D. Display Of Badge: Any solicitor shall at all times while soliciting or canvassing within the village wear in plain view upon his person the solicitor's badge
required by this chapter, and shall exhibit the same, upon request, to any police officer or to any person upon whom he calls in the course of his
business. (1965 Code § 9-3-3)
4-6-2: CONSENT OF OCCUPANTS:
It shall be unlawful to enter any residential premises, or to remain therein, for the purpose of selling or taking orders for any commodity or service or for
soliciting contributions or memberships of any nature, without the express or implied consent of the occupant of such premises. (1965 Code § 9-3-4)
4-6-3: EXCEPTION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons who have obtained a peddler's license as provided by provisions of this code. (1965 Code § 9-3-
5)
Chapter 7
CONTRACTORS
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CONTRACTORS
4-7A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms used in this article shall have the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires:
CONTRACTOR: Any person engaged in the business of constructing, altering, or repairing buildings or other structures or sidewalk or street pavements,
including, but not limited to, general building contractors, cement or concrete contractors, masonry contractors, carpentry contractors, and subcontractors;
provided, that this article shall not be construed as requiring a license for the operation of the business of plumbing contractor, or the business of electrical
contractor1 by a person who has registered as such pursuant to the provisions of this code relating to said contractors. Any person who engages in the
construction, repair or alteration of any building, structure, or street or sidewalk pavement within the village, for which a building permit is required, is
presumed to be a "contractor" and must be licensed hereunder unless such presumption is rebutted.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, trust or other legal entity. (1965 Code § 4-28-1)
4-7A-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: No person shall be a contractor within the village without first having obtained a license therefor as herein provided. (1965 Code § 4-
28-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 66/307
B. Application: Application for license shall be made in writing to the village clerk upon forms furnished thereby. Each application shall state the name of
the applicant, applicant's address, number of individual persons to be operating under such license, type of license requested, and a statement that the
applicant agrees to comply with this code and all other laws relating to or regulating the activities in which engaged. (1965 Code § 4-28-3)
C. Issuance; License Period: The clerk shall issue a license upon application and compliance with this article, and payment of the prescribed fee, as
hereafter provided. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. (1965 Code § 4-28-5)
D. Fee: The annual license fee for contractors shall be set forth in section 4-1-3 of this title. Any person licensed as a general contractor shall not be
required to secure an additional license for the performance of carpentry, masonry, cement or concrete contracting. (1965 Code § 4-28-6)
4-7A-3: BOND AND INSURANCE:
A. Bond: Each applicant shall, before receiving a license as provided in this article, deposit with the clerk a bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) with surety to be approved by the village board of trustees to indemnify, keep and save harmless the village against any loss, cost,
damage, judgment or liability of any kind whatsoever which the village may suffer or be put to, or which may accrue against, be charged to or be
recovered from the village or any of its officials by reason of any act or thing done or neglected to be done under or by virtue of the authority given in
such license, and further conditioned that the applicant shall well and faithfully observe all the provisions of this code and other regulations of the
village relating to the activities engaged in under or by virtue of the authority given in such license. Such bond shall extend over the license period.
(1965 Code § 4-28-4)
B. Insurance: Each applicant shall, before receiving a license as provided in this article, deposit with the clerk a certificate of insurance reflecting
comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)
combined single limit and workers' compensation insurance if required per state statute and approved by the corporate authorities. Such insurance
shall extend over the license period. (1965 Code § 4-28-9)
4-7A-4: DUTIES OF LICENSEES:
It shall be the duty of all contractors licensed hereunder to comply with all laws relating to or regulating the activities in an orderly condition, free from
standing water, unguarded, dangerous implements and health hazards, and contractors shall not obstruct traffic on streets or sidewalks or permit dirt or
waste materials to fall or be carried onto such public ways. (1965 Code § 4-28-7)
4-7A-5: INSPECTION; ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this article are declared to be of a regulatory nature, and it shall at all times be the duty of the police department, the health department,
the fire department and the building department regularly to inspect the site of the contractor's activities to see that the same are being conducted and
operated in accordance with the requirements of this code applicable thereto. (1965 Code § 4-28-8)
Footnote 1: See section 12-5-4 of this code.
ARTICLE B. CATCH BASIN CLEANERS
4-7B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
A. License Required: No person shall be permitted to empty, clean or remove the contents of any catch basin or in any manner engage in the business of
cleaning catch basins within the village without first having obtained a license so to do. (1965 Code § 4-30-1)
B. License Fee: Every person applying for a catch basin cleaner's license shall pay to the village clerk the sum as set out in section 4-1-3 of this title. (1965
Code § 4-30-2; amd. 2009 Code)
4-7B-2: CLEANING PERMIT:
No person, licensed as provided in this article, shall remove or cause to be removed the contents of any catch basin without first having obtained a written
permit from the village. Such permit shall state the name of the licensed catch basin cleaner, describe the premises where the work is to be done, and the
place where the contents of such catch basin shall be deposited. (1965 Code § 4-30-3)
4-7B-3: REPORT WORK PERFORMED:
Every catch basin cleaner shall make a written report to the village of all work done by him within ten (10) days after such work shall have been finished,
giving the address of the premises, the name of the person for whom the work was done, stating the manner in which the catch basin was cleaned, the
amount of contents removed, and the place where the same was deposited. In case of his failure to comply with this section, he shall be subject to the
penalty provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and his license may be removed by the village president, after notice to the licensee, and opportunity for
hearing. (1965 Code § 4-30-4; amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 67/307
Chapter 8
LUMBERYARDS
4-8-1: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: No person shall maintain a lumberyard or other place where lumber is sold or stored for the purpose of seasoning or drying the same
without first having obtained a license thereof as hereinafter provided. (1965 Code § 4-8-1)
B. Application: Any person desiring to maintain a lumberyard or place for the selling, storing or keeping of lumber as described in subsection A of this
section shall make application in writing to the village clerk for a license so to do, setting forth therein the name of the applicant and the place where it
is desired to keep such lumberyard or place for the storage or sale of lumber. (1965 Code § 4-8-2; amd. 2009 Code)
C. Issuance: Upon the payment of said license fee, the village clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a license to such applicant, attested by the village
clerk, authorizing the applicant to keep, conduct, or maintain a lumberyard or place for storage or sale of lumber at the place designated in such
application. If such applicant shall desire or intend to keep or conduct more than one lumberyard or place for the storage of lumber, a license shall be
secured for each such lumberyard or place, and a full license fee as fixed in section 4-1-3 of this title shall be charged for each such license so issued.
(1965 Code § 4-8-3; amd. 2009 Code)
4-8-2: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS; INSPECTION:
Every person maintaining a lumberyard or other place where lumber is sold, or where lumber is stored for the purpose of seasoning or drying, or where
secondhand lumber is stored or kept for sale shall conduct said lumberyard in accordance with all of the provisions of this code, and it shall be the duty of
the chief of police to inspect each lumberyard at least once in every six (6) months. (1965 Code § 4-8-4)
Chapter 9
DRY GOODS STORES
4-9-1: DEFINITION:
The term "dry goods store", as used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean any building, room, place or premises in the village operating, maintaining
or conducting the sale or offering for sale any dry goods, woolen, silk, cotton or other fabrics, notions, fancy goods, wearing apparel, haberdashery, hats,
caps, millinery or any cloth goods. (1965 Code § 4-9-1)
4-9-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: No person shall establish, operate, maintain or conduct a dry goods store without first having obtained a license as hereinafter
required. (1965 Code § 4-9-1)
B. Application: Any person desiring a license to establish, maintain or conduct such store as described in section 4-9-1 of this chapter shall make written
application to the village clerk, stating the name and residence of the applicant, if an individual; or all the members of the firm, if a copartnership; or
names and residences of the principal officers, if the applicant is a corporation; also, the location and description of the premises where such business
is to be conducted. (1965 Code § 4-9-2; amd. 2009 Code)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for such stores or where business is begun after July 1 shall be payable in advance as provided in section 4-1-3 of
this title. (1965 Code § 4-9-3)
4-9-3: INSPECTION OF PREMISES; LICENSE ISSUANCE:
A. Inspection Authorized: It shall be the duty of the village manager to have the premises so described in section 4-9-1 of this chapter inspected by the
health officer and fire chief for the purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of such premises for such business from a sanitary standpoint and
determining whether or not the said premises complies with all the ordinances relating to health, safety and sanitation so as to properly safeguard the
lives and health of the employees engaged therein and customers frequenting same.
B. Issuance Of License: If the village manager is satisfied that the applicant has complied with the provisions of this code regulating health, safety and
sanitation, he shall, upon payment by such applicant to the village clerk of the license fee as provided in section 4-1-3 of this title, issue or cause to be
issued to such applicant a license to conduct and operate such business. (1965 Code § 4-9-2; amd. 2009 Code)
4-9-4: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
Every such store shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. All necessary measures shall be taken to safeguard the lives and health of all persons
employed or trading in such establishments, and adequate and convenient washing and toilet facilities shall be provided for such employees. All articles
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 68/307
kept for sale shall be kept free from vermin or any matter of a contagious or infectious nature. No person suffering from an active contagious or infectious
disease shall be employed in such store. All refuse, waste and sweepings shall be removed and disposed of at least once each day and in such a manner
as not to cause a nuisance, and all cleaning shall be done, as far as possible, outside of working hours, but if done during working hours, shall be done in
such a manner as to avoid the unnecessary raising of dust or noxious material. (1965 Code § 4-9-4; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 10
SHOE STORES
4-10-1: DEFINITION:
The term "shoe store", as used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean any building, room, place or premises operated, maintained or conducted for
the sale or offering or keeping for sale of any shoes, boots, slippers, sandals or other footwear. (1965 Code § 4-12-1; amd. 2009 Code)
4-10-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: No person shall establish, operate, maintain or conduct any "shoe store", as defined in section 4-10-1 of this chapter, without first
having obtained a license. (1965 Code § 4-12-1)
B. Application: Any person desiring a license to establish, maintain or conduct such store as described in section 4-10-1 of this chapter shall make written
application to the village clerk stating the name and residence of the applicant, if an individual; or all the members of the firm, if a copartnership; or
names and residences of the principal officers, if the applicant is a corporation; also, the location and description of the premises where such business
is to be conducted. (1965 Code § 4-12-2; amd. 2009 Code)
4-10-3: INSPECTION OF PREMISES; LICENSE ISSUANCE:
A. Inspection Authorized: It shall be the duty of the village manager to have the premises so described inspected by the health officer and fire chief for the
purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of such premises for such business, from a sanitary standpoint, and determining whether or not the
said premises complies with all the provisions of this code relating to health, safety and sanitation so as to properly safeguard the lives and health of
the employees engaged therein and customers frequenting same.
B. License Issuance: If the village manager is satisfied that the applicant has complied with the provisions of this code, he shall, upon payment by such
applicant to the village clerk of the license fee as provided in section 4-1-3 of this title, issue or cause to be issued to such applicant a license to
conduct and operate such business. (1965 Code § 4-12-2; amd. 2009 Code)
4-10-4: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
Every such store shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. All necessary measures shall be taken to safeguard the lives and health of all persons
employed or trading in such establishments, and adequate and convenient washing and toilet facilities shall be provided for such employees. All articles
kept for sale shall be kept free from vermin or any matter of contagious or infectious nature. No person suffering from an active contagious or infectious
disease shall be employed in such store. All refuse, waste and sweepings shall be removed and disposed of at least once each day and in such a manner
as not to cause a nuisance, and all cleaning shall be done, as far as possible, outside of working hours, but if done during working hours, shall be done in
such a manner as to avoid the unnecessary raising of dust or noxious material. (1965 Code § 4-12-3; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 11
BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY PARLORS
ARTICLE A. BARBERSHOPS
4-11A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BARBER: One who cuts or dresses hair or shaves another.
BARBERSHOP: Any building, room, place or establishment where any hair cutting, shaving or massaging is given or employed. (1965 Code § 4-11-1)
4-11A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM; APPLICATION:
A. License Required: No person shall establish, maintain or operate any "barbershop", as defined in section 4-11A-1 of this article, without first having
obtained a license as hereinafter provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 69/307
B. Term: The license shall expire on December 31. (1965 Code § 4-11-2)
C. Application: Any person desiring a license to establish, maintain or operate a "barbershop", as defined in section 4-11A-1 of this article, shall make
written application to the health officer, stating the name and residence of the applicant, if an individual; or all the members of the firm, if a
copartnership; or the names and residences of the principal officers, if a corporation; also, the training and experience of the applicant, the time or
place where the said applicant has obtained his or her required training or state license and the place or places at which it is intended or desired to
conduct said barbershop. (1965 Code § 4-11-3)
4-11A-3: INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES AND APPLICANT:
The health officer shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the premises named in such application for the purpose of determining the fitness
and suitability of said premises for the conduct of such business, from a sanitary standpoint. He shall also cause an investigation to be made of the
applicant and the qualifications mentioned in the application to determine whether the said applicant is of good character and reputation; to determine if all
the provisions of this code, and laws of the state relative to the operation and maintenance of barbershops, have been complied with; and also, if all
necessary precautions are and will be taken in said establishment to prevent the spread of contagious or communicable disease. (1965 Code § 4-11-4)
4-11A-4: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The health officer, upon completion of such investigation, shall transmit to the village president such application, together with a recommendation for or
against the issuance of such a license. If the village president shall be satisfied that the applicant or its chief officers (if the applicant be a corporation) is of
good moral character and repute and that the person or persons employed hold the proper state licenses wherever the same is required, the village
president, upon payment by such applicant to the village clerk of the license fee as provided in section 4-1-3 of this title, shall issue or cause to be issued
to such applicant a license to conduct a barbershop. (1965 Code § 4-11-5; amd. 2009 Code)
4-11A-5: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. It shall be the duty of every person licensed to conduct a barbershop to at all times keep the premises where such establishment is conducted in a
clean and proper sanitary condition. All necessary measures shall be taken to properly safeguard the life and health of all patrons of such
establishments and of all persons employed in such establishments against communicable and contagious diseases.
B. Clean linen must be supplied for each individual patron.
C. No person suffering from a communicable disease shall be employed in a barbershop.
D. All towels and washcloths used in such establishments shall be washed with soap and water and boiled before being used on another patron. All
receptacles, finger bowls, utensils, vessels, appliances or anything whatsoever used in such establishments shall at all times be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
E. All scissors, clippers, tweezers, needles, razors, scalpels, massage cups, combs, brushes, blackhead removers or other instruments used must be kept
clean and free from infected materials, and must be thoroughly sterilized by the application of an approved disinfectant or by boiling, whenever used
upon any person showing any signs of any disease of the skin or scalp.
F. Shaving mugs and brushes must be thoroughly scalded before being used upon any patron. Headrests must be covered with a clean cloth or paper, and
such covering shall be removed after each use by a patron. (1965 Code § 4-11-7)
4-11A-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The health officer may, at any time, recommend the revocation of any license issued under the terms of this article, and the village president may revoke
such license by notice in writing, and allowing the licensee an opportunity for hearing before the village board of trustees, whenever it shall appear to his
satisfaction from the recommendation of the health officer, or otherwise, that the licensee has violated the provisions of any law of the state, or of any
provision of this code relating to the carrying on of the business named in such license. (1965 Code § 4-11-6; amd. 2009 Code)
ARTICLE B. BEAUTY PARLORS
4-11B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the terms "beauty parlor", "cosmetic establishment" or "physical therapeutic establishment" are defined to mean any
building, room, place or establishment where any hair dressing, beauty culture, facial massage, or manicuring is carried on; or where massage or Turkish,
Russian, vapor, or other baths are given; or where physical culture, electric, thermic, or other physical therapeutic or cosmetic treatments are given or
employed outside of a regularly licensed hospital or dispensary. (1965 Code § 4-10-1)
4-11B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM; APPLICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 70/307
A. License Required; Term: No person shall establish, maintain, or operate any beauty parlor or cosmetic or physical therapeutic establishment, as defined
in section 4-11B-1 of this article, without first having obtained a license as hereinafter provided. The license shall expire on December 31 following.
(1965 Code § 4-10-2)
B. Application: Any person desiring a license to establish, maintain or operate a beauty parlor or cosmetic or therapeutic establishment, as defined in
section 4-11B-1 of this article, shall make written application to the health officer stating the name and residence of the applicant, if an individual; or all
the members of the firm, if a copartnership; or the names and residences of the principal officers, if a corporation; also, the training and experience of
the applicant, the time or place where the said applicant has obtained his or her required training or state license, and the place or places in which it is
intended or desired to conduct said cosmetic or physical therapeutic establishments. (1965 Code § 4-10-3)
4-11B-3: INVESTIGATION:
The health officer shall then make or cause to be made an investigation of the premises named in such application for the purpose of determining the
fitness and suitability of said premises for the conduct of such business from a sanitary standpoint. He shall also cause an investigation to be made of the
applicant and the qualifications mentioned in the application to determine whether the said applicant is of good character and reputation; to determine if all
the provisions of this code and laws of the state relative to the operation and maintenance of cosmetic or physical therapeutic establishments have been
complied with; and also, if all necessary precautions are and will be taken in said establishment to prevent the spread of contagious or communicable
disease. (1965 Code § 4-10-4)
4-11B-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The health officer, upon completion of such investigation, shall transmit to the village president such application, together with a recommendation for or
against the issuance of such a license. If the village president shall be satisfied that the applicant or its chief officers (if the applicant be a corporation) is or
are of good moral character and repute, and that the person employed holds the proper state license wherever the same is required, the president, upon
payment of the license fee provided in section 4-1-3 of this title, to the village clerk, shall issue or cause to be issued to such applicant a license to conduct
a beauty parlor or cosmetic or physical therapeutic establishment. (1965 Code § 4-10-5; amd. 2009 Code)
4-11B-5: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. It shall be the duty of every person licensed to conduct a beauty parlor or cosmetic or physical therapeutic establishment to at all times keep the
premises where such establishment is conducted in a clean and proper sanitary condition. All necessary measures shall be taken to properly safeguard
the life and health of all patrons of such establishments and of all persons employed in such establishments against communicable and contagious
diseases.
B. All massage tables, couches, beds or similar structures used shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Clean linen must be supplied for each
individual patron.
C. No person suffering from a communicable disease shall be employed in a cosmetic or physical therapeutic establishment.
D. All towels and washcloths used in such establishments shall be washed with soap and water and boiled before being used on another patron. All
receptacles, finger bowls, utensils, vessels, appliances or anything whatsoever used in such establishments shall at all times be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
E. All scissors, clippers, tweezers, needles, razors, scalpels, massage instruments, cups, combs, brushes, blackhead removers or other instruments used
must be kept clean and free from infectious material, and must be thoroughly sterilized by the application of an approved disinfectant, or by boiling,
whenever used upon any person showing any signs of any disease of the skin or scalp.
F. The use of powder puffs, sponges and styptic pencils in any such establishment is prohibited.
G. Shaving mugs and brushes must be thoroughly scalded before being used upon any patron. Headrests must be covered with a clean cloth or paper,
and such covering shall be removed after each use by a patron. (1965 Code § 4-10-7)
4-11B-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The health officer may, at any time, recommend the revocation of any license issued under the terms of this article, and the village president may revoke
such license by notice in writing, and allowing the licensee an opportunity for hearing before the village board of trustees, whenever it shall appear to his
satisfaction from the recommendation of the health officer, or otherwise, that the licensee has violated any law of the state or any provision of this code
relating to the carrying on of the business named in such license. (1965 Code § 4-10-6; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 12
LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING SERVICES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 71/307
ARTICLE A. SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES
4-12A-1: DEFINITION:
The term "self-service laundries", as used in this article, shall mean any establishment in which coin operated facilities are available for washing clothes or
for drying clothes, or both, and which is open and available to the general public for use. (1965 Code § 4-22-2)
4-12A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE:
It shall be unlawful to establish or operate any self-service laundry in the village without first having secured a license therefor as herein provided.
Applications for such licenses shall comply with the general provisions relating to applications for licenses and permits. For designated license fees, see
section 4-1-3 of this title. (1965 Code § 4-22-1)
4-12A-3: INSTALLING EQUIPMENT:
Installation of all equipment in such establishments shall be in conformity with the building and zoning laws of the village. (1965 Code § 4-22-4)
4-12A-4: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the village health officer to inspect each self-service laundry at least once every six (6) months. Such self-service laundry must be
kept in a clean condition and shall be free of all vermin, rodents and insects. (1965 Code § 4-22-5)
4-12A-5: HOURS; EXCEPTION:
It shall be unlawful to keep any such establishment open for business between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. unless
there is an adult attendant in charge of the premises during such hours. (1965 Code § 4-22-3)
ARTICLE B. DRY CLEANING MACHINES
4-12B-1: DEFINITION:
An "automatic dry cleaning machine", as the term is used in this article, shall be construed to include and mean any device or apparatus for the cleaning of
fabrics and designed to be used or operated by anyone but the owner, or any employee of the owner thereof, which machine or device makes use of or
contains perchlorethylene or any other chemical solvent or substance which may cause harm to human beings by reason of inhalation or contact. (1965
Code § 4-21-2)
4-12B-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to install, operate or maintain any "automatic dry cleaning machine", as defined in section 4-12B-1 of this article, except in compliance
with the provisions of this article; or without complying with all of the provisions pertaining to the installation and operation of such machine herein
contained; or in violation of any laws, rules or regulations of the state department of public health relating thereto. (1965 Code § 4-21-1)
4-12B-3: LICENSE, PERMIT AND FEE:
A. Machine Installation Permit: It shall be unlawful to install any automatic dry cleaning machine without first having secured a permit therefor.
B. Business License; Fee:
1. It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of maintaining any such machine for use by the public upon payment of a fee, without having first
secured a license therefor.
2. The annual fee for such license shall be as set forth in section 4-1-3 of this title. (1965 Code § 4-21-3)
4-12B-4: INSPECTIONS; SAFE AND SANITARY CONDITIONS:
It shall be the duty of the village manager to cause such inspections to be made by the health officer and fire chief or his officers as are necessary to see
to the enforcement of the provisions of this article. All such establishments shall be maintained in a safe, clean condition, free from odors, vermin, rodents
and insects. (1965 Code § 4-21-6; amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 72/307
Chapter 13
BUSINESSES DEALING WITH PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
4-13-1: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
A. License Required: No person shall engage in the business of selling, transporting or storing gasoline, benzine, naphtha or any of the combustibles
mentioned in section 4-13-4 of this chapter without first procuring a license so to do, as hereinafter provided. (1965 Code § 4-18-3)
B. Application For License: Any person desiring a license to sell, keep, store, transport or distribute any gasoline, benzine, benzol, naphtha or other like
volatile combustibles shall make a written application to the village clerk which shall state the name and address of the applicant and the location and
description of the building or place where such business is to be carried on. Such application shall be referred to the fire chief, who shall make an
investigation, and if the location, buildings and equipment comply with the provisions of this code, he shall recommend that the license be issued as
hereinafter provided. (1965 Code § 4-18-4; amd. 2009 Code)
C. License Fee: The fee for a license to sell, keep, store, transport or distribute gasoline, benzine, benzol, naphtha or other similar combustibles per year
or any unexpired portion thereof shall be as follows:
Business Fee
Automobile accessory shops $10 .00
Filling stations:
One pump 10 .00
Each additional pump 10 .00
Garages 10 .00
(1965 Code § 4-18-6)
D. License Term And Conditions: Every such license shall expire on December 31 after its issuance, shall be nontransferable, and shall be good only at
the location therein named. (1965 Code § 4-18-5; amd. 2009 Code)
4-13-2: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon compliance with subsection 4-13-1B of this chapter and the payment to the village clerk of the license fee provided in subsection 4-13-1C of this
chapter, the village president shall issue or cause to be issued a license to such applicant, authorizing the licensee to carry on the business specified at
the place named therein for and during the term of the license. (1965 Code § 4-18-5; amd. 2009 Code)
4-13-3: BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Buildings Where Products Stored:
1. Every building in which gasoline, benzine, benzol, naphtha, or other like volatile substance is kept, stored or sold shall be fireproof throughout.
2. No such building shall be located nearer than ten feet (10') at its nearest point to any other building, or nearer than twenty feet (20') at its nearest
point to any public street or highway.
B. Filling Stations1: No filling station shall be located nearer than twenty feet (20') at its nearest point to any other building or structure or to any street or
public highway.
C. Lighting; Open Flames: No open artificial light shall be used in any such building or filling station nor open fire or flame shall be allowed in any such
place. (1965 Code § 4-18-7)
4-13-4: STORAGE AND HANDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, store, transport, sell or use any crude petroleum, benzine, benzol, gasoline, naphtha, ether or other like volatile
combustibles in such manner or under such circumstances as will jeopardize life or property. (1965 Code § 4-18-1)
4-13-5: MARKINGS ON CONTAINERS:
Every person dealing in or selling gasoline, benzine, benzol, naphtha or other volatile combustibles shall keep the same only in barrels, casks, packages,
cans or measures painted red, and having the word "gasoline", "benzine" or "naphtha" plainly stenciled thereon, in black letters, not less than one-half inch
(1/2") in width. (1965 Code § 4-18-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 73/307
4-13-6: ENFORCEMENT; INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the fire chief to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Investigations And Inspections: The fire chief shall have the power to make all investigations and inspections which are necessary, and all buildings,
premises and equipments mentioned and referred to in the provisions of this chapter shall be open at all times to investigation and inspection. (1965
Code § 4-18-8)
Footnote 1: See article A of this chapter.
ARTICLE A. GASOLINE FILLING STATIONS1
4-13A-1: DEFINITION:
The words "filling station", as used in this article, shall be held to mean and are hereby defined as meaning any building, structure, premises, enclosure or
other place within the village where a container or containers, tank or tanks, either portable or stationary, and containing ether, carbon bisulfate, gasoline,
naphtha, benzol, hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquefied petroleum gas, acetone, kerosene, turpentine or other inflammable liquids, having a flashpoint below
one hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187°F) are kept or located for the purpose of selling, offering for sale, or distributing any such liquids from
such containers, tank or tanks; provided, however, that the provisions of this article shall not apply to any place where such inflammable liquids are kept or
sold for medicinal purposes only. (1965 Code § 4-17-1)
4-13A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; TRANSFER:
A. License Required; Fee: No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a filling station without first having obtained a license
therefor and paying the fee as provided in section 4-1-3 of this title. (1965 Code § 4-17-2; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Application For License: The application for such license for the business of managing, conducting, operating or carrying on a filling station shall
conform to the general provisions of this chapter relating to applications for licenses, and shall specify the location of the building, structure, premises,
enclosure or other place in which such filling station is proposed to be kept, and the capacity in gallons of the container or tank. Every such application
shall be approved by the police chief and the fire department before a license shall be issued. (1965 Code § 4-17-3; amd. 2009 Code)
C. License Nontransferable: No license granted under the provisions of this article shall be assigned or transferred to any person other than the licensee
named therein to do business or act under such license. (1965 Code § 4-17-5)
4-13A-3: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
If any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall, before the expiration of such license, desire to change the location of the business
conducted thereunder, the licensee shall notify the village clerk and shall furnish all of the information which is required to be furnished on an original
application for license. Every such application for change of location shall be approved by the police chief and the fire department before a change in
location shall be authorized. (1965 Code § 4-17-6)
4-13A-4: CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
No person shall locate, build, construct, operate or maintain any filling station without obtaining the written consent of the property owners in accordance
with the provisions of title 13 of this code. (1965 Code § 4-17-7)
4-13A-5: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; INSPECTIONS:
All filling stations shall be conducted and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this code with regard to fire prevention and storage of
inflammable liquids, and shall be inspected by the chief of the fire department or his duly authorized representative at least once every year. (1965 Code
§ 4-17-4)
4-13A-6: RESTRICTIONS:
A. Storage Of Inflammable Liquids: Except as otherwise permitted by this code, storage of inflammable liquids shall be outside of buildings. (1965 Code
§ 4-17-8)
B. Smoking: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit smoking in any filling station. (1965 Code § 4-17-9)
Footnote 1: See subsection 4-13-3B of this chapter for location restrictions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 74/307
Chapter 14
VEHICLE REPAIR SHOPS1
4-14-1: DEFINITION:
The term "repair shop", as used in this chapter, means a building or structure in the village in which work or service is performed on motor vehicles; such
work to consist of the replacing of, or adding to or repairing, parts of such vehicles, including frames, wheels, bodies, top or other parts, or the painting or
refinishing of such vehicles. (1965 Code § 4-39-2)
4-14-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEE:
A. Licenses Required:
1. Sales: No person shall engage in the business of selling at wholesale or retail new or secondhand motor vehicle tires, supplies, parts or accessories,
whether purchased or exchanged, or kept for sale or exchange, without first obtaining a license therefor. (1965 Code § 4-39-1)
2. Repair: No person shall keep, conduct or operate a repair shop in the village without first obtaining a license therefor.
B. In Conjunction With Salesroom: If an automobile repair shop is managed, conducted, operated or carried on in the same building, structure, premises,
enclosure or other place in which an automobile salesroom is managed, conducted, operated or carried on by the same person, such person is
required to take out only one license, and that license shall be the license which requires the payment of the highest license fee.
C. In Conjunction With Garage: A license to conduct or operate a garage, which has been obtained as required in title 13 of this code, shall be deemed to
include a license to maintain a repair shop, and no additional license or fee is required for the operation of the repair shop. (1965 Code § 4-39-3)
4-14-3: CLEANLINESS; FIRE HAZARDS; OBSTRUCTIONS:
A. Cleanliness; Fire Hazards: All repair shops conducted and maintained in accordance with this chapter shall be kept in a clean condition. Oil, grease,
dirt, refuse and inflammable material of any kind shall not be permitted to accumulate (so as to constitute a fire hazard) or be tracked from any such
repair shop onto the streets or sidewalks of the village.
B. Blocking Streets: No vehicle or other article used in connection with such repair shop shall block the streets, parkways or sidewalks near or adjacent to
such repair shop or interfere with the free use of the streets, parkways or sidewalks by the public. (1965 Code § 4-39-3)
Footnote 1: See subsection 13-12-2K of this code for vehicle repair in residential districts.
Chapter 15
TAXICABS
4-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall apply:
FLAT RATE TAXICAB: All public vehicles driven by mechanical power used for the carriage of persons for hire on a flat rate or predesignated charge
basis, except those vehicles commonly known as buses.
OWNER: Every person, firm or corporation having the use or control of one or more "taxicabs", as that term is defined in this section.
TAXICAB: All public vehicles driven by mechanical power used for the carriage of persons for hire except those vehicles commonly known as buses.
TAXIMETER: A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or for
waiting time, or for both, and upon which such charge shall be indicated by means of figures. (1965 Code § 4-26-1)
4-15-2: JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The licensing and inspecting of taxicabs, the examining of applicants for licenses to drive such taxicabs and the licensing of drivers as hereinafter
provided, and enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall be under the control of the chief of police. The chief of police shall have power to appoint from
the police department such inspectors as he may deem necessary for the enforcement of the provisions hereof who shall serve as such as part of their
police duties. The inspecting and sealing of taximeters shall be under the jurisdiction of the village clerk. (1965 Code § 4-26-3)
4-15-3: DECLARATION OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY:
A. Declaration; Hearing; Exceptions: No taxicab license shall hereafter be issued unless the president and the board of trustees, after a hearing, shall by
resolution declare that public convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab service for which application for a license is made; provided, that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 75/307
such declaration of public convenience and necessity shall not be necessary:
1. For the licensing of the same number of taxicabs licensed for operation and operated by the applicant under the same name and colors, for which
license was issued previous to the effective date hereof, or the renewal of the same number of licenses annually thereafter.
2. For the renewal of licenses to the applicant for the number of taxicabs of the applicant for which the president and board of trustees shall, at any time
prior to the date of application for such renewal, have made declaration of public convenience and necessity. (1965 Code § 4-26-12)
B. Grounds For Declaration: In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the licensing of such taxicabs for which application is made,
the president and board of trustees shall take into consideration whether the demands of public convenience and necessity require such proposed or
such additional taxicab service within the village; the financial responsibility of the applicant; the number, kind and type of equipment; the schedule of
maximum rates and rates proposed to be charged; the color scheme to be used by the applicant; the increased traffic congestion and demand for
increased parking spaces on the streets of the village which may result; whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and
pedestrian, will be preserved by the granting of such additional license; and such other relevant facts as the president and board of trustees may deem
advisable and necessary. (1965 Code § 4-26-13)
C. Proceedings After Hearing:
1. If the president and board of trustees finds from the investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of the
vehicle for which license is desired, it shall notify the applicant of its findings. Within sixty (60) days thereafter, the applicant shall furnish to the
president and board of trustees any and all additional information which may be required, and if the president and board of trustees then finds that
the applicant is the owner or lessee and bona fide operator of the vehicle for which license is desired, and that such vehicle complies with all
provisions of this code, license shall thereupon be issued to the applicant upon the payment of the proper license fee.
2. If the president and board of trustees finds from such investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity do not justify the operation
of the vehicles for which license is desired, it shall forthwith notify the applicant of said finding. (1965 Code § 4-26-14)
4-15-4: TAXICAB LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
A. License Required; Term; Application:
1. No taxicab shall ply upon the streets of the village without first obtaining a license from the village clerk.
2. Such license shall be issued as of the fiscal year and shall be effective for such period of time unless sooner suspended or revoked.
3. Applications for licenses for the taxicabs shall be made to the village clerk by the owner or operator thereof upon blank forms to be furnished by said
clerk, and such application shall contain the full name and address of the owner or operator, the class of the vehicle for which the license is desired,
the length of time the vehicle has been in use, the number of persons it is capable of carrying, and if a motor driven vehicle, the motor power thereof.
Such application shall thereupon be referred by the clerk to the chief of police. (1965 Code § 4-26-4)
B. Vehicle Inspection; License Suspension Or Revocation For Noncompliance:
1. No vehicle shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined and found to be in thoroughly safe condition for the
transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance, and well painted.
2. No license shall be issued to any person having the name or color of his taxicab similar to that of any other person licensed to operate a taxicab
within the limits of the village. The chief of police shall make, or have made, by his inspectors, such examination and inspection, or any inspector
appointed by him shall examine any taximeter attached to any taxicab and see that the same is accurate before the license to operate such taxicab
is issued by the clerk, and report his findings to the village board. Upon approval of the application by the chief of police, said chief shall so endorse
such application and file the same with the clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue the license as provided by subsection D of
this section. The village president shall revoke or suspend the license of any taxicab found to be unfit or unsuited for public patronage. (1965 Code
§ 4-26-5)
C. Compliance Required; Surety Bond Or Insurance: No person shall be licensed to operate a taxicab until the owner or operator thereof shall have
complied with all provisions of this chapter, and with all sections of the state law pertaining to a surety bond or the insurance policy issued for the
benefit of any person who might suffer damage by reason of the operation of such vehicle. Before issuing such license, the applicant shall submit to the
village clerk the approval of such bond by the secretary of state, or proof of the issuance of such insurance policy. (1965 Code § 4-26-6)
D. License Card Or Plate: The license to be issued by the village clerk as hereinabove provided shall be in the form of a card or plate which shall contain
the official license number of the taxicab, together with the date of inspection. Such card shall be signed by the village clerk and shall contain blank
space upon which an entry shall be made of the date of inspection of the taxicab by the chief of police or an inspector appointed by him. License cards
shall be of a distinctly different color each year, and in the case of taxicabs, the license number assigned thereto shall in each case be the same as that
issued to the vehicle for that year pursuant to law. Such cards shall be affixed to a conspicuous and indispensable part of each taxicab. The design of
such plates shall be changed annually. The village clerk shall, at the time, issue a vehicle license for such taxicab. (1965 Code § 4-26-7; amd. 2009
Code)
E. License Fees: The annual license fee shall be as specified in section 4-1-3 of this title. Such license fees shall be in lieu of the regular annual license
fees charged by the village for motor vehicles housed in the village as established in this code. No additional charge, except as above provided, shall
be made. In the case of licenses issued on or after May 1 in each year hereafter, one-half (1/2) only of the annual fee shall be paid. (1965 Code § 4-26-
8)
F. Register Of Licensed Vehicles: The village clerk and chief of police shall keep a register of the name and address of each person owning or operating a
vehicle licensed under subsection A of this section, together with the license number and the description, make and necessary dimensions of such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 76/307
vehicle, with the date and complete record of inspections made thereof. Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all times, and shall
be public records, extracts of which may be certified for use as evidence by the clerk. (1965 Code § 4-26-9)
G. Inspection Of Taxicabs: The chief of police shall maintain constant vigilance over all taxicabs; see that they are kept in a condition of continued fitness
for public use; and to this end, the chief of police or his inspectors shall inspect all taxicabs from time to time, or on the complaint of any person, or as
often as may be necessary. At least twice each year, the chief of police shall make a written report of all such inspections to the president and village
board of trustees. (1965 Code § 4-26-10)
H. Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses: Licenses granted hereunder are subject to revocation at any time by the village president for good cause
shown, or if it shall have been determined that said taxicab is not in good condition for operation. Licenses, when so revoked or suspended, shall not
be reissued until the cause for such revocation shall have been removed to the satisfaction of the president. (1965 Code § 4-26-11)
4-15-5: DRIVER LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
A. Requirements For Applicants: Every person driving a taxicab must be licensed as such and comply with the following:
1. Applicant for a driver's license must be of the age of twenty one (21) years or over.
2. Applicant for a driver's license must be of sound physique, with good eyesight, and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble, or any other
infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab.
3. Applicant for a driver's license must be able to read, write and speak the English language. (1965 Code § 4-26-17)
4. Applicant for a driver's license must be clean in dress and person and not be addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors and/or controlled substances.
(1965 Code § 4-26-17; amd. 2009 Code)
5. Any person desiring to secure a license as driver of any public vehicle hereunder and used for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward shall
make application in writing therefor to the village clerk, upon a form to be provided by the clerk. Such application shall set forth the name of the
applicant, his residence addresses for the past five (5) years, the dates of such residences, his date of birth, his social security number, his place of
birth, his hair and eye color, his height and weight, his Illinois driver's license number, and a list of any and all convictions for criminal offenses
including traffic offenses, whether he has previously been issued a license as a taxicab driver or chauffeur by any unit of government, whether said
license(s) have ever been suspended or revoked, and the reasons therefor.
6. A recent photograph of the applicant shall also be attached to the application clearly showing the applicant's face.
7. In addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by a duly authorized peace officer, for the purpose of a criminal background
check, and the applicant shall sign a release authorizing the taking of fingerprints and their use for the purpose of conducting a criminal background
check. No driver's license shall issue until the background check is complete. Each applicant shall receive a copy of any conviction information
received as a result of the fingerprint check. Within seven (7) working days of receipt of such copy, the applicant shall have the responsibility and
obligation to notify the clerk if the information is inaccurate or incomplete. In the absence of a response, the license may be granted or denied based
upon the information in the report.
8. Conviction of a felony or a crime involving injury, attempted injury or threatened injury to another person shall be grounds for denial or an
application and grounds for revocation of a license. (1965 Code § 4-26-16)
B. Examination Of Drivers: Each applicant for driver's license under subsection A of this section shall be examined by the health officer and by the chief of
police, or someone by him designated, as to the applicant's knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, the traffic regulations, and the geography of the
village. If the results of the examinations are unsatisfactory, the applicant shall be refused a license. Each applicant must demonstrate his skill and
ability to safely handle a vehicle by driving it through a crowded section of the village accompanied by an inspector or other representative of the chief
of police. If the chief of police shall approve the application, he shall endorse thereon such approval and return same to the clerk, who shall issue such
license. (1965 Code § 4-26-17)
C. Additional Requirements; License Term:
1. Such driver's license shall also be in such form as to contain the signature of the licensee and blank spaces upon which a record may be made of
any arrest of, or serious complaint against, him. Any licensee who defaces, removes or obliterates any official entry made upon his license shall be
punished by the revocation of his license. (1965 Code § 4-26-18)
2. Driver's licenses shall be issued as of January 1 in each and every year, and shall be valid to and including December 31. (1965 Code § 4-26-18;
amd. 2009 Code)
D. Badge For Drivers: Every person licensed as a driver shall, at all times while acting as a driver of any vehicle licensed under the provisions of this
chapter, wear a metal badge at least one and three-fourths inches (13/4") long and one-eighth inch (1/8") wide and having a number thereon
corresponding to the number of such driver's license. Such badge shall be obtained from the village clerk. Where any driver has obtained a similar
badge in any other municipality in Cook County, Illinois, it shall not be necessary for him to obtain the badge described in this subsection, but he must
at all times wear the badge of this or such other municipality. (1965 Code § 4-26-19)
E. Renewal Of License: The village president may renew a driver's license from year to year by appropriate endorsement thereon. A driver, in applying for
a renewal of his license, shall make such application upon a form to be furnished by the village clerk entitled "Application For Renewal Of Licenses",
which shall be filled out with the full name and address of the applicant, together with a statement of the date upon which his original license was
granted and the number thereof. (1965 Code § 4-26-20)
F. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: A driver's license may be suspended or revoked at any time by the village president for cause. Any such
suspension shall be noted on the license, together with a statement of the reason therefor, and the driver shall be deprived of his badge by the officer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 77/307
suspending or revoking such license. No driver whose license has been revoked shall again be licensed as a public taxicab driver in the village unless,
upon presentation of reasons satisfactory to the president or in a case where the license has been suspended or revoked by the president, the
approval of the president shall be necessary before the restoration or reissuance of said license. The president shall notify the police department when
any such license is revoked. If any licensed driver shall change his residence at any time before the expiration of his license, he shall forthwith notify
the chief of police of such act. (1965 Code § 4-26-21)
G. License Fees: The following license fees shall be paid for driver's licenses:
For each original license $1 .00
For each renewal 1 .00
(1965 Code § 4-26-22)
H. Records Kept: There shall be kept in the office of the village clerk and the police department a complete record of each license issued to a driver and all
renewals, suspensions or revocations thereof. The village clerk's record shall be kept on file with the original application of the driver for a license.
(1965 Code § 4-26-23)
4-15-6: SAFE, ADEQUATE SERVICE:
Every owner is required to furnish reasonable and adequate service at just and reasonable rates within the village as may be reasonably required to
assure adequate accommodations to the public in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1965 Code § 4-26-2)
4-15-7: TAXICAB SERVICE REQUIRED; ABANDONMENT:
A. Service: The applicant shall regularly and daily operate his licensed taxicab during each day of the licensed year to the extent reasonably necessary to
meet the public demand for such taxicab service.
B. Abandonment: Upon complete abandonment of taxicab service for the period of ten (10) consecutive days by the owner or operator of such taxicab
service, the chief of police, upon hearing, after five (5) days' notice to the said owner or operator, shall thereupon recommend to the village president
that the license of such owner or operator shall be revoked covering such taxicab of the owner or operator. (1965 Code § 4-26-15)
4-15-8: FLAT RATE AND NONFLAT RATE TAXICABS:
A. Flat Rate Taxicabs: No taxicab operating on a flat rate basis shall travel, pick up or discharge passengers on any public street other than a through
street. Every taxicab stopped or parked for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers shall be stopped or parked with the right hand wheels
of such vehicle parallel with and within twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb. It shall be unlawful for any driver to permit any person to board or
alight from any taxicab on any side other than the right hand side thereof. (1965 Code § 4-26-24)
B. Nonflat Rate Taxicabs:
1. Taximeters Required: Each taxicab not operating on a flat rate basis must have affixed thereto and in good working order a taximeter. Each taxicab
must be licensed in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (1965 Code § 4-26-25)
2. Inspection: No license shall be issued for a taxicab, not operating on a flat rate basis, until the taximeter attached thereto shall have been inspected
as provided by subsection B3 of this section and found to be accurate. (1965 Code § 4-26-26)
3. Testing; Removal: No person owning or operating any taxicab, except cabs being operated on a flat rate basis, shall offer or let the same for hire or
reward anywhere within the village unless the taximeter placed, attached, or installed thereon has been inspected and tested by the inspector; and
no such person shall detach any certified or inspected taximeter from any taxicab and attach the same to any other taxicab, the front wheels of which
are a different diameter from those with reference to which the taximeter was originally tested, unless a new inspection or certification is had on such
taximeter. (1965 Code § 4-26-27)
4. Dial On Taximeter:
a. Each taxicab required to have a taximeter shall, during the period between sunset and sunrise, be equipped with a light which shall be so reflected
upon the dial of the taximeter as to enable the passengers engaging and using such taxicab to read the figures indicated thereon.
b. Every taximeter hereafter placed on a taxicab shall be so arranged that the dial thereof is in plain view of the passenger while riding in such
taxicab or upon alighting from same. (1965 Code § 4-26-28)
5. Unapproved Taximeter: No person shall drive a taxicab to which is attached a taximeter that has not been duly inspected and approved. (1965 Code
§ 4-26-29)
4-15-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Violations:
1. Any owner or driver of a vehicle not licensed or equipped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or of a vehicle, the license of which has
been suspended or revoked, who engages in the business of a public "taxicab", as defined in section 4-15-1 of this chapter, or who attempts to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 78/307
engage in such business or solicits for hire passengers upon the streets, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
2. Any person not having been duly licensed as a taxicab driver, or any person whose license as such driver has been revoked, or any person whose
license has been suspended, and who, during the time of such suspension, drives for hire a taxicab upon the streets shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
B. Penalties: In addition to the penalty provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, any licensee shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of his license.
The village president may, in his discretion, suspend or revoke a license granted under subsection 4-15-4A of this chapter, pending or in advance of the
criminal prosecution of the licensee. (1965 Code § 4-26-30)
Chapter 16
TOBACCO DEALERS
4-16-1: DEFINITION:
The term "retail tobacco dealer", as used in this chapter, is hereby defined to mean any person selling, offering for sale, exposing for sale, or keeping with
the intention of selling or exchanging at retail, cigarettes or cigarette papers or wrappers in the village. (1965 Code § 4-19-1)
4-16-2: ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTION:
Enforcement of this chapter shall be by the village police department. The police department shall create and institute a system of routine inspection for
the enforcement of this chapter. (1965 Code § 4-19-14)
4-16-3: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEE:
A. License Required: No person shall engage in the business of a retail tobacco dealer without first having obtained a license therefor. (1965 Code § 4-19-
2)
B. Term Of License: Every retail tobacco dealer's license shall be issued for one year, ending on December 31. (1965 Code § 4-19-5)
C. License Fee: The tobacco dealer license fee is as set out in section 4-1-3 of this title. (1965 Code § 4-19-4; amd. 2009 Code)
4-16-4: SIGNS:
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or company operating a business where tobacco or tobacco accessories are sold shall post in a conspicuous
place the following signs which shall be printed in red letters at least one-half inch (1/2") in height on a white card. In the instance where cigarettes are sold
by vending machine, such signs shall be displayed in plain view on the machine. The signs must state the following:
SALE OF TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND SMOKING HERBS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE OR THE MISREPRESENTATION
OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
and
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: SMOKING BY PREGNANT WOMEN MAY RESULT IN FETAL INJURY, PREMATURE BIRTH, AND LOW BIRTH
WEIGHT.
(1965 Code § 4-19-8)
4-16-5: SALES NEAR SCHOOLS:
No person shall sell, give away, barter, exchange, or otherwise deal in any place located within three hundred feet (300') of any building used exclusively
for school purposes, any cigarettes, tobacco, or tobacco product of any form whatsoever used in the making of cigarettes or with which cigarette papers or
wrappers are sold or given away. (1965 Code § 4-19-9)
4-16-6: RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS:
A. Sales To Minors:
1. No person shall sell or give away, or offer to sell or give away any cigarettes or cigarette papers, tobacco, or tobacco accessories, or smoking herbs
to persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Misrepresentation of age to procure such a sale is prohibited by law. (1965 Code § 4-19-10; amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 79/307
B. Possession By Minors:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any tobacco products; provided, that the possession by a person
under the age of eighteen (18) years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian shall not be prohibited.
2. Any person violating this subsection shall be subject to a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense and fifty dollars ($50.00) for repeat
offenses if paid within fourteen (14) days of issuance of a citation. After fourteen (14) days, the fine shall be doubled. (1965 Code § 4-19-12)
4-16-7: VENDING MACHINES:
A. License Required: No person, without a retail tobacco dealer's license, shall locate, install, keep, maintain, or use, or permit the location, installation,
keeping, maintenance, or use upon his premises, of any vending machine, automatic vending machine, coin controlled or coin operated machine or
other mechanical device used or intended to be used for the sale or distribution of cigarettes. (1965 Code § 4-19-11)
B. Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating the terms and conditions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a maximum fine as
set out in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1965 Code § 4-19-11; amd. 2009 Code)
4-16-8: VENDOR ASSISTED SALES:
It is unlawful for any licensee, person, business or tobacco dealer to sell, permit to be sold or offer for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service
displays or any other means other than vendor assisted sales. All tobacco shall be kept in a locked case and will be opened for distribution purposes only
by employees of the licensee. The operation of vending machines shall be controlled by mechanical or electrical means that require operation by the
machine owner or agent prior to each distribution of a tobacco product. (1965 Code § 4-19-13)
4-16-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Offenses Committed By Tobacco Dealers:
1. Each offense of this chapter committed by a tobacco dealer is punishable by the imposition of a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). The first offense by a licensee shall result in a fine between one hundred dollars ($100.00) and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). The
second offense shall be punishable by a fine between five hundred dollars ($500.00) and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A third or subsequent
offense shall be punishable by a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
2. A third or subsequent offense shall subject the licensee to an automatic license hearing as provided by village ordinance for business license
suspensions or revocations. In the event the hearing officer finds that a third or subsequent offense has been committed, the license may be
suspended for up to thirty (30) business days. During the period of suspension, all tobacco products and merchandise shall be removed from display
and all other areas accessible to the public, or the place of business closed.
3. A tenth offense shall subject the licensee to an automatic license hearing as provided for by village ordinance for business license suspensions or
revocations. In the event the hearing officer finds that a tenth offense has occurred, the license shall be permanently revoked.
4. All rulings by the hearing officer may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided for by law. All suspensions and revocations shall
be stayed until such time as there is a judicial determination of such action.
5. In addition to the fines provided herein, the village may assess reasonable attorney, clerical and court costs in relation to the prosecution and
enforcement of the violation.
B. Purchase/Possession Violation: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) that violates the purchasing or possession sections of this chapter shall be
subject to the following penalties:
1. First violation: Twenty five dollar ($25.00) fine or the completion of an approved smoking cessation program.
2. Second violation: A fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and the completion of an
approved smoking cessation program.
3. Third and subsequent violations: A fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), and
the completion of an approved smoking cessation program, and not less than twenty (20) hours of approved community service. (1965 Code § 4-19-
15)
Chapter 17
MOTELS
4-17-1: DEFINITION:
The term "motel", as used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean any establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached rooms, located on a
single zoning lot or contiguous or adjoining zoning lots comprising one single plot of land, which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the
public to be a place where units, with or without self-contained kitchen facilities, are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient,
permanent or residential. These facilities may be described as motor hotels, highway hotels, motor courts, lodges, inns or other similar name denoting that
accommodations are available primarily for transient guests. (1965 Code § 4-23-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 80/307
4-17-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; APPLICATION:
A. License And Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a motel in the village without having first obtained a license therefor or
without complying with all of the provisions of this chapter.
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for such licenses shall be as set forth in section 4-1-3 of this title. (1965 Code § 4-23-2)
C. Application For License: Each applicant for a license to operate or maintain shall file an application with the village stating therein the name and
address of the owner, name and address of the manager, assistant manager, if any, or desk clerk or clerks or any other person or persons having
charge of the operation of the premises; location of the motel; the number of rental units available; the maximum number of persons and vehicles to be
accommodated; and whether or not kitchen facilities are afforded and, if so, the number and location of each such unit. Unless the same shall have
been previously presented and approved, this application shall be accompanied by plans of the motel showing the proposed or existing locations of all
buildings, rooms, toilets, type of heating, sewer connections, exits, driveways and other improvements. (1965 Code § 4-23-5)
4-17-3: CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Compliance With Code: All motels constructed or remodeled so as to create new or additional accommodations shall comply with the provisions of this
code.
B. Size Of Rooms: Motel rooms shall have at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each adult person occupying said room, and in no event shall any
room have less than one hundred (100) square feet, exclusive of area required for toilet and exclusive of space provided for clothing racks or closet
space.
C. Number Of Persons Limited: In no event shall more than four (4) adult persons be accommodated in any one individual room.
D. Bathroom: Each rental unit shall be equipped with a private bathroom consisting of toilet, shower stall and/or bath, all within a single enclosed area.
E. Window Area:
1. The window area of each rental unit shall be sufficient to furnish adequate natural light. Twenty five percent (25%) of the required window area shall
be capable of being opened unless some other adequate means of ventilation is provided.
2. The toilet room shall contain at least one window opening to the outside unless some other adequate means of ventilation is provided. (1965 Code
§ 4-23-3)
F. Heat And Heaters:
1. Rooms Heated: Each room, including the bathroom, shall have facilities to keep such room at a minimum sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F)
temperature. (1965 Code § 4-23-8)
2. Venting Of Room Heaters: All combustion type room heaters shall be vented to the outside.
3. Gas Heaters: If gas heaters are used, the same shall be approved by the American Gas Association or some other recognized testing laboratory that
provides a follow up inspection service; all heaters must be equipped with an automatic shutoff which will operate at flame failure.
G. Water Supply: An adequate supply of safe water shall be provided from a source which complies with the municipal requirements governing the supply
of water.
H. Sewerage And Water Carried Wastes: All sewerage and all other water carried wastes shall be discharged into a municipal sewer.
I. Swimming Pools: Artificial swimming pools used in connection with a recreational area shall be constructed and maintained in a manner which will not
create any health or safety hazards.
J. Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical equipment installed or used in connection with the motel including, but not limited to, electrical, water and sewer
supplies and heating facilities shall be of such standard as to provide a reasonable degree of health and safeguards for the occupants of said motel.
K. Off Street Parking: The zoning requirements of the village with respect to off street parking shall be fully met. (1965 Code § 4-23-3)
4-17-4: SUPERVISION AND MAINTENANCE:
Any establishment shall at all times be open for inspection, and the health officer, police department, fire department and officials of the village may from
time to time inspect any such establishment to see that the following requirements are met:
A. Attendant Or Caretaker: Each establishment shall have at least one competent attendant or caretaker available at all times. It shall be his duty to
receive and deliver telephone messages and mail and to maintain the premises, facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and
free from rodents and vermin.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 81/307
B. Guest Register: Each establishment shall keep a registration of all transient guests. This register shall include the name, legal residence, make of car,
car license, number and names of persons occupying the rooms, the number or numbers of the rooms assigned to the guest or guests and the date of
arrival and departure. The register shall be available for inspection by law enforcement officers for a period of not less than three (3) years.
C. Sanitation And Safety Requirements:
1. All floors in the bathroom shall be thoroughly washed and disinfected for each incoming guest.
2. All areas shall be kept free from rubbish, litter and inflammable materials at all times, and no inflammable liquids or chemicals shall be kept on the
premises unless the same are in approved types of containers.
3. All sheets, towels and other linens furnished for each rental unit shall be clean and freshly laundered for each incoming guest.
4. All drinking glasses shall be washed and sterilized for each incoming guest. If paper cups are furnished in lieu thereof, such paper cups shall be in
proper dispensers which do not permit the handling of same except by guests.
D. Wholesome Accommodations; Maintenance Of Furnishings And Equipment: The entire establishment shall be so operated in such a manner as to
provide clean, wholesome accommodations to the guests at all times. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it shall be the duty of the operator
of the establishment to keep the furniture, furnishings and equipment and the premises as a whole in a good state of repair and maintenance.
E. Garbage Removal: In any rental units where cooking facilities are provided, flyproof metal containers shall be supplied for garbage and refuse, and it
shall be the duty of the motel operator to promptly remove and dispose of such garbage and refuse each day.
F. Lighting: Any area or premises of the motel open to use by the public or by all persons staying in or being accommodated in the motel shall be kept
adequately lighted at nighttime. (1965 Code § 4-23-4)
4-17-5: OFFICE MAINTAINED; FIRE EXTINGUISHER:
A. Registration Area: Each establishment shall maintain an office, lobby or other room or lighted drive-in area, which shall be available for the registration
of guests.
B. Fire Extinguishers: For each two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area on each floor, one 21/2-gallon soda and acid approved type fire
extinguisher or an approved wet water type extinguisher shall be available, but in no event shall there be less than one fire extinguisher on each floor.
In no event shall extinguishers be located so that a person would have to travel more than one hundred feet (100') from any part of the motel to the
nearest extinguisher. (1965 Code § 4-23-6)
4-17-6: NOTICE OF RATES AND RULES POSTED IN ROOMS:
Printed notices shall be posted in each room giving the established rate for said room for one or more persons, and it shall be unlawful to charge a rate in
excess of such rate; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the motel from establishing other or different rates during seasonal
periods, and nothing herein contained shall prevent the proprietor from changing such published rates from time to time. Such notices shall also prescribe
only reasonable rules and regulations of the establishment, not in conflict with any statute or regulation of the state or provision of this code. (1965 Code
§ 4-23-7)
4-17-7: PENALTY; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In addition to the penalty imposed in section 1-4-1 of this code for violation of any provisions of this chapter, the village president shall have the right to
terminate, revoke or suspend any license previously granted; provided, however, that no suspension, termination or revocation of a license shall take place
unless and until reasonable notice of such alleged violation, and an opportunity for hearing, has been given to the licensee. (1965 Code § 4-23-9; amd.
2009 Code)
Chapter 18
DISTRIBUTING PRINTED MATTER
4-18-1: CLASSIFICATION OF PRINTED MATERIALS:
There are hereby designated classes of printed material as follows:
A. First Class Printed Matter: Printed matter of the first class includes religious, political and literary handbills, cards, circulars, sheets, pamphlets and other
printed matter of like character and nature.
B. Second Class Printed Matter: Printed matter of the second class includes mercantile, advertising handbills, card circulars, sheets, pamphlets, shopping
news and other printed matter of a like character and nature.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 82/307
C. Third Class Printed Matter: Printed matter of the third class includes all other circulars and literature such as obscene, lewd, immoral and destructive
circulars and literature of like nature. (1965 Code § 4-25-1)
4-18-2: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Transmitted Or Delivered Materials: Nothing herein contained shall be construed as interfering with or legislating against newspapers, magazines,
pamphlets, periodicals and other printed matter transmitted and delivered in the following manner:
1. Through the United States mail.
2. By the parcel post system.
3. Delivered by carriers to the premises of persons who have lawfully subscribed for the same or by other legal means not contrary to the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Posting Notices: The posting of legal notices of the police department, election notices and all notices authorized by law shall be excluded from the
operation of this chapter.
C. Certain Signs And Billboards: Nothing herein shall be construed as interfering with or legislating against billboards and advertising signs where the
parties have lawfully entered into a contract or have obtained consent of the owner of the premises to carry on such business and engage in such
activity. (1965 Code § 4-25-2)
4-18-3: FIRST CLASS PRINTED MATTER:
A. Distribution Regulations: First class printed matter intended to disseminate knowledge, intelligence and education may be distributed, passed out and
circulated freely within the village, subject to the following rules and regulations:
1. Such handbills, cards, circulars, sheets, pamphlets and other printed matter mentioned aforesaid may be distributed by hand and delivered to
persons (who shall respectively be called receivers and acceptors if they accept the same), but in no case shall such handbills, cards, circulars,
sheets, pamphlets and other printed matter referred to be dropped loosely or scattered by the distributor, receiver or acceptor in and upon any
squares, streets, alleys, parks, public grounds or in public buildings, so as to litter the squares, streets, alleys, parks, public grounds and public
buildings.
2. Provided, that, at meetings, assemblages and at gatherings, educational, religious, political and literary, and at business or mercantile
demonstrations and exhibitions, circuses, shows, theaters and business places, such materials may be passed around freely in and around the
premises to persons attending such affairs. (1965 Code § 4-25-3)
B. Breach Of Peace; Littering: The distributors and circulators of first class printed matter, by their conduct and actions in the distribution and circulation of
same, shall not disturb the peace or cause a riot and shall not blockade, obstruct or congest any streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public places which are
crowded with vehicles and pedestrians, so as to interfere with the flow of traffic on such streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public places and so as to
interfere with the free passage of pedestrians on such streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places; nor shall such distributors and circulators, receivers
and acceptors of same, throw, drop or scatter about such handbills, circulars, pamphlets and other printed matter so as to litter such streets, alleys,
sidewalks and public places. (1965 Code § 4-25-4)
C. License Or Fee Not Required: No license fee of any kind shall be paid or permission of any kind shall be necessary for the distribution of printed matter
of the first class in the village. (1965 Code § 4-25-5)
4-18-4: SECOND CLASS PRINTED MATTER:
A. Distribution Regulations: No printed matter of the second class shall be dropped or scattered in or about the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, public
grounds or other places, public or private, in the village, at any place or at any time, and no such printed matter shall be deposited in and upon a
gangway, parkway, yard, sidewalk, basement, garage, porch (rear or front), stairway, doorstep, alcove, enclosure, or other room of any private building,
nor shall such printed matter be placed or deposited or stuck behind any door, under any door or any doorbell, on a door knob or transom, or on a door
handle or window, or under window ledges, or in crevices, cracks or apertures between doors or otherwise, unless:
1. With the permission and consent obtained from the landlord, tenant or occupant of the premises that such printed matter herein referred may be
placed, deposited or stuck behind any door, under a door or doorbell, on a door knob or transom, or on a door handle or window, or under window
ledges, or in crevices, cracks or apertures between doors or otherwise.
2. The distributor or circulator of the same can show by proper written authority that the landlord, tenant or occupant of the premises has legally
subscribed for or permitted the delivery of the same to the premises.
3. The landlord, tenant or occupant of the premises shall have on the premises an appropriate container, receptacle or box (other than a mailbox) for
the deposit and delivery of the same, where same may be delivered and deposited. The presence of such receptacle, container or box being on the
premises shall be construed as consent and invitation on the part of the landlord, tenant or occupant to allow the deposit and delivery in the
container, receptacle or box of such printed matter. Such printed matter shall not be pasted, affixed, attached, nailed to, or tied by string, rubber
bands, wire or otherwise to any window, door, telegraph, telephone, or trolley pole, electric wire pole, police or fire alarm box, fence, garage, bridge,
viaduct or to any refuse box or container, on any part of any sidewalk, street or alley, park, or public grounds in the village. (1965 Code § 4-25-6)
B. Certificate Granting Permission: In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, no person shall distribute any printed matter of the
second class without first having obtained from the clerk a certificate in writing granting said person permission to distribute printed matter of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 83/307
second class in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. No certificate shall be issued or renewed to any person who has been convicted of
violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of a felony, or to any person of ill repute, or to any person whose hands are infected with a skin disease
of any kind that is contagious. (1965 Code § 4-25-7)
C. Distributor's Badge: Upon issuance of the certificate, the person shall receive a distributor's badge which will be displayed on the person of such
distributor at all times while he is distributing printed matter of the second class. The certificate issued shall identify the distributor and his employer, if
any, and shall designate the territory to be traversed and the dates and hours of the distribution. (1965 Code § 4-25-8)
4-18-5: UNLAWFUL MATTER:
It shall be unlawful, and the same is hereby prohibited, for any person to distribute, circulate, possess, pass out, deliver and deposit any obscene, lewd or
immoral literature whatsoever or any literature or writing which advocates the destruction of the democratic form of government, the overthrow of the
federal or state constitution, the destruction of freedom of religion and which advocates any unlawful conduct or the commission thereof, or any printed
matter known as printed matter of the third class, at any time or at any place within the limits of the village. (1965 Code § 4-25-9)
4-18-6: DISTRIBUTING INTO VEHICLES:
Dropping circulars, handbills and other printed matter of any class into passenger automobiles, trucks, taxis, commercial or mercantile vehicles, whether
parked or in motion, and attaching, affixing, placing and sticking same on any part of passenger automobiles, trucks, taxis, commercial or mercantile
vehicles is hereby strictly forbidden and prohibited by persons other than the owner, at any time and place within the limits of the village; provided, the
owner and possessor of any kind of motor vehicle is not prohibited from furnishing, displaying or decorating in his own private motor vehicle with any
cards, signs, placards and the like that may suit him, for the promotion of his safety, pleasure and business as long as the same shall not violate any
provisions of this code and state laws. (1965 Code § 4-25-10)
Chapter 19
GARAGE SALES
4-19-1: DEFINITION:
The term "garage sale", as used in this chapter, shall mean and include "garage sale", "patio sale", "basement sale", "back yard sale", "rummage sale", or
any similar type of sale of common household items, which is held on residential premises to which the general public is invited. (1965 Code § 4-35-1)
4-19-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; INFORMATION; FEE:
A. Permit Required; Information: No garage sale shall be allowed until a permit for such sale shall be granted. The village clerk is authorized to establish
necessary administration procedures for obtaining a permit. The permit shall include at least, but not limited to:
1. Name and address of the permittee;
2. Date on which the last garage sale was held at the above address;
3. A statement that if a permit is granted, the permittee will abide by all applicable codes and ordinances of the village;
4. A statement that all goods and furnishings to be sold are in the possession and title of the permittee and have been in use at said location or have
been in use at another dwelling unit on the same block;
B. Permit Fee: The fee for a garage sale permit shall be one dollar ($1.00); and
C. Display Of Permit: The permit shall be prominently displayed at the location of the sale. (1965 Code § 4-35-3)
4-19-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Upon satisfactory showing that a garage sale is being held entirely as a fundraising activity for a charitable, not for profit, or religious organization, no
permit fee shall be required. (1965 Code § 4-35-4; amd. 2009 Code)
4-19-4: SALES RESTRICTIONS:
A. Number Of Sales; Days; Items:
1. Every owner or occupant of a dwelling unit may conduct not more than two (2) garage sales in any calendar year. Such sales shall extend over not
more than three (3) consecutive days, and shall be limited to household goods and furnishings which have been in use in the dwelling unit located on
the premises on which such sales are conducted or which have been in use in more than one dwelling unit on the same block.
2. No merchandise purchased for intentional sale or resale at a profit may be sold from a private residence. (1965 Code § 4-35-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 84/307
B. Signs: Signs shall be regulated as provided in subsection 12-11-12E of this code. (2009 Code)
C. Loudspeakers Prohibited: No loudspeakers shall be used for promotional purposes during the conducting of any garage sale. (1965 Code § 4-35-5;
amd. 2009 Code)
D. Display Of Goods Or Furnishings: No household goods or furnishings shall be displayed or offered for sale in the following areas:
1. Front Yard: Any portion of a front yard, from the front building line to the public right of way. (1965 Code § 4-35-6)
2. Public Property: Any public property or public right of way. (1965 Code § 4-35-7)
E. Time Of Sale: No garage sale may commence before the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. nor extend beyond the hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (1965
Code § 4-35-8; amd. 2009 Code)
4-19-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person holding a garage sale in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed twenty five dollars
($25.00). (1965 Code § 4-35-9)
Chapter 20
CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
4-20-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to exercise or carry on, directly or indirectly, the business of selling cut evergreen trees (Christmas
trees) without first procuring a license therefor from the village clerk. (1965 Code § 4-37-1)
B. Application For License: Any person desiring to operate a business as described in subsection A of this section shall make a written application for a
license so to do to the village clerk. Such application shall conform to the general requirements relating to applications for licenses and shall include the
name of the applicant, the type of business to be conducted and the place where it will be located. (1965 Code § 4-37-2)
C. License Fee: The license fee for a cut evergreen tree sale business license shall be as set forth in section 4-1-3 of this title and shall conform to the
general provisions relating to licensing. (1965 Code § 4-37-4)
4-20-2: BOND REQUIRED; REFUND:
A. Required: In addition to any license fee required by subsection 4-20-1C of this chapter, no license shall be issued under this chapter until the applicant
deposits a cash bond with the village in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each location at which trees are to be sold. (1965 Code § 4-
37-5)
B. Refund; Restoration Of Property: The deposit made pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be refunded to the licensee upon a report by the
building director certifying that the premises used for sale of the cut evergreen trees (Christmas trees) has been restored to its original condition. If the
licensee fails to clean up the premises, the village, after due notice, shall take such action as is necessary to complete necessary repairs and/or
cleanup. The refund shall be reduced by the amount of the cost of said necessary repairs and/or cleanup. No burning of any kind will be allowed at the
site. (1965 Code § 4-37-6)
4-20-3: APPROVAL OF PROPERTY OWNER:
If the applicant does not own the property upon which he proposes to sell the cut evergreen trees (Christmas trees), said applicant shall provide the village
with a letter indicating permission of the property owner to conduct said business on such property. (1965 Code § 4-37-3)
Chapter 21
LIVE SEX ACTS BUSINESSES1
4-21-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 85/307
CONSIDERATION: The direct or indirect payment of money or the exchange of any item of value for:
A. The right to enter the business premises, or any portion thereof; or
B. The right to remain on the business premises, or any portion thereof; or
C. The right to purchase any item permitting the right to enter, or remain on, the business premises, or any portion thereof; or
D. The right to a membership permitting the right to enter, or remain on, the business premises, or any portion thereof.
LIVE SEX ACT: Any act whereby one or more persons engage in a live performance or live conduct which contains oral sexual contact or sexual
intercourse.
LIVE SEX ACT BUSINESS: Any business in which one or more persons may view, or may participate in, a live sex act for a consideration.
OPERATE AND MAINTAIN: To organize, design, perpetuate or control. "Operate and maintain" includes providing financial support by paying utilities, rent,
maintenance costs or advertising costs, supervising activities or work schedules, and directing or furthering the aims of the enterprise.
ORAL SEXUAL CONTACT: Oral contact with the penis, vulva or anus.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE: Penetration into the penis, vulva or anus by any part of the body or by any object or manual masturbatory contact with the
penis or vulva. (1965 Code § 4-45-1)
4-21-2: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to the nonobscene presentation, showing, or performance of any play, drama, or ballet in any theater,
concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education, or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of
ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of sex, for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or
business enterprise. (1965 Code § 4-45-7)
4-21-3: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and maintain a live sex act business. (1965 Code § 4-45-2)
4-21-4: NUISANCE DECLARED; ABATEMENT; HEARING:
A. Nuisance Declared: Operation of a live sex act business is a public nuisance per se which may be abated by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(1965 Code § 4-45-3)
B. Authorization: The village attorney, in the name of the village, upon direction by the village manager, may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for
an order permitting the village to abate violations of this chapter. (1965 Code § 4-45-4)
C. Hearing: After notice to the operator of a live sex act business, the judge shall conduct a hearing and take evidence as to whether a live sex act
business is being operated in violation of this chapter. (1965 Code § 4-45-5)
D. Order Of Abatement: If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the judge determines that a live sex act business is being operated in the village in violation of
this chapter, an order shall be entered authorizing the village to abate the violation by closing the business. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the
operator of the business and mailed to the owner of the property upon which the business is located. (1965 Code § 4-45-6)
Footnote 1: See title 13, chapter 5 of this code for adult use provisions.
Chapter 22
NEWSPAPER DISPENSING DEVICES
4-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
"Newspaper dispensing device" means a container, constructed of metal or other material of substantial equivalent strength and durability which is used
for the dispensing of newspapers, fliers, handbills or other similar printed materials either at a cost or free of charge. (Ord. 03-16-10-03, 3-16-2010)
4-22-2: PUBLIC PROPERTY LOCATION, APPLICATION, PERMIT AND FEE:
A. No private newspaper dispensing device shall be placed or located within a public right of way, along the streets, thoroughfares, parkways, sidewalks or
on any other village of Lyons property, whether owned or leased by the village, unless a permit has been issued therefor by the village in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 86/307
B. Applications for such permit shall be made on forms approved by the village for permits allowing for the installation and placement of private newspaper
dispensing devices within the public right of way, along the streets, thoroughfares, parkways, sidewalks or on any other village property within the
village. The applications shall be provided by the director of building and code enforcement upon request. The application must include a site plan and
state the exact location where the applicant wishes to install a newspaper dispensing device. The application must also include a description of and the
size and color specifications for the intended newspaper dispensing device. Misrepresentation of information, false statements or any other fraudulent
information supplied on or with the application shall be grounds for revocation of a permit in compliance with this chapter.
C. Within five (5) business days of receipt of a completed application for a permit and payment of applicable fee, the village shall issue a permit, provided
that the applicant meets conditions contained in section 4-22-3 of this chapter. In the event that the terms and conditions of section 4-22-3 of this
chapter, where applicable, are not met, the village shall, within five (5) business days of receipt of an application for a permit, deny the application, state
the reasons in writing for such denial and notify the applicant, in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the reasons for the denial. Any
such denial may be appealed pursuant to the procedure set forth in this chapter.
D. The applicant shall pay an annual administrative processing fee as established by section 4-1-3 of this title for each location where a newspaper
dispensing device is installed.
E. Permits shall be for a term of one year and shall not be assignable. Permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Applications and fees for
renewal of permits shall be filed with the director of building and code enforcement no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon December 15 of each
year.
F. A permit shall allow the installation of a newspaper dispensing device only at the location described in the application for the permit. The permit shall
contain a description of the authorized location and permits shall not be transferable from one location to another nor from one person to another.
G. As an express condition of the acceptance of a permit hereunder, the permittee thereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the village, its trustees,
officers and employees against any loss or liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury and for property damage
sustained by any person as the result of the installation, use or maintenance of a device within the village. (Ord. 03-16-10-03, 3-16-2010)
4-22-3: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
A. A permit issued for a privately owned newspaper dispensing device shall be subject to and granted upon the following conditions, restrictions and
requirements:
1. Newspaper dispensing devices shall be placed adjacent and parallel to building walls not more than six inches (6") distant therefrom, or near and
parallel to the curb not less than eighteen inches (18") and not more than twenty four inches (24") distant from the curb.
2. No newspaper dispensing device shall be placed, installed, located or maintained:
a. Within ten feet (10') of any fire hydrant or other emergency facility;
b. Within fifteen feet (15') of any intersecting driveway, alley or street;
c. Within five feet (5') of any bus stop, bench, street sign, stoplight, parking meter, streetlight, utility pole, display window, handicap access ramp, or
marked crosswalk;
d. Within five hundred feet (500') of another newspaper dispensing device containing the same newspaper or news periodical;
e. So as to be chained, or otherwise secured, to any tree, utility pole, light pole, parking meter, traffic control post, street signpost, bench, refuse
receptacle or other public property;
f. On or within any median within any public right of way;
g. Within a rectangular area stretching from the entire width of any building entranceway to the curb;
h. At any location where the width of paved clear space in any direction for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet (5');
i. Adjacent to parallel or angle parking spaces;
j. Within three feet (3') of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, planters, or trees.
3. No publication may be displayed, offered for sale, or offered free to the public on any public right of way by means of a newspaper dispensing device
in such manner as to expose to the public view any photograph, drawing or depiction of any kind contained within such publication displaying any of
the following:
a. The genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft perineum, anal region or pubic hair region on any person;
b. Any portion of the breast, at or below the areola, of any female person.
4. The permittee shall maintain the newspaper dispensing device in good working order, in a safe and clean condition, in such a manner so that:
a. It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;
b. It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof;
c. It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereon;
d. The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks,
dents, blemishes and discoloration;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 87/307
e. The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading;
f. The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshaped and the device is level on the ground and not leaning or placed on uneven
portions of ground.
5. A legible telephone number shall be displayed on the newspaper dispensing device for a user to call to obtain a refund in case of malfunction of the
newspaper dispensing device.
6. Newspaper dispensing devices may have the name of the newspaper or the applicable publication displayed on the side, front and back of the
device provided that the lettering is no larger than two inches (2") in height.
7. The newspaper dispensing device shall not be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than the purposes dealing with the display, sale
or purchase of the newspaper sold or distributed free therein.
8. Upon removal of the newspaper dispensing device, the permittee shall restore the property of the village to the same condition as when the
newspaper dispensing device was initially installed, ordinary wear and tear excepted. If those repairs are not made within thirty (30) days, the village
shall undertake that repair work and collect from the owner or permittee the costs thereof, including reasonable attorney fees and related costs of
collection. (Ord. 03-16-10-03, 3-16-2010)
4-22-4: REMOVAL:
A. In the event any newspaper dispensing device is placed or remains within any public right of way, street, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk or other
village property without a permit being issued for the newspaper dispensing device, or after the expiration or revocation of a previously issued permit,
or in violation of any other provision of this chapter, the village shall send, by certified mail, with return receipt requested, a written notice to the address
of the owner or user of the newspaper dispensing device. The notice shall state the address and telephone number of the village, a description of why
the newspaper dispensing device is in violation of the requirements of this chapter; that the owner or user is ordered to cause immediate removal of the
newspaper dispensing device from public property; and that the newspaper dispensing device will be removed by the village after a date designated in
the notice. The date shall be no less than ten (10) calendar days after the date the notice is mailed; unless the owner or user requests a hearing before
the village board by filing a written appeal with the village manager pursuant to subsection 4-22-5A of this chapter on or before the designated removal
date.
B. If any newspaper dispensing device is still on public property after the ten (10) calendar day period described above, or if an appeal is filed and denied
after hearing before the village board, the newspaper dispensing device shall be removed by the village.
C. The owner of any newspaper dispensing device removed in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall be responsible for all the expenses of the
removal and storage of such newspaper dispensing device. Should the newspaper dispensing device fail to be claimed or should the owners fail to pay
any money due the village, after six (6) months, such newspaper dispensing device shall be disposed of according to law.
D. If a newspaper dispensing device is unused for a period of more than thirty (30) days in that no newspapers, fliers, handbills or other similar printed
materials are placed within the device and offered for sale or for distribution at no cost, the newspaper dispensing device shall be considered
abandoned by the owner or permittee. The procedures of this section shall then be followed. (Ord. 03-16-10-03, 3-16-2010)
4-22-5: APPEAL OF DENIAL OF PERMITS; REMOVAL OF DEVICE:
A. The decision of the village manager in refusing to grant or renew a permit shall be appealable. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision
to the village board provided that the applicant file a written notice of appeal, including a statement of the grounds of appeal, with the village manager,
within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the notice of denial. The village board shall set a hearing on the appeal at its next regularly scheduled
village board meeting and notice of such time and place shall be given to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested. The village board
shall have the power to reverse, affirm, or modify the original decision. In making its determination, the village board shall only consider the standards
set forth in this chapter. The decision of the village board shall be rendered the same day as the hearing. The decision of the village board shall be
final.
B. The decision of the village to remove a newspaper dispensing device shall be appealable. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to
the village board provided that the applicant file a written notice of appeal, including a statement of the grounds of appeal, with the village manager,
within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the notice of removal. The village board shall set a hearing on the appeal at its next regularly scheduled
village board meeting and notice of such time and place shall be given to the owner/user of the newspaper dispensing device by certified mail, return
receipt requested. The newspaper dispensing device may remain in place during the appeal period. The village board shall have the power to reverse,
affirm or modify the original decision. In making its determination, the village board shall only consider the standards set forth in this chapter. The
decision of the village board shall be rendered the same day as the hearing. The decision of the village board shall be a final administrative decision
subject to judicial review by the circuit court. (Ord. 03-16-10-03, 3-16-2010)
4-22-6: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
The village manager may revoke a permit issued under the terms of this chapter for any of the following causes, which shall constitute violations of this
section:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement contained in the application for a permit;
B. Violation of any term or condition of the permit granted to the permittee;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 88/307
C. Violation of any term, condition or provision of this chapter or any other chapter of this code.
A permittee may appeal the decision of the village manager to revoke a permit in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 4-22-5 of this
chapter. (Ord. 03-16-10-03, 3-16-2010)
4-22-7: EMERGENCY PROVISIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the village may remove any newspaper dispensing device from public property which, because of its
location or condition, poses an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public or a member thereof. Within five (5) business days of the
removal, the village manager shall send, by certified mail, with return receipt requested, a written notice to the permit holder. The notice shall state the
reason for the removal and permittee's right to appeal this decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the village manager. This decision is appealable
pursuant to the provisions of section 4-22-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-16-10-03, 3-16-2010)
4-22-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Except as otherwise specifically stated herein, the village manager or his designee shall be responsible for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 03-16-10-03,
3-16-2010)
4-22-9: PENALTIES:
Any person or entity who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as established by title 1, chapter 4 of
this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for every day a violation continues. (Ord. 03-16-10-03, 3-16-2010)
Chapter 23
OFFERING DRUG PARAPHERNALIA FOR SALE
4-23-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CANNABIS: Includes marihuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such
plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of
extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A drug, substance, or immediate precursor in the schedules of article II of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 570/201 et seq.
DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in section
10 of the methamphetamine control and community protection act, which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the cannabis
control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., or the
methamphetamine control and community protection act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 646/1 et seq.
It includes, but is not limited to:
A. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
B. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance;
C. Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or
controlled substances;
D. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
E. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
F. Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 89/307
G. Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human
body including, but not limited to, the following items:
1. Water pipes;
2. Carburetion tubes and devices;
3. Smoking and carburetion masks;
4. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
5. Carburetor pipes;
6. Electric pipes;
7. Air driven pipes;
8. Chillums;
9. Bongs;
10. Ice pipes or chillers;
11. Glass pipes;
12. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
13. Roach clips; meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
H. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 02-15-11-O1, 2-15-2011)
4-23-2: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to lawful research,
teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale;
B. Items historically and customarily used in connection with the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, or
inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance, including, but not limited to: garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling
papers;
C. Items listed in the definition of "drug paraphernalia" in this chapter which are used purely for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered
completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any purpose prohibited by this chapter;
D. A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the hypodermic syringes and needles act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 635/0.01 et seq.;
E. Any item that the hearing officer determines was not intended for illicit use. In making such a determination, the hearing officer shall consider, in addition
to all logically relevant factors, the following:
1. The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item involved has been put;
2. Any written instructions accompanying the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
3. Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale;
4. Any advertising concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 90/307
5. The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise exhibited
upon the premises where the sale was made;
6. Whether the person offering the item for sale is a legitimate seller of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of
tobacco products;
7. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community;
8. The existence of any residue of cannabis or controlled substances on the object;
9. Expert testimony concerning the item's use; and
10. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the item, to sell or deliver it to persons whom he knows, or
should reasonably know, intend to use the object for ingesting controlled substances; the innocence of an owner or anyone in control of the item,
shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use, as drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 02-15-11-O1, 2-15-2011)
4-23-3: SALE, DELIVERY AND ADVERTISING OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA UNLAWFUL:
A. No person or store shall display, keep for sale, offer for sale, sell, or deliver for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia. Each
sales transaction involving drug paraphernalia, or each day on which a store shall offer for sale an item of drug paraphernalia shall constitute a
separate violation.
B. Upon a finding of liability for a violation of this chapter, the hearing officer shall impose a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation.
C. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances
where one should reasonably know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects used or intended for
use as drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 02-15-11-O1, 2-15-2011)
4-23-4: NUISANCE DECLARED:
A. Any store, place or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for any
commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance.
B. The village attorney, in the name of the village, upon direction by the village manager or acting village manager, may petition a court of competent
jurisdiction for an order enjoining the defendant from maintaining the public nuisance described in subsection A of this section and the village may take
action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. (Ord. 02-15-11-O1, 2-15-2011)
4-23-5: SUSPENSION OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
In addition to any other penalties already provided for by law and this chapter, a licensed business found liable by a hearing officer, or a licensed business
with an owner, employee or agent found liable by a hearing officer, or a licensed business against which an injunction is entered for selling or offering for
sale an item of drug paraphernalia, may have its business license revoked or suspended by the village manager or acting village manager following a
public hearing in accordance with the provisions of section 4-1-7 of this title. (Ord. 02-15-11-O1, 2-15-2011)
Chapter 24
GUN SHOPS
4-24-1: INTENT:
The legislative intent of this chapter is to provide as much legal protection from the unlawful distribution and use of firearms as allowed by law to a
municipal government. Fully acknowledging a citizen's Second Amendment rights, the Concealed Carry laws of our State, and not intending to impinge on
a citizen's constitutional rights, the Village's Corporate Authorities enact this legislation to help monitor and track the lawful sale of firearms. (Ord. 10-27-
15-O1, 10-27-2015)
4-24-2: ADMINISTRATION OF GUN SHOPS:
A. The Village acknowledges the need for strict and effective measures to minimize firearms being used in crimes. As a non-home rule Municipality, the
Village can only pass and enforce legislation as authorized by the Illinois Constitution, Statutes of the State of Illinois, and case law as decided by the
State and Federal Courts. The regulation of gun shops is administered by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives ("ATF") of the
Federal government.
B. The Village desires to help the appropriate governmental authorities by greater "on-site" monitoring of the sale of firearms within the Village's corporate
boundaries.
C. The Village desires to prevent illegal traffickers by helping regulate gun shops within its jurisdiction to prevent the sales of firearms to straw purchasers
(purchasers who legally can purchase firearms but intend to divert the firearms to those who are not legally authorized to purchase, carry or possess a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 91/307
firearm).
D. The Mayor and Board of Trustees implement the regulations and conditions as prerequisites of obtaining and keeping a business license which allows
the sale of firearms within the corporate boundaries of the Village. (Ord. 10-27-15-O1, 10-27-2015)
4-24-3: RECORDKEEPING:
It shall be the responsibility of the gun shop to keep electronic records of the following information:
A. All trace information received from any law enforcement agency, including, but not limited to, ATF formal TRACE requests, the FTIP requests, and any
other County or Village requests;
B. A record of all persons who purchase more than one firearm within a twelve (12) month period. A separate record is not a requirement; however, a
master list which includes multiple gun purchasers is sufficient. Only a record of purchasers of firearms at gun shops in the Village is required.
C. All paper or electronic records or documents, including any forms filled out by prospective firearms purchasers, shall be tendered to the Lyons Police
Department within forty eight (48) hours of the attempted purchase, or sooner if requested, if the potential purchaser appears not to be a valid or lawful
purchaser as determined by the gun shop dealer. The records do not have to be kept electronically, but kept in a manner that can be transmitted by fax
or e-mail.
D. All electronic records shall be kept for a minimum of five (5) years. (Ord. 10-27-15-O1, 10-27-2015)
4-24-4: COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS:
A. Currently, firearm dealers may be inspected yearly by agents from the ATF. No other inspections are required by State or Federal authorities.
Commencing December 1, 2015, the Village of Lyons and the Cook County Sheriff, working collectively, will conduct random inspections of any gun
shops in the Village, but no more than twice per year, collectively. These inspections will not interfere with the regular operation of the business and will
include the following:
1. Inspection and approval of an anti-theft safety plan which shall include exterior lighting around the premises; surveillance video cameras, as
generally used in businesses and as currently used by the existing gun shop in the Village (including point-of-sale) (the video shall be maintained for
a minimum of 30 days); alarm systems; safe storage of weapons and ammunition; and fire hazard compliance, as may be required by the
Municipality.
2. Inspection and approval of internal training procedures and inventory audits.
a. Each employee must hold a valid FOID card and have been processed with a background check.
b. Maintain a computerized, alphabetical, electronic listing of all gun sales where the gun was later traced, and maintain a Do Not Sell list.
c. Keep an internal audit of all inventory, and report any loss or discrepancy to the Village within forty eight (48) hours of discovering the loss or
discrepancy. (Ord. 10-27-15-O1, 10-27-2015)
4-24-5: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT:
The Village and Cook County Sheriff will enter into an intergovernmental agreement (IGA) specifying that enforcement of this chapter is by the Village of
Lyons, in collaboration with the Cook County Sheriff. Only the Village of Lyons may enforce the provisions of this chapter through its business license
regulations and this chapter, itself. (Ord. 10-27-15-O1, 10-27-2015)
4-24-6: PENALTIES:
If there are multiple (more than 2) willful violations of any or all of the items specified above, the Mayor may suspend, fine, and/or revoke the business
license of the gun shop. After the first violation, there may be an additional, random inspection made during that calendar year in addition to the other
inspections as set forth in this chapter. The Mayor may consult with the Cook County Sheriff and any other appropriate law enforcement authorities prior to
imposing any penalty. The holder of the business license is entitled to service of process of the charges, and to a hearing not more than five (5) days from
service of the charges. The Mayor may suspend the business license for up to ten (10) days without a hearing if the business has been found in violation
of this chapter on at least two (2) occasions within a twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 10-27-15-O1, 10-27-2015)
Title 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
Chapter 1
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 92/307
The following shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
APPROVED SOURCE: Such source as approved by the state department of public health.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who handles food or drink during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is
employed in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served.
FOOD STORE: Grocery store, butcher shop, delicatessen store, confectionery store, bakery store, butter and egg store, milk store, fruit and vegetable
store, fish store, drugstore, ice cream store, or any combination of the foregoing, or any place where food or drink is prepared, handled, stored, offered for
sale, or sold at wholesale or retail.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A waste or combination of wastes which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics,
may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise
managed or which has been identified, by characteristics or listing, as hazardous pursuit to section 3001 of the resource conservation and recovery act of
1976 (P.L. 94-580), or which is designated as special, hazardous or toxic, pursuant to other applicable law, ordinance or regulation.
HEALTH OFFICER: The director of the department of health and sanitation of the village or his authorized representative.
ITINERANT RESTAURANT: One operating for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or other similar gathering.
ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person engaged in the house to house delivery or sale of any products of food and drink.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Means and refers to refuse, garbage or other discarded material generated by those residing in residential structures within
the village of Lyons with three (3) or fewer dwelling units. "Municipal solid waste" does not include hazardous waste or waste which any of the facilities to
which it is sent is not permitted to receive.
OPEN AIR MARKET: Any establishment engaged only in the handling and storage of fruits and vegetables offered for sale, or sold at wholesale or retail,
such establishment not being entirely enclosed.
PERSON: A person, firm, corporation, or association.
PLACED FOR COLLECTION: Placed at the curb, alley, or at the back door for collection by the village.
RESTAURANT: Restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain, and all other eating and drinking
establishments as well as kitchens or other places in which food or drink is prepared for sale elsewhere.
UTENSILS: Any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, utensils, or containers, or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during
storage, preparation or serving. (1965 Code § 3-2-1; amd. 2009 Code)
5-1-2: LICENSES REQUIRED; STATE REGULATIONS:
A license is required to operate a restaurant, itinerant restaurant, food store, or open air market, or to operate as an itinerant vendor in the village, and
application shall be made on forms provided by the village clerk. Regulation and inspection of these businesses shall be in conformance with provisions of
the "Illinois State Food Service Sanitation Rules And Regulations" as published in the general assembly's Illinois administrative code, title 77, public
health, chapter 1, department of public health: subchapter m, food, drugs and cosmetics, part 750, food service sanitation code. (Ord. 04-15-08-02, 4-15-
2008)
ARTICLE A. DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS1
5-1A-1: PURPOSE; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
It is declared to be the intention and purpose of this article not to repeal any other codes now in effect applicable to such public areas, and it is hereby
declared that the purpose of this article is to make this article cumulative with all other such applicable codes; provided, however, that if there is any
conflict in language between this article and any other codes applicable to such public areas, the language of this article shall prevail. (1965 Code § 4-31-
11)
5-1A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: Any restaurant where meals, sandwiches, cold drinks, beverages, ice cream or other food is served directly to or is permitted to
be consumed by patrons in automobiles, motorcycles or other vehicles parked on the premises.
PUBLIC PLACE: The entire premises occupied by a drive-in restaurant or by the places of business included in a shopping plaza, together with the
parking areas provided adjacent thereto and as a part thereof, and the means of ingress thereto and egress therefrom. (1965 Code § 4-31-1)
5-1A-3: OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Maintain Quiet And Good Order: The owner, lessee or operator of any drive-in restaurant shall maintain quiet and good order upon the premises and
shall not permit disorderly or immoral conduct or loitering thereon, nor shall he cause or permit any noise or nuisance on the parking lot area of the
drive-in restaurant whereby the quiet and good order of the neighborhood are disturbed. (1965 Code § 4-31-2; amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 93/307
B. Provide Litter Receptacles: The owner, lessee or operator of a drive-in restaurant shall provide not less than two (2) receptacles for the deposit of trash,
litter, paper, napkins, cups and remnants of food at each exit available to the patrons as they leave the premises. (1965 Code § 4-31-8)
C. Post Signs; Retain Copies Of Regulations:
1. It shall be the duty of the drive-in restaurant operator to post on the premises in a conspicuous location one or more signs, minimum size eighteen
inches by thirty six inches (18" x 36") with letters two inches (2") high, bearing the following legend:
CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LOITERING OUTSIDE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE IS UNLAWFUL. NO UNOCCUPIED VEHICLE MAY
BE LEFT ON THE RESTAURANT PREMISES WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE RESTAURANT OPERATOR.
2. It shall be the duty of the restaurant operator to retain on the premises a copy of this article. (1965 Code § 4-31-12)
5-1A-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Disturbances: No person in a public area shall race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden stop or start any motor vehicle or
cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise, nuisance, or disturbance, whereby the quiet and good order of the public area or the surrounding
neighborhood are disturbed. (1965 Code § 4-31-3)
B. Alcoholic Beverages: It shall be unlawful for any person to bring onto a public area any alcoholic beverage and consume or attempt to consume such
alcoholic beverage. (1965 Code § 4-31-4)
C. Unaccompanied Vehicle Parking: No person shall enter the premises of any drive-in restaurant in a motor vehicle of any description and park said
vehicle and leave the premises without getting the consent of the owner or operator of said restaurant; such a parked vehicle may be impounded until
lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois state statutes relating thereto. (1965 Code § 4-31-5)
D. Capricious Driving: No person shall enter any public place in a motor vehicle of any kind and use said public place for cruising, racing, as a shortcut to
another street, or to annoy or endanger any persons or other vehicles lawfully in such public place. (1965 Code § 4-31-6)
E. Loitering: It shall be unlawful for three (3) or more persons to congregate on the premises and linger or loiter at any location on the premises of any
drive-in restaurant other than in the restaurant building or in a legally parked motor vehicle. (1965 Code § 4-31-7; amd. 2009 Code)
F. Littering: It shall be unlawful for any patron of a drive-in restaurant to throw or deposit any of the litter mentioned in subsection 5-1A-3B of this article
anywhere on the grounds or on the streets of the village save and except in the receptacles provided therefor. (1965 Code § 4-31-9)
G. Behavior Restrictions: No person, while in a public area, shall use loud and vociferous, or obscene, vulgar or indecent language, or swear or curse, or
yell or shriek, or make lewd gestures in a manner which will disturb other persons at such place. (1965 Code § 4-31-10)
Footnote 1: See section 4-1-3 of this code for license fee.
ARTICLE B. ICE CREAM PARLORS
5-1B-1: DEFINITION; LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall carry on, engage in or conduct a business of keeping what is generally known as an "ice cream parlor", which is hereby defined as a place
where ice cream, ices and beverages are kept and offered for sale to be consumed on the premises; provided, however, that this article shall not apply to
restaurants or coffee houses where such ice cream, ices, or beverages are sold and consumed in connection with the serving of meals, without first having
obtained a license as hereinafter provided. (1965 Code § 4-4-1)
5-1B-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE AND POSTING; FEE:
A. Application For License; Fee: Any person desiring a license to engage in the business of keeping an "ice cream parlor", as defined in section 5-1B-1 of
this article, shall make written application to the village clerk, stating the name and residence of the applicant, if an individual; or all the members of the
firm, if a copartnership; or the names and residences of the principal officers, if the applicant is a corporation; and also the location and description of
the premises where such business is to be conducted. If the president and board of trustees shall be satisfied that the applicant or applicants, or its
chief officers, if the applicant be a corporation, is or are of good character and reputation, and that the premises where the business is to be carried on
is proper and suitable, the president shall issue or cause to be issued a license, in accordance with such application, upon such applicant or applicants
paying a fee as set forth in section 4-1-3 of this code. (1965 Code § 4-4-2; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Issuance Of License: Every applicant in compliance with the aforesaid requirements, and the payment in advance of the fee hereinabove set forth to the
village clerk, shall receive a license, which shall authorize the person or persons therein named to keep an "ice cream parlor", as defined in section 5-
1B-1 of this article, in the place designated in the license and for the person designated therein. (1965 Code § 4-4-3; amd. 2009 Code)
C. Posting License: Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions in this article shall immediately post the said license or cause it to be posted
and shall at all times keep it posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where such business is thereby authorized to be conducted. (1965 Code
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 94/307
§ 4-4-4)
5-1B-3: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
No person, licensed in accordance with the provisions in this article, shall keep open any such place during the nighttime between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (1965 Code § 4-4-5)
5-1B-4: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Premises: It shall be the duty of any person licensed to carry on a business under this article to keep the premises at all times where the said business
is conducted in a clean and sanitary condition.
B. Employees: All persons employed or working on said premises shall be kept cleanly clothed.
C. Utensils, Equipment And Facilities: All utensils, refrigerators, pantries or any other places or things whatever which are used for the purpose of storing,
preparing or manufacturing must at all times be kept in a clean, wholesome and sanitary condition.
D. Materials For Sale: No decayed, unwholesome or impure material of any kind whatsoever shall be kept or offered for sale by any person in such
business. (1965 Code § 4-4-6)
ARTICLE C. MOBILE FOOD VENDORS1
5-1C-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
APPROVED EVENT: An event, including, but not limited to, a festival, holiday celebration, religious or charitable event, that is otherwise lawful and
approved, where required, by the proper authorities. Vendors operating in this context shall be registered with the building department.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: An individual, enterprise, corporation, partnership or other entity that sells, for profit, food from a motorized motor vehicle by
virtue of patrolling village streets in search of unsolicited or random sales and wherein the vehicle is an integral part of the enterprise. Such activity shall
include, but not be limited to, ice cream trucks, produce trucks, meat trucks and similar enterprises. (1965 Code § 4-44-1)
5-1C-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Mobile food vending, as defined in this article, shall be a prohibited activity within the corporate limits of the village unless such activity is otherwise in
compliance with this article. (1965 Code § 4-44-2)
5-1C-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of pushcarts, trailers and motorized vehicles to sell food when properly licensed and conducted in conjunction
with an approved event occurring within the village; provided, that such use shall be limited to the duration of the event and shall not meet the definition of
a "mobile food vendor". (1965 Code § 4-44-2)
5-1C-4: LIMITATION OF LICENSES:
Mobile food vendor licenses shall be limited as follows:
A. Ice cream vendors: One license (1 licensee, maximum 2 trucks).
B. Catering trucks: One license (1 licensee, maximum 2 trucks).
C. Noncategory (other than subsections A and B of this section): One license. (1965 Code § 4-44-2)
5-1C-5: LICENSE AWARDED THROUGH BIDDING PROCESS:
A. Bid Qualifications:
1. Licenses shall be awarded to the highest qualified bidder.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 95/307
2. A qualified bidder is one who:
a. Provides the village with a list of all vehicles utilized for mobile food vending;
b. Provides the village with a list of the full names, addresses, telephone numbers and dates of birth for all proposed drivers;
c. Provides the village with a valid certificate of automobile insurance for all vehicles utilized for mobile food vending;
d. Provides the village with a certificate of inspection approval from the village mechanic for all vehicles utilized for mobile food vending;
e. Provides the village with a listing of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all food suppliers;
f. Provides the village with a photograph of all vehicles utilized for mobile food vending service;
g. Provides the village with a completed application for the license; and
h. Provides the village with a bid tabulation sheet. (1965 Code § 4-44-2)
B. Bid Process:
1. In March of 2004, and each March every two (2) years thereafter, the village shall advertise in a news publication of general circulation in the Lyons
area the village's intent to take bids for mobile food vending licenses. The advertisement shall advise of an open period of thirty (30) days for bidders
to obtain a bid package from village hall and submit same by a date ending the thirty (30) day bid submission process. (1965 Code § 4-44-2; amd.
2009 Code)
2. A bid opening shall be conducted by the village manager or his designee on or about seven (7) days following the bid submission deadline. Bids not
containing the required submissions enumerated in this article shall not be considered.
3. A preliminary bid award shall be awarded by the village manager or his designee based upon the highest bid amount from a qualified bidder for the
license fee. The bid shall not be awarded until all documents contained within the bid package have been verified, and all employee information
contained in the bid submission is checked by the Lyons police department for outstanding warrants, poor driving record, criminal history and
placement on the state of Illinois sex offender registry; further, that in the event an employee is found to have outstanding warrants, a driving record
with convictions for reckless or careless driving, driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, felony use of a motor vehicle, vehicular homicide or
similar offenses within the past two (2) years, a criminal history with felony convictions within the past five (5) years or a conviction at any time for
child molestation, food adulteration or similar offense or current placement on the state of Illinois sex offender registry, shall be cause for denying the
license or requiring the prospective licensee to remove the individual from driving food service vehicles in the village.
C. Licensure: The bid shall be awarded by the village manager upon completion of the verification process and payment of the bid amount by the vendor
to the village. A license shall be good for twenty four (24) months from the date of issuance. In the event a successful bidder is disqualified or revoked,
the village may, at its option, readvertise and rebid, or decline to issue another license for the duration of the license period. (1965 Code § 4-44-2)
5-1C-6: VEHICLE STICKER, APPEARANCE AND MAINTENANCE:
Vehicles utilized for mobile food service vending shall be kept in good mechanical and structural condition. Vehicles shall have a clean exterior and interior
and shall be equipped with automatic signs that extend outward from the vehicle to alert passing traffic to stop and proceed with caution past the truck
while it is stopped and serving customers. Each vehicle shall have the company name affixed to it in a professional, workmanlike manner and in letters
that are a minimum of six inches (6") high. The company name shall be affixed to each side and rear of the vehicle. The vehicle shall also display on the
front and rear bumpers a license sticker issued by the village. (1965 Code § 4-44-2)
5-1C-7: OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Noise: No mobile food service vendor shall cause or have equipment to project noise other than the ringing of bells installed on the vehicle. The bell
ringing shall not be in a manner so as to create a nuisance.
B. Hours And Locations Of Operation: Mobile food vendor hours of operation within the village shall be restricted to between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. A vendor shall not operate within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a place of worship or one hundred fifty feet
(150') of Smith park.
C. Food Safety: Food sold or provided by a mobile food vendor shall be kept refrigerated or frozen, where applicable, to provide for food safety. No food
shall be served after its packaged expiration date. Vehicles shall be subject to random inspection by both the village food safety inspector and the
village mechanic. All food service shall comply with state regulations where applicable. (1965 Code § 4-44-2)
5-1C-8: SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A license may be suspended when a violation of this article is verified by the village and until such time as the violation is cured by the licensee and
verified by the village. The village manager or his designee shall be empowered to order a particular vehicle out of service for violations of this article
without actually suspending the vendor license. (1965 Code § 4-44-2)
5-1C-9: PENALTIES; VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Penalties: In addition to license suspension, the village may, at its discretion, issue citations for appearance in the village adjudication hearings or in a
court of competent jurisdiction. A violation of this article, upon conviction or finding of responsibility, shall carry a minimum fine of one hundred dollars
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 96/307
($100.00) and a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day in violation shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Vehicle Impoundment; Storage Fee:
1. The village police department is empowered to impound mobile food service vehicles in the event the driver, company or vehicle is found to be in
violation of this article, or if the driver does not have a current driver license, or food safety or vehicle safety is found to be compromised. (1965 Code
§ 4-44-2)
2. The storage fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per day. (1965 Code § 4-44-2; amd. 2009 Code)
Footnote 1: See section 4-1-3 of this code for license fee.
Chapter 2
NUISANCES
5-2-1: NUISANCES DECLARED AND ENUMERATED:
A. Nuisance Declared: In addition to other sections of this code, each of the acts or omissions in this section is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance.
(1965 Code § 9-2-1)
B. Creation Or Maintenance Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain, or suffer or permit to be created or maintained, any
nuisance, or to suffer or permit any such nuisance to exist, or to neglect or refuse to abate the same, or hinder, obstruct or prevent the abatement
thereof. (1965 Code § 9-2-2)
C. Nuisances Enumerated:
1. Offensive Odors: It shall be unlawful to so conduct any business or use any premises as to create an offensive odor which taints the air or renders it
unwholesome or disagreeable to the neighborhood. (1965 Code § 9-2-3)
2. Offensive Substances: It shall be unlawful to deposit any nightsoil, dead animal or other filthy, offensive or noisome substance upon any lot, street,
alley, park or other public place. (1965 Code § 9-2-5)
3. Water Pollution: It shall be unlawful to pollute or render unwholesome or impure the water of any drinking hydrant, spring, stream, pond or lake, to
the annoyance or prejudice of others. (1965 Code § 9-2-6)
4. Obstructing Public Ways: It shall be unlawful to obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets, alleys or public places. (1965
Code § 9-2-7)
5. Offensive, Filthy Premises: It shall be unlawful to keep or permit to be kept in a foul, offensive or filthy condition any premises. (1965 Code § 9-2-8)
6. Garbage, Refuse On Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person, and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance, to permit or suffer any slop, swill,
garbage, stable dripping, offal, filth, refuse, animal or vegetable matter which is liable to become putrid, offensive or injurious to health to remain on
any premises used or occupied by said person for a longer period than twenty four (24) hours at any one time. (1965 Code § 9-2-9)
7. Stagnant Pools: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit stagnant pools to stand on any premises owned or occupied thereby.
(1965 Code § 9-2-10)
8. Offensive Businesses: It shall be unlawful to erect, maintain or use any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or
manufacture which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or to the public. (1965
Code § 9-2-11)
9. Combustible Material Near Buildings: It shall be unlawful to pile or stack any combustible or inflammable material within the space of fifty feet (50') of
any building; provided, however, that this shall not apply to materials to be used for building purposes. (1965 Code § 9-2-12)
10. Storing Old Automobiles And Junk: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to store or permit to be stored on any lot, piece or parcel of
land any old automobiles, bathtubs, sinks, toilets and other unsightly junk and miscellaneous debris. (1965 Code § 9-2-13)
11. Animal Related Nuisances: See the following provisions of this code for animal related offenses:
Poultry or fowl, subsection 8-1-1B
Confined animals, section 8-1-7
Noisy animals, section 8-1-8
Slaughtering cattle, section 8-1-9
Animal carcasses, section 8-1-10
(1965 Code §§ 9-2-4, 9-2-14, 9-2-15, 9-2-16, 9-2-17)
12. Expectorating: It shall be unlawful to expectorate upon any sidewalk, or upon the floor of any public conveyance, or any building where a
considerable number of people gather or assemble together. (1965 Code § 9-2-18)
13. Deposit Of Slippery Substances On Public Property: It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful to place, throw, deposit or drop, or cause
to be placed, deposited, thrown or dropped, any peel, rind, slippery substance, nutshells or shucks, fruit, vegetables or refuse upon the floors, stairs,
walks, passages or ways of any public hall, place of public amusement, waiting room or station, public building, or school, or in or upon any sidewalk,
public way, passageway, crosswalk, alley or curb in the village. (1965 Code § 9-2-19)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 97/307
14. Establishing Cemetery: It shall be unlawful, and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance, to establish a cemetery within the corporate limits or within
one mile of the limits of the village. (1965 Code § 9-2-20)
15. Tree Roots Obstructing Sewers Or Drains: Any tree or shrub standing or growing on any public street or on private land abutting thereon, whose
roots obstruct or interfere with the free operation of any public or private sewer or drain in use is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and subject to
abatement as such. Any owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land abutting on a public street or way, upon which land such tree or shrub shall be
standing or growing shall, within ten (10) days after notice from the village president and board of trustees so to do, remove such tree or shrub and
the roots thereof. Any person violating this subsection C15 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If any such person shall fail to remove such
tree or shrub and the roots thereof within fifteen (15) days after notice so to do, the director of public works shall effect such removal at the expense
of such owner or occupant. (1965 Code § 9-2-21)
16. Traction Engines On Streets: It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person to haul, drive, propel or operate any steam or gasoline or diesel
traction engine over or through any street, avenue or alley unless the wheels thereof are equipped with treads which will not injure the pavement.
(1965 Code § 9-2-22)
5-2-2: COMMON LAW NUISANCES:
All acts which constitute nuisances at common law or by the laws of the state shall constitute nuisances under this chapter. (1965 Code § 9-2-23)
5-2-3: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
Whenever any nuisance exists or shall be found on any premises contrary to any provision of this code, the village president, by and with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees, may, in his discretion, cause the same to be summarily abated in such manner as he may direct, and at the expense of
the person permitting or maintaining such nuisance. (1965 Code § 9-2-24)
Chapter 3
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS1
5-3-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the term "hazardous material" means any substance or mixture of substances that is toxic, corrosive, an irritant, strong sensitizer,
flammable, combustible, or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means and that may cause substantial personal injury or illness
during customary or reasonably anticipated handling or use or may cause an unreasonable threat to property, the public health or safety, or the ecological
balance of the environment. "Hazardous material" includes, but is not limited to, explosives, radioactive substances, petroleum or petroleum products,
poisons, toxic gases, flammable substances, corrosive substances, and pathogens. (1965 Code § 8-5-1)
5-3-2: DEPOSITS PROHIBITED:
No person shall place, spill or otherwise deposit, or cause to be placed, spilled or otherwise deposited, any hazardous material on any property in the
village or in any village owned building or facility without securing, in advance, proper authorization therefor from the fire chief or other authorized village
official. (1965 Code § 8-5-2)
5-3-3: ABATEMENT; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
A. Abatement Authorized: The fire chief or his delegate shall cause any unauthorized deposit of hazardous material on or in any property or village owned
public building or facility to be removed therefrom in a manner consistent with applicable federal and state law as soon as possible. (1965 Code § 8-5-
3)
B. Liability For Costs:
1. Any person responsible for any unauthorized placement, spill or other deposit of any hazardous material shall be liable for the payment of all costs of
removal thereof, including, but not limited to, labor costs, administrative costs and disposal costs.
2. Such payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after service of an invoice therefor by the village.
3. The assessment by the village of costs hereunder shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this code or federal or state
law. (1965 Code § 8-5-4)
Footnote 1: See also title 6, chapter 6 of this code.
Chapter 4
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
5-4-1: CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 98/307
The village hereby incorporates by reference the following Illinois acts:
A. Environmental Protection: The Illinois environmental protection act, as amended, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq. (1965 Code § 3-12-1)
B. Water Pollutant Discharge: The Illinois water pollutant discharge act, as amended, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/0.01 et seq. (1965 Code § 3-12-2)
C. Litter Control: The Illinois litter control act, as amended, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/1 et seq. (1965 Code § 3-12-3)
5-4-2: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INVESTIGATIONS:
The village building department, fire department and police department, and their agents, are empowered under this chapter to enter properties for the
purposes of conducting such investigations so as to determine compliance with said acts, as adopted in section 5-4-1 of this chapter, and to provide such
evidence to the state of Illinois or Cook County agencies for follow up and enforcement by those entities, as required. (1965 Code § 3-12-4)
5-4-3: PROBABLE CAUSE; VERIFICATION OF POLLUTION:
A. Investigation To Verify Existence Of Pollution: Wherein probable cause exists that a violation of such acts, as adopted in section 5-4-1 of this chapter,
has occurred, or where probable cause exists that illegal dumping or polluting has occurred, the village may cause to have conducted those
environmental studies, including, but not limited to, a phase I or phase II environmental impact study, so as to further verify the existence of such
pollution, causation, remediation and enforcement needs.
B. Cost Borne By Property Owner: The cost of such assessment shall be borne by the affected property owner, unless otherwise preempted by state law.
(1965 Code § 3-12-5)
5-4-4: CIVIL REMEDIES:
The penalties proscribed by the acts, as adopted in section 5-4-1 of this chapter, shall not limit the village from pursuing other remedies as provided by
law. (1965 Code § 3-12-6)
Chapter 5
GARBAGE AND REFUSE1
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS2:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter, they will have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ASHES: Residue from wood, coal and coke, and residue from the combustion of any material or substances, and soot, cinders, slag and charcoal.
GARBAGE: Waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; from the handling, storage and sale of produce; animal and
vegetable matter; manure; and swill; including decaying animal matter and fish.
MANURE: All excrement of domestic animals and fowl, stable bedding, and all hay, straw, shavings, grass, weeds or leaves which have been used for
stable bedding.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials that would otherwise be abandoned or discarded but which can be utilized in the secondary material market.
REFUSE: Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, wood furniture, and bedding;
noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, crockery, or other mineral
waste; street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, catch basin dirt, and contents of litter receptacles.
SCAVENGER: Any person that manages, conducts or carries on the business of the collection, removal and/or disposal of garbage, refuse or ashes from
businesses or residences or any other places within the village.
YARD WASTE: All accumulations of grass, leaves, plant or shrubbery materials, tree branches or other materials accumulated as the result of the care of
the lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees. "Yard waste" shall also include discarded Christmas trees. The term "yard waste material" shall also connote any
and all materials specified from time to time by 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.270, or any successor to that provision should that definition be broader
than the above. (1965 Code § 3-9-1; amd. 2009 Code)
5-5-2: SUPERVISION:
All matters relating to or affecting the collection, removal or disposal of household refuse or all waste material, or recyclable material, unless specifically
placed under the direction of the health department, shall be subject to and under the supervision and direction of the village inspector or such other
employee as may be designated by the board of trustees. (1965 Code § 3-9-2; amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 99/307
5-5-3: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL:
A. Collection: Garbage, ashes and miscellaneous waste, yard waste and recyclable material shall be called for and disposed of by the village or its agents
or persons with whom it may contract to perform such services from time to time and shall not be collected or disposed of in any other manner, except
as in this chapter provided; and no such garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste, yard waste and recyclable material shall be allowed to accumulate on
any property or premises for a period longer than the time between calls by the village, its agents or contractors at said property or premises for the
purpose of collecting the same.
B. Special Service: If the waste is of such character or quantity that the regular collectors making the regular trips do not collect such waste, then the
occupant of such premises shall make request for said service within one week after the accumulation thereof. For such special service, the village
agent or contractor, as the case may be, shall make a reasonable charge. (1965 Code § 3-9-11)
5-5-4: CONTRACT FOR GARBAGE HAULING; RATES:
A. Contract: The village president and board of trustees may, in their discretion, enter into a contract with a responsible person to handle all the garbage,
ashes, miscellaneous waste, yard waste and recyclable materials collection, removal and disposal from the village.
B. Establishment Of Rates: The village president and board of trustees shall establish reasonable rates from time to time for the collection and disposal of
garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste, yard waste and recyclable materials.
C. Rate Increases: All rate increases hereinafter provided by the village scavenger and landfill operator shall be added to the established garbage rate as
they occur.
Effective March 16, 2010, the rates for residential garbage collection and disposal shall be as follows:
1. Fourteen dollars four cents ($14.04) per month per unit for a thirty five (35) gallon capacity garbage container and up to one bulk item per week.
2. Eighteen dollars sixty eight cents ($18.68) per month per unit for a sixty five (65) gallon capacity garbage container and up to one bulk item per
week.
3. Twenty two dollars thirty one cents ($22.31) per month per unit for a ninety five (95) gallon capacity garbage container and up to one bulk item per
week.
D. Conflicting Provisions: Where conflicts exist between other village regulations, ordinances and this chapter, the stricter standard shall apply. (Ord. 03-
16-10-01, 3-16-2010)
5-5-5: RECEPTACLES:
A. Receptacles Required And Maintained: It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent of any dwelling, apartment, condo, or commercial building
to provide, and to maintain in good order, adequate, covered receptacles for storage of garbage and recyclable materials.
B. Types Of Receptacles:
1. Such receptacles shall be watertight, durable, secure, and have close fitting covers at all times to prevent the attraction of animals. At no time shall
garbage be put out only in plastic bags without inserting said plastic bags into a covered receptacle. A sufficient number and properly sized
containers shall be provided to accommodate all waste for a seven (7) day period.
2. Yard waste shall be deposited in biodegradable paper bags or such other durable containers used exclusively for the disposal of yard waste. Neither
the paper bag nor the durable container shall have a capacity of more than thirty two (32) gallons.
3. Recyclable material shall be deposited in a durable container separate from any receptacle used for other types of waste, with a capacity of not more
than thirty two (32) gallons.
C. Placement Of Receptacles For Pick Up:
1. Every owner, or the occupant of every house, building, store, flat, apartment, tenement, or dwelling place in the village, of which receptacles for
garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste, recyclable materials, yard waste or any of them have been provided, shall cause such receptacles to be
placed in a convenient area upon said premises for the removal of the contents thereof at such times and in such a manner as the village inspector,
or other village employee in charge, may direct.
2. No receptacle shall be kept on the parkways or in front of any premises other than on pick up days, and said receptacle or receptacles shall be
moved immediately after the pick ups have been made. (1965 Code § 3-9-3)
5-5-6: PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION BY VILLAGE:
A. Draining And Wrapping:
1. It shall be the duty of each occupant, tenant or person in possession of any dwelling to cause all garbage produced in or brought into such dwelling
to be thoroughly drained of surplus liquid, securely wrapped in paper or packed in a covered box or carton, and finally deposited in a garbage
receptacle meeting the requirements of section 5-5-5 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 100/307
2. Materials of every character to be collected shall be securely wrapped in such manner as to prevent the blowing of same by the wind and shall be
deposited in the receptacle provided for such materials. (1965 Code § 3-9-4)
B. Yard Waste Collection: All yard waste must be deposited in paper, compostable yard waste bags or such other durable container used solely for the
disposal of yard waste, either having a maximum capacity of thirty two (32) gallons. Residents shall be required to furnish their own compostable bags
or durable container. Yard waste material shall be placed at the same location where other garbage and refuse is deposited for removal and collection.
Yard waste material such as twigs, brush and branches not exceeding four feet (4') in length nor more than three inches (3") in diameter which are tied
in bundles not to exceed twenty four inches (24") in diameter with biodegradable twine shall also be collected as yard waste material. The collection
day(s) shall be on the same day(s) when other refuse is collected within Lyons and shall not commence prior to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Yard waste
materials shall not be allowed to scatter or be spilled. (1965 Code § 3-9-5)
5-5-7: LITTERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to litter or to perform any act which will cause to be littered any streets, alleys, sidewalks, sewers, curbs, gutters or other
public places in the village with garbage, paper or refuse of any kind. Likewise, no person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the
jurisdiction of the village any substance, article or thing defined in section 5-5-1 of this chapter, in such a manner that it or any of them may be carried or
deposited by the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow, into or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied
premises within the village. (1965 Code § 3-9-6)
5-5-8: REFUSE AND YARD WASTE IN STREETS AND ALLEYS3:
A. Refuse Deposits Prohibited; Exceptions: No person shall deposit or place in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, parkway or public place, any refuse of
any kind; provided, that this section shall not apply to the deposit of material under a permit authorized by an ordinance of the village; nor to goods,
wares or merchandise deposited upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place temporarily in the necessary course of trade and removed
therefrom within two (2) hours after being so deposited; nor to articles or things deposited in or conducted into the village sewerage system through
lawful drains.
B. Yard Waste Removal By Village; Assessment Of Costs; Lien:
1. No person, company, partnership, corporation or other entity shall deposit, place or cause to deposit or place in or upon any gutter, street, alley, or
public way any leaves, grass, or other yard waste. The presence of deposits of leaves, grass, or yard waste in the gutter or street in front of any
property in an amount that exceeds the capacity of a thirty two (32) gallon biodegradable paper bag intended for yard waste disposal shall constitute
a presumption that the owner or resident at that property address is responsible for such illegal disposal of leaves, grass, or yard waste at that
location.
2. In addition to being liable for fines as provided for by this code, in the event the village provides leaf removal service from the street, the actual cost
of such service, including labor, materials, dump fees, equipment rental and/or depreciation, plus a fifty dollar ($50.00) service fee, shall be imposed
upon the owner of the subject property. In the event that the invoice is not paid within thirty (30) days of its issuance, such costs shall be placed as a
lien upon the property as provided for by law. (1965 Code § 3-9-7)
5-5-9: DEPOSITS OF OFFENSIVE MATTER:
A. No pile or deposit of manure, garbage, miscellaneous waste or refuse of any kind or accumulation of any offensive or nauseous substance shall be
made within the limits of the village; nor shall any person or corporation unload, discharge or put upon or along the line of any railroad, street, highway,
or public place within the village or upon any vacant lot, any manure, garbage, miscellaneous waste, refuse or other offensive or nauseous substances;
nor shall any cars loaded with or having in or upon them any such substance be allowed to remain or stand on or along any railroad, street or highway
within the limits of the village, within three hundred (300) yards of any inhabited dwelling.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any garbage, offal, refuse or animal or vegetable matter which is liable to become putrid or
offensive or injurious to health to remain on any premises used or occupied by him for a longer period than four (4) hours at any one time. (1965 Code
§ 3-9-8; amd. 2009 Code)
5-5-10: SIFTING OR EXPOSING TO WIND:
No lime, ashes, coal or other substance that is in a similar manner liable to be blown by the wind shall be sifted or exposed in any street or public place, or
in any place within the village where particles therefrom set in motion thereby will pass into any such street or public place or into any occupied premises.
(1965 Code § 3-9-9)
5-5-11: OPEN BURNING4:
No person shall burn any matter or materials within the village except in keeping with the provisions of section 13-8-6 of this code. (1965 Code § 3-9-10;
amd. 2009 Code)
ARTICLE A. COMPOSTING
5-5A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 101/307
The purpose of this article is to promote the recycling of yard wastes through composting and to establish minimum standards for proper compost
maintenance. (1965 Code § 3-9A-1)
5-5A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
COMPOSTABLE MATERIAL: Grass, garden clippings, brush, leaves, tree clippings, and other materials accumulated as a result of the maintenance of
gardens, lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees.
COMPOSTING: The controlled biological reduction of organic wastes to humus. (1965 Code § 3-9A-2)
5-5A-3: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
Every owner or operator shall be responsible for maintaining all property under his or her control in accordance with the requirements of this article. (1965
Code § 3-9A-6)
5-5A-4: MAINTENANCE:
All compost piles shall be maintained using approved composting procedures that comply with the following requirements:
A. All compost piles shall be enclosed in a freestanding compost bin.
B. Compostable materials may be placed in a compost pile; provided, that such materials are placed in such a manner as not to allow them to be
windblown.
C. The depositing of garbage, pet waste, meat scraps or other materials that may attract animals or vermin to the compost pile or which may provide an
obnoxious odor shall be prohibited. Compost piles containing garden debris shall be kept covered, except while turning.
D. The presence of rodents in or near a compost pile shall cause health department regulation and enforcement under subsection 1-9D-2C of this code.
(1965 Code § 3-9A-3)
5-5A-5: LOCATION:
A compost pile shall not be located less than twenty five feet (25') from any neighboring dwelling unit, less than eight feet (8') from any rear or side lot line
or within any required front yard as defined in the village zoning regulations in title 13 of this code. (1965 Code § 3-9A-4)
5-5A-6: COMPOST BIN CONSTRUCTION:
Each compost bin shall be no larger than three feet (3') to five feet (5') wide and no taller than five feet (5') high, and shall be constructed of woven
galvanized wire, block, or brick; or shall be a prefabricated wooden bin, with sufficient openings to allow adequate air movement. (1965 Code § 3-9A-5)
5-5A-7: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of a violation of this article shall be fined in an amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any second or subsequent
finding of guilty for any of these offenses shall result in a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). (1965 Code § 3-9A-7)
ARTICLE B. ON SITE MULTI-FAMILY RECYCLING PROGRAM
5-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MULTI-FAMILY PROPERTY: A property consisting of one or more multi-family structures.
MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURE: A building with more than two (2) residential dwelling units which are not included in the village of Lyons curbside refuse,
recyclables and landscape waste collection and disposal service.
OWNER: Any person, corporation, partnership or entity such as a condominium or homeowners' association, jointly or severally having an ownership
interest in a multi-family property or otherwise being responsible for solid waste collection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 102/307
PRIVATE SCAVENGER: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the removal of solid waste, compostable material and/or recyclable material from any
location within the village not covered by either an exclusive collection contract between the village of Lyons and a contracted hauler or a franchise
agreement between the village of Lyons and a franchised hauler.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: A material which would otherwise be abandoned or discarded but which can be utilized in the secondary material market.
RECYCLING: The process by which materials that would otherwise be disposed of or discarded are collected, separated or processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
SOURCE SEPARATION: A process that separates recyclable materials from other refuse prior to collection for the purpose of recycling such materials.
VILLAGE: The village of Lyons or its designee. (1965 Code § 3-13-1)
5-5B-2: RECYCLING PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS:
A. Program Requirements:
1. All owners of "multi-family properties", as defined in section 5-5B-2 of this article, shall be required to institute an on site recycling program, with
collection of recyclable materials to be no less than one pick up per week.
2. Said program shall be instituted on or before July 1, 2003.
3. Multi-family property owners are required to use the village's franchised recyclables collection hauler. Multi-family property owners shall be billed for
such services by the franchised hauler or directly by the village, as determined by the village manager. The fee for such service shall be as
established by the village and the franchised hauler. In the event the franchised hauler is unable to perform, owners shall be permitted to utilize the
services of a private licensed scavenger, who shall be subject to the same regulations herein listed; except, that the private scavenger shall bill the
owner directly for his services.
4. An acceptable recycling program shall include, but is not limited to, the following components:
a. Siting and design of common area collection areas for recyclable materials;
b. Recyclable materials collection;
c. Provision of common area recycling containers;
d. Data collection and reporting;
e. Educational campaign and materials; and
f. Recycling program administration and maintenance.
B. Specific Requirements:
1. Recycling collection areas for residents shall be conveniently located and maintained within common areas in or near the buildings and consist of
separate containers for the purposes of temporary storage of recyclables. Whenever possible, recycling containers should be placed adjacent to
common area solid waste collection containers.
2. Indoor common area collection/storage areas shall be established in accordance with appropriate village fire safety and property maintenance
codes.
3. Exterior recyclables storage areas shall be established in accordance with village requirements for solid waste enclosures.
4. The multi-family property owner shall maintain all recycling areas, including the containers, in a clean, sanitary and litter free manner.
5. On site multi-family structure recycling programs are required to offer collection of a minimum of five (5) of the following types of recyclable materials:
Aluminum, steel, tin and bimetal cans
Chipboard
Corrugated cardboard
Glass bottles (3 colors)
High grade paper
Junk mail
Magazines and catalogs
Miscellaneous ferrous and nonferrous scrap metals
Newspaper
PETE (#1) and HDPE (#2) plastic bottles
Telephone books
6. Recyclable materials shall be source separated from other solid waste prior to collection for the purpose of recycling such materials. Separate
collection containers and collection vehicles shall be employed.
7. The minimum gallon amount of recycling container capacity (total weekly base recycling container capacity) an owner shall provide weekly for each
structure shall be based upon the following formula:
7 gallons x number of studio and 1-bedroom units +
8 gallons x number of 2-bedroom units +
9 gallons x number of 3-bedroom or more units =
total base weekly recycling container capacity
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 103/307
The weekly base recycling container capacity may be met by a combination of container sizes and number of pick ups, such as containers totaling
one-half (1/2) the base capacity picked up twice a week. Capacity per structure may be shifted within the multi-family property if necessary, so long
as the total required capacity is met.
8. The franchised scavenger providing the on site recycling collection service shall be responsible for furnishing and replacing all common area
recycling containers and collection vehicles which are deemed necessary in the recycling program.
9. Multi-family property owners shall notify residents of the availability of recycling services through a formal and ongoing educational campaign and
shall use their best efforts to gain and maintain participation in the program.
10. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized persons to remove or damage any recyclable materials placed in designated containers or the containers
themselves1. Title to recyclable material shall pass to the scavenger when the materials are placed into the collection vehicle.
11. A sale certificate, as required by this code, shall not be approved until such time as compliance with this article is verified by the village inspector.
(1965 Code § 3-13-2)
5-5B-3: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Report By Franchised Hauler: Each franchised hauler shall submit a quarterly report to both the multi-family property owner(s) or their designee and the
village and/or its designee that contains the following information:
1. Total weight or volume of refuse collected from multi-family properties it serves within the village.
2. Total weight or volume of yard waste collected from multi-family properties it serves within the village.
3. Total weight or volume of recyclable materials collected from multi-family properties it serves within the village.
4. A summary of recycling services provided to each multi-family property to be submitted only on an annual basis with the fourth quarter report.
B. Applicability Of Report: Quarterly reports submitted to the multi-family property shall only pertain to that property's activity.
C. Aggregate Totals: Quarterly reports submitted to the village shall contain aggregate totals concerning the information listed above for all multi-family
properties within the village's jurisdiction.
D. Due Date: Reports shall be due no later than fifteen (15) days after the close of each quarter. "Quarters" are defined as follows: first quarter (January 1
through March 31), second quarter (April 1 through June 30), third quarter (July 1 through September 30) and fourth quarter (October 1 through
December 31). Reports shall follow the format prescribed by the village. (1965 Code § 3-13-3)
5-5B-4: RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
The village and/or its designee shall have the right to inspect and examine records pertaining to the collection and disposal or processing of refuse and
recyclables upon request and with reasonable notice. (1965 Code § 3-13-4)
5-5B-5: IMPLEMENTATION AND CONTINUATION OF PROGRAM:
Implementation of on site multi-family structure recycling programs shall be required as provided for in this article. Such programs shall be maintained in
effect regardless of a change in scavenger, hauler or property ownership. Multi-family property owners shall be required to notify the village in writing
within thirty (30) days after a change in their choice of private scavenger. (1965 Code § 3-13-5)
5-5B-6: PENALTIES:
A. Penalty Imposed: A violation of this article, upon conviction, shall, in addition to a loss of license, be punishable by a minimum fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), as determined by the village code hearing officer or court of competent
jurisdiction. Each day of noncompliance shall be deemed to be a separate violation.
B. Other Remedies: Prosecution and/or loss of license shall not preclude the village from seeking any other lawful remedy to obtain compliance. (1965
Code § 3-13-6)
Footnote 1: See also section 7-4A-4 of this code.
ARTICLE C. SCAVENGERS
5-5C-1: DEFINITIONS1:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this article, they will have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ASHES: Residue from wood, coal and coke, and residue resulting from the combustion of any material or substance, and soot, cinders, slag and charcoal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 104/307
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Any and all materials used, to be used or having been used in the construction of a building or structure, including, but not
limited to, shingles, wood, concrete, plastic, metal, brick and similar items.
GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; from the handling, storage and sale of produce; animal
and vegetable matter; manure; and swill; including decaying animal matter and fish.
PRIVATE SCAVENGER: Any person that manages, conducts or carries on the business of the collection, removal or disposal of garbage, refuse, or ashes
from businesses or residences or any other places within the village.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials that would otherwise be abandoned or discarded but which can be utilized in the secondary material market.
REFUSE: Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture,
and bedding, noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, and small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete,
glass, crockery, or other mineral waste; street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt, and contents of litter
receptacles. (1965 Code § 4-38-1)
5-5C-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article and shall issue such reasonable orders in connection with the carrying on of the business of
a licensed scavenger as he deems necessary to protect the health of the public. It shall be the duty of such licensed scavenger to comply with such orders
and to perform the work required of them in such a way that no nuisance will be created thereby. (1965 Code § 4-38-12)
5-5C-3: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEE:
A. License Required; Exceptions: No person shall manage, conduct, or carry on the business of private scavenger, or shall be permitted to remove and
dispose of any matter enumerated in the section 5-5C-1 of this article, without first having obtained a license so to do; provided, however, that no
license shall be required of any person for the removal of manure from his own premises; and provided further, that any person desiring to gather,
remove, or dispose of animal or vegetable refuse and wastes from his own premises without the aid of a licensed private scavenger may do so only
upon the written permission of the health officer, and then only in the manner specified in such permit. (1965 Code § 4-38-2)
B. Application For License: Any person desiring to manage, conduct, or carry on the business of "private scavenger", as defined in section 5-5C-1 of this
article, shall make a written application for a license so to do in conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to application for licenses.
The applicant shall state the number of vehicles which he intends to operate or use in said business and what method of disposal and the place thereof
proposed by the applicant. (1965 Code § 4-38-3)
C. Investigation; Issuance Of License: The village inspector shall cause an investigation to be made of the application to determine whether the health,
sanitation and safety provisions of this code applicable to private scavengers have been satisfied. Upon a determination of compliance with the
applicable provisions of this code, the village inspector shall cause a license to be issued to the applicant. (1965 Code § 4-38-4)
D. License Fee: The annual license fee for each private scavenger shall be as set forth in section 4-1-3 of this code and shall conform to the general
provisions relating to licenses. (1965 Code § 4-38-5)
5-5C-4: REFUSE REMOVAL BY VILLAGE:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with any existing or future provisions of this code concerning the removal and disposal of dirt, filth, litter,
garbage, ashes, manure, offal, swill, dead animals or other materials from the public ways by the village through its contractors or otherwise. (1965 Code
§ 4-38-7)
5-5C-5: SCAVENGER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Service Required: A scavenger licensed by the village shall provide service within the limits of the village on regular, scheduled days, at least once a
week, and more often when necessary, to all persons requiring such service at such rates as are fixed by contract with the village. (1965 Code § 4-38-
8)
B. Workers' Compensation And Liability Insurance: A scavenger licensed by the village shall provide and maintain workers' compensation and public
liability insurance in a minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence with a total limit of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00), with the village named as an additional insured, and a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) cash or surety bond indebted to the village.
Such bond shall act as a surety to guarantee against damage to village and private property by scavenger equipment and vehicles. (1965 Code § 4-38-
9)
C. Vehicle And Equipment: A scavenger licensed by the village shall use only trucks and equipment that are maintained in safe and proper operating
condition and according to the manufacturer's specifications. All trucks and equipment shall be safely and properly operated and in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications and applicable state and village regulations. (1965 Code § 4-38-10)
D. Sanitary And Safety Provisions: It shall be the duty of every person who has contracted or undertaken to remove any filthy, offensive or noxious
substance, or is engaged in any such removal, or in the loading or unloading of any such substance to do the same as quickly and as carefully as
possible and free from offense and with as little danger and prejudice to life and health as possible. (1965 Code § 4-38-11; amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 105/307
5-5C-6: LIABILITY OF OWNER AND OCCUPANT:
The owner of the premises thereof, and the user of the garbage collection service, shall be jointly and severally liable for payment for the service on such
premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the
user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village. (1965 Code § 4-38-13)
5-5C-7: BILLING AND PAYMENT:
Charges for garbage and refuse collection services rendered shall be included on the customer's water bill and shall be due and payable at the same time
the water bill is due and payable2. (1965 Code § 4-38-15; amd. 2009 Code)
5-5C-8: DISPOSITION OF REVENUE:
All revenues and monies received for the collection of garbage, ashes and refuse and any other monies paid into or belonging to the garbage division shall
be kept and maintained in a separate fund and used only for the purpose of operating and maintaining such division. No monies shall be transferred from
such fund for any purpose except upon vote of the majority members of the board of trustees and then only in the event that such transfer is from funds
declared to be surplus over and above any and all requirements of the refuse division. (1965 Code § 4-38-16)
5-5C-9: HOURS OF OPERATION; NUISANCE CONDITIONS:
Scavengers shall be precluded from operating within the village from seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., and shall be prohibited from
creating nuisance conditions such as noise, dust, vibrations and similar nuisance actions as defined by village ordinances. Scavengers shall be prohibited
from depositing or leaving refuse, garbage, recyclables, construction debris and similar items upon private property, parkways, roadways, sidewalks and
alleys. Exceptions to operating hours may be granted by the village manager based upon extraordinary or exigent circumstances; provided, that such
exceptions will not serve to create a nuisance. (1965 Code § 4-38-17)
5-5C-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A scavenger license shall be suspended if, after ten (10) days' notice from the village that such entity owes the village fees or fines, such amount is not
tendered to the village in full. Such suspension may be appealed to the village manager. (1965 Code § 4-38-19)
5-5C-11: RESPONSIBILITY AND PENALTY:
A. Penalty Imposed: Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity who knowingly engages the services of an unlicensed scavenger, and any
person, corporation, partnership or other entity who manages, operates or conducts themselves as an unlicensed scavenger or as a scavenger in
violation of this code is subject to the penalties contained herein. A violation of this code shall be punishable by a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each day such violation exists; further, leach containers, dumpsters, trucks and other property of an unlicensed scavenger found
to be in operation or use for scavenger purposes within the village may be locked, immobilized or impounded by the village. Such property shall only be
released upon demonstration that the scavenger has properly obtained the required village license and paid all fines and fees, including, but not limited
to, an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus the actual cost of impounding, storing, immobilizing and/or locking such vehicles and
equipment, as determined by the impounding authority.
B. Double License Fee For Unlicensed Scavenger: The license fee for an unlicensed scavenger shall double if said scavenger does not obtain the license
within ten (10) days after being notified by the village to obtain said license. (1965 Code § 4-38-20)
Footnote 1: See also section 5-5-1 of this chapter.
Footnote 2: See section 11-1-3 of this code.
Chapter 6
WEEDS, GRASSES AND VEGETATION
5-6-1: WEEDS PROHIBITED; NUISANCE DECLARED:
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person, firm, or corporation, or any owner, agent, occupant or person in possession, charge or control
of any lot, tract, parcel of land, building or other premises within the village or within its territorial jurisdiction to permit the growth upon any premises within
the village of any noxious weeds, such as blue vervain, buckthorn, burdock, bull nettle, burdock, cockleburs, common milkweed, curled dock, dodders,
field bindweed, giant foxtail, hoary cress, jimson weed, Johnson grass, lamb's quarters, leafy spurge, marijuana or wild hemp, multiflora rose, purple
loosestrife, ragweed, ox-eye daisy, poison ivy, thistle (bull, Canada, sowthistle or musk), quack grass, ragweed (giant, common, or western), Russian
knapweed, rough pigweed, sweet clover, teasel, wild carrot, wild lettuce, wild garlic, wild mustard or like weeds having similar undesirable characteristics
as determined by the public works department or the dean of the college of agriculture of the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana. It shall be
unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain on property within the village. (Ord. 02-19-08-03, 2-19-2008)
5-6-2: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 106/307
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person, firm, or corporation, or any owner, agent, occupant or person in possession, charge or control
of any lot, tract, parcel of land, building or other premises within the village or within its territorial jurisdiction to permit the growth upon any premises within
the village of any weeds or grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, garden crops or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height exceeding six
inches (6") anywhere in the village, or to permit any premises to become overgrown with weeds and brush in such a manner as to become injurious to the
health of the community. (Ord. 02-19-08-03, 2-19-2008)
5-6-3: TRIMMING BUSHES AND SHRUBS:
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person, firm, or corporation, or any owner, agent, occupant or person in possession, charge or control
of any lot, tract, parcel of land, building or other premises within the village or within its territorial jurisdiction to permit the unchecked growth upon any
premises within the village of any bushes or shrubs without trimming the same in such a manner as to prevent such bushes or shrubs from crossing
property lines or obstructing the sidewalk, parkway, street or highway. Moreover, it is hereby declared a public nuisance to permit bushes and shrubs to
become unsightly and unruly, as the same shall be determined by the public works department. (Ord. 02-19-08-03, 2-19-2008)
5-6-4: OWNER/OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Every owner or occupant of real estate within the village shall cut the weeds and grass on his or her property and on the abutting parkway at all such
times as may be necessary so that such weeds and grass shall not exceed six inches (6") in height.
B. Every owner or occupant of real estate within the village shall trim the bushes and shrubs on his or her property and on the abutting parkway at all such
times as may be necessary to prevent the same from crossing property lines or obstructing the sidewalk, parkway, street or highway or otherwise
become unsightly and unruly, as the same shall be determined by the public works department.
C. If such owner neglects or refuses to cut such weeds or grass so that such weeds or grass exceed six inches (6") in height, or fails to trim bushes and
shrubs in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the village may cut the weeds or grass or trim the bushes and shrubs or authorize some
person to do the same on behalf of the village. (Ord. 02-19-08-03, 2-19-2008)
5-6-5: NOTICE TO REMEDIATE AND ABATE NUISANCE:
It shall be the duty of the public works department to cause notice to be served upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which landscaping
conditions are in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days. The "notice to remediate
and abate nuisance" may be served either in person or by first class mail. It shall not be necessary in any case to specify in what manner the nuisance
shall be abated, though such notice shall provide sufficient information for the recipient thereof to understand the nature of the nuisance(s). Such notice
shall notify the owner that he or she must abate the nuisance(s) within ten (10) days and shall also contain a copy of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-
7 and the ordinance codified herein and notify the owner that the village may remove or trim the tree(s) and place a lien on the property for the cost of the
removal if the nuisance is not abated within ten (10) days. (Ord. 02-19-08-03, 2-19-2008)
5-6-6: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
If the person served with a "notice to remediate and abate nuisance" under this chapter shall fail, refuse or neglect to abate the nuisance within ten (10)
days, the director of public works shall proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of all related expenses. Such expenses shall be charged to
and paid by the owner or occupant. (Ord. 02-19-08-03, 2-19-2008)
5-6-7: PAYMENT OF CHARGES; LIEN PROVISIONS:
A. Rendition Of Bill: If weeds, grass, bushes or shrubs are cut or trimmed by the village or by someone directed to perform the same on behalf of the
village, the village shall send a bill for the cost and expense thereof to the property owner, his agent or legal representative or occupant in legal
possession or control of the premises.
B. Failure To Pay; Notice Of Lien:
1. If said bill is not paid in full within thirty (30) days of the date of said bill, the village manager or his or her designee shall cause a notice of lien of the
cost and expense thereof incurred by the village to be recorded in the following manner: The village or the person performing the service by authority
of the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds, or the office of the county registrar of
titles, if the real estate affected is registered under the Torrens system. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth:
a. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
b. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service; and
c. The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the village or someone working on behalf of the village.
2. Such notice of lien shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the cost and expense is incurred. After recording, the notice of lien, together with copies
of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7 and the ordinance codified herein, shall be sent by certified mail or hand delivered to the property owner,
his agent or legal representative or occupant in legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to the person who received the tax bill for
the preceding year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 107/307
C. Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the cost and expense after the notice of lien has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the
village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
D. Foreclosure Of Lien: Subsequent to the filing of the above described lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure of such lien, or
upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the premises or real estate, by answer to the complaint, or in the nature of an intervening
petition or cross complaint, the village may proceed in its corporate name to foreclose such lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this
chapter shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the monies owing the village. (Ord. 02-19-08-
03, 2-19-2008)
Chapter 7
TREES AND SHRUBS
5-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names and all areas owned by the village, or to
which the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the village. (1965 Code § 5-4-1)
5-7-2: FORESTRY REVIEW BOARD1:
A. Established; Appointment: There is hereby created and established a forestry review board for the village which shall consist of five (5) members,
citizens and residents of the village, who shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. (1965 Code
§ 5-4-10; amd. Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009; Ord. 05-17-11-O3, 5-17-2011)
B. Term Of Office; Vacancies:
1. The term of the five (5) persons to be appointed by the president shall be three (3) years; except, that the term of two (2) of the members appointed
to the first board shall be for only one year, and the term of two (2) members of the first board shall be for two (2) years.
2. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. (1965
Code § 5-4-11)
C. Compensation: Members of the board shall serve without compensation. (1965 Code § 5-4-12)
D. Duties And Responsibilities: It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer,
a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other
public areas. Such plan shall be presented annually to the village board and, upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the "official
comprehensive village tree plan for the village of Lyons, state of Illinois". The forestry review board, when requested by the village board, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. (1965 Code § 5-
4-13)
E. Operation; Rules: The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. (1965 Code § 5-4-14)
F. Review By Village Board: The village board shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the forestry review board. Any person may
appeal from any ruling or order of the forestry review board to the village board who may hear the matter and make the final decision. (1965 Code § 5-
4-15)
G. Interference With Forestry Board: It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the forestry review board or any of its agents
while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on private
grounds as authorized in this chapter. (1965 Code § 5-4-5)
5-7-3: ARBORISTS:
A. License Required; Fee: It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing trees within
the village without first applying for and procuring a license. The fee for the license shall be as provided in section 4-1-3 of this code; provided,
however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or village employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service
endeavors.
B. Liability Insurance: Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum
amounts of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for property damage,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 108/307
indemnifying the village or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. The noncommercial
removal of trees in excess of twenty feet (20') in height and twenty four inches (24") in circumference shall require the listed insurance in addition to the
mandatory license. (1965 Code § 5-4-45; amd. 2009 Code)
5-7-4: PUBLIC TREE CARE:
The village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares
and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The forestry
review board may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature, is
injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners; provided, that the selection and location of said trees is in
accordance with section 5-7-5 of this chapter. (1965 Code § 5-4-2)
5-7-5: TREE PLANTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required: No person shall plant, spray, trim or fasten any wire or rope to, or otherwise interfere with, the free growth of any tree or shrub on
village property without procuring a permit therefor as herein provided. (1965 Code § 5-4-50)
2. Application For Permit: Applications for a permit shall be made on blanks available at the village hall. Such application shall describe in detail the
variety, size and precise location of each tree and shrub that the applicant desires to plant, and the nature of all other work in connection with the
trees or shrubs that he intends to do. (1965 Code § 5-4-51)
3. Permit Issuance Procedure: If the proposed planting or work desired to be done is in accord with the provisions of this chapter, then the application
shall be considered and a permit may be issued thereon, as follows:
a. If the planting or work desired to be done is to be done in a parkway (i.e., in property adjoining a roadway and forming a part of a platted street), a
permit therefor may be issued by the forestry review board if the proposed planting or work complies with the village forestry plan. (1965 Code § 5-
4-52)
b. If the planting or work is to be done in a public park or other public place, except a parkway, the village forestry review board shall submit the
application for permit to the board of trustees, and if the village board finds that the proposed planting or work complies with the village forestry
plan and is in the public interest, the village board shall approve the application, and the permit shall be issued in accordance therewith. (1965
Code § 5-4-52; amd. 2009 Code)
4. Regulations Governing Permit: A permit for planting, trimming or care of trees or shrubs in public property may be granted if the request complies
with the requirements of this section and the village forestry plan. (1965 Code § 5-4-53)
B. Regulations Governing Planting: No tree shall be planted except in accordance with the following regulations:
1. No tree shall be planted where the soil is too poor to ensure the growth of such tree, unless the planter excavates a suitable hole of not less than
thirty six (36) cubic feet and replaces the material removed with loam or other suitable soil.
2. No street tree shall be planted in any parkway adjoining a roadway where the clear space between the curb and the sidewalk is less than six feet
(6').
3. No street trees shall be planted within six feet (6') from the driveway or within ten feet (10') from a street lamp or other public utility structure.
4. No street tree shall be planted closer than thirty five feet (35') from any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb
lines.
5. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') from any fireplug.
6. No street trees, other than those species listed as small trees in subsection D of this section, may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of
any overhead utility wire or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility structure.
7. The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed in
subsection D of this section, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following:
Small and medium trees 3 feet
Large trees 4 feet
(1965 Code § 5-4-20)
C. Spacing: The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed in subsection D of this section, and no trees may
be planted closer together than the following:
Small trees 30 feet
Medium trees 40 feet
Large trees 50 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 109/307
except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. (1965 Code § 5-4-21)
D. Species Of Street Trees Permitted:
1. The following species of trees can be planted on parkways:
Small Trees (20 To 35 Feet Tall):
Callery pear
Globe Norway maple
Mountain ash
Tatarian maple
Washington hawthorn
Medium Trees (35 To 60 Feet Tall):
Amur cork tree
Amur maple
Birch
Crimean linden
Green ash
Hedge maple
Littleleaf linden
Norway maple
Red maple
Large Trees (Over 60 Feet Tall):
American elm
Gingko
London planetree
River birch
Scarlet oak
Shingle oak
Sugar maple
Swamp white oak
Thornless honey locust
2. No other species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the forestry review board. (1965
Code § 5-4-22)
E. Species Of Street Trees Prohibited:
Ailanthus (tree of heaven)
Any fruit tree
Black locust
Black walnut
Box elder
Catalpa
Chinese elm
Evergreens
Honey locust
Mulberry
Poplar (Lombardy, cottonwood, or silver)
Soft maple (silver)
Willow
(1965 Code § 5-4-23)
5-7-6: TREE TOPPING:
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or village department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
"Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires, or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from the provisions of this chapter at the determination of the village forestry
review board. (1965 Code § 5-4-3; amd. 2009 Code)
5-7-7: STUMP REMOVAL:
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground. (1965 Code § 5-4-4)
5-7-8: DEAD OR DISEASED TREES; UNCHECKED GROWTH2:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 110/307
A. Dead Or Diseased Trees: It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person, firm, or corporation, or any owner, agent, occupant or person in
possession, charge or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, building or other premises within the village or within its territorial jurisdiction to permit the
growth upon any premises within the village of any elm tree infected with a fungus disease of elms caused by Ophiostoma ulmi, commonly known as
Dutch elm disease, or any ash tree infected with Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire, commonly known as the emerald ash borer. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of any property in the village to keep or maintain any such infected tree or deadwood on his or her property.
B. Unchecked Growth: It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person, firm, or corporation, or any owner, agent, occupant or person in
possession, charge or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, building or other premises within the village or within its territorial jurisdiction to permit the
unchecked growth upon any premises within the village of any trees without trimming the same in such a manner as to prevent any part of such trees
from crossing property lines or overhanging or obstructing views along the sidewalk, parkway, street or highway, as the same shall be determined by
the public works department.
C. Owner/Occupant Responsibilities:
1. Every owner or occupant of real estate within the village upon whose property there is located an elm tree infected with Dutch elm disease or an ash
tree infected with the emerald ash borer shall remove the same immediately upon discovering it or be notified of it, by cutting the same down. The
tree so cut down, together with all of its limbs, shall be cut into lengths not to exceed five feet (5') and placed upon the parkway to be removed by the
village. Upon so cutting the trees and placing them upon the parkway, the owner of said property shall notify the public works department in order
that the same may be removed by the village or its designee.
2. Every owner or occupant of real estate within the village shall trim or remove any and all trees and the limbs thereof on his or her property and on
the abutting parkway at all such times as may be necessary to prevent the same from crossing property lines or overhanging or obstructing views
along the sidewalk, parkway, street or highway, as the same shall be determined by the public works department.
D. Notice To Remediate And Abate Nuisance: It shall be the duty of the code enforcement director to cause notice to be served upon the owner or
occupant of any premises on which landscaping conditions are in violation of the provisions of this section and to demand the abatement of the
nuisance within thirty (30) days. The "notice to remediate and abate nuisance" may be served either in person or by registered mail. Such notice shall
provide information regarding the existence of infected or overgrown trees on the owner's property, and shall notify the owner that he or she must abate
the nuisance(s) within thirty (30) days. Such notice shall also contain a copy of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-12 and the ordinance codified
herein and notify the owner that the village may remove or trim the tree(s) and place a lien on the property for the cost of the removal if the nuisance is
not abated within thirty (30) days.
E. Abatement By Village: If the person served with a "notice to remediate and abate nuisance" under this section shall fail, refuse or neglect to abate the
nuisance within thirty (30) days, the director of public works shall proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of all related expenses. Such
expenses shall be charged to and paid by the owner or occupant.
F. Payment Of Charges; Lien Provisions:
1. Rendition Of Bill: If trees are cut, trimmed or removed by the village or by someone directed to perform the same on behalf of the village, the village
shall send a bill for the cost and expense thereof to the property owner, his agent or legal representative or occupant in legal possession or control of
the premises.
2. Failure To Pay; Notice Of Lien:
a. If said bill is not paid in full within thirty (30) days of the date of said bill, the village shall cause a notice of lien of the cost and expense thereof
incurred by the village to be recorded in the following manner: The village or the person performing the service by authority of the village, in its, his
or her own name, may file a notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds, or the office of the county registrar of titles, if the real estate
affected is registered under the Torrens system. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
(2) The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service; and
(3) The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the village or someone working on behalf of the village.
b. Such notice of lien shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the cost and expense is incurred. After recording, the notice of lien, together with
copies of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-12 and the ordinance codified herein, shall be sent by registered mail or hand delivered to the
property owner, his agent or legal representative or occupant in legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to the person who
received the tax bill for the preceding year.
3. Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the cost and expense after the notice of lien has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the
village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded of record in the same manner as recording the notice of
lien.
4. Foreclosure Of Lien: Subsequent to the filing of the above described lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure of such lien, or
upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the premises or real estate, by answer to the complaint, or in the nature of an intervening
petition or cross complaint, the village may proceed in its corporate name to foreclose such lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this
section shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the monies owing the village. (Ord. 02-19-
08-03, 2-19-2008)
5-7-9: DUTIES OF OWNERS OF TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY3:
A. Obstructing View: No person shall plant, grow or maintain any tree, shrub, bush or flower that obstructs the view of motorists, cyclists or pedestrians in
such a way as to constitute a danger to the public in the use of the streets, alleys and sidewalks of the village. (1965 Code § 5-4-35)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 111/307
B. Obstructing Streetlights: The owner and the tenant of every lot or parcel of land upon which any trees are now or may hereafter be growing shall trim, or
cause to be trimmed, the branches thereof so that the same shall not obstruct the passage of light from any streetlight in any street, alley or highway to
the adjacent street or sidewalk. (1965 Code § 5-4-36)
C. Trees Overhanging Streets And Sidewalks: Every owner shall trim all branches of any trees now or hereafter growing on his premises which overhang
any sidewalk, street, alley or public highway so that there shall be a clear height of eight feet (8') above the surface of the street or sidewalk. (1965
Code § 5-4-37)
D. Dead Trees On Private Property: Every owner of a parcel of land shall remove all dead, decayed or broken limbs or branches that overhang any
sidewalk, street, alley or public highway. When any of such trees are dead, such owner shall remove the same so that they shall not fall in the street,
alley or public highway. (1965 Code § 5-4-38)
E. Authority To Remove Or Prune: The village shall have the right to prune or remove any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the
proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, at the expense of the property
owner, if the owner fails to do so, upon fifteen (15) days' written notice by the forestry review board. (1965 Code § 5-4-39)
F. Adequate Guards; Preventing Injury: Anyone doing construction, repair or maintenance work on any property adjoining parks, parkways or other public
property shall place adequate guards around nearby trees and shrubs in such parks, parkways or other public property so as to prevent injury to such
trees. Machinery and implements shall be used in such manner as not to destroy any trees or shrubs on public property. (1965 Code § 5-4-40)
5-7-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction thereof, or a plea of guilty, punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(1965 Code § 5-4-6)
Footnote 1: See section 1-7-6 of this code for records and tape recording requirements.
Footnote 2: See also section 5-7-9 of this chapter.
Footnote 3: See also section 5-7-8 of this chapter.
Title 6
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION1
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 3 of this code for alarm system regulations.
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
6-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
A department to be hereafter known as the Lyons fire department, the object of which shall be the prevention and extinguishment of fire and the protection
of life and property within the corporate limits of the village, is hereby created. (1965 Code § 8-1-1)
6-1-2: FIRE CHIEF:
A. Appointment, Qualifications, Term: The fire department shall be headed by a chief, who shall be appointed by the village manager, and his tenure in
office shall depend upon his good conduct and efficiency. The chief shall be technically qualified by training and experience and shall have the ability to
command people and hold their respect and confidence. (Ord. 04-21-09-04, 4-21-2009)
B. Powers And Duties:
1. Generally: The fire chief shall have control, subject to the order and direction of the president and board of trustees, of the fire department and of all
fire apparatus belonging to the village. Whenever any fire apparatus needs repairing, the fire chief shall cause same to be done without delay. The
chief shall be held accountable to the president and board of trustees only and shall make written and verbal reports thereto as the president and
board of trustees may require. All other department companies and officers shall be accountable to the chief.
2. Determine Department Composition: The fire chief shall determine the number and kind of divisions, platoons and companies of which the fire
department is to be composed and shall determine the response of such platoons and companies.
3. Monthly Training: The fire chief shall monitor training and operations concerning the handling of equipment, first aid, rescue work, salvage, a study of
buildings in the village, fire prevention, water supplies and all other matters considered essential to good firemanship and safety of life and property
from fire.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 112/307
4. Records: The fire chief shall see that complete records are kept on all fires, inspections, apparatus and minor equipment, personnel and other
information about the work of the department.
5. Reports:
a. The fire chief shall submit a monthly report to the president and board of trustees containing a statistical analysis of the activities of the firefighting
division, training division, fire prevention bureau, mechanical division and personnel division of the department.
b. The fire chief shall make a complete annual report to the president and board of trustees within one month after the close of the fiscal year. Such
report shall include the information specified in subsection B5a of this section, together with comparative data for previous years and
recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the department. (1965 Code § 8-1-2; amd. 2009 Code)
6-1-3: COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT:
A. Officers And Members:
1. Designated: One deputy chief, one assistant chief, three (3) captains, five (5) lieutenants and such additional members of the fire department as may
from time to time be prescribed by the president and board of trustees shall constitute the remainder of the fire department, and they shall function as
provided by the rules and regulations of the fire department.
2. Paid On Call Firefighters:
a. Appointment, Qualifications: The department shall be made up of paid on call firefighters, the number of which shall be determined by the
president and board of trustees upon the chief's recommendation. The members shall be appointed by the chief. They shall be able bodied
citizens. Determination of whether applicants for appointment are able bodied shall be made by the chief after a medical and physical examination
has been made in a manner prescribed by the chief.
b. Suspension, Hearing: Any member of the department may be suspended or discharged from the department by the chief and/or a disciplinary
review committee at any time that such action is deemed necessary for the good of the department. On written request of such member to the
president and board of trustees, he shall be given a hearing, public or private, at his discretion, on the charges brought by the chief.
B. Inspectors: The fire chief may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The fire chief shall
recommend to the village the employment of technical inspectors who, when such authorization is made, shall work with the fire chief and the building
department. (1965 Code § 8-1-3)
6-1-4: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
A. Bureau Established: The bureau of fire prevention in the fire department is hereby established and shall be operated under the supervision of the chief
of the fire department.
B. Annual Report: A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the village president. It shall contain all proceedings
under the fire prevention code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein. (1965 Code § 8-1-4)
6-1-5: FIRE PROTECTION TRAINING:
A. Participation In State Programs: The village hereby elects to participate in the programs provided for in the Illinois fire protection training act1.
B. Fire Certification Required: As a firefighter, an individual must be certified by the Illinois state fire marshal as firefighter II and as having successfully
completed an approved training course as provided in said act. The firefighter II training must be completed by the trainee within his/her probationary
period.
C. EMT Certification Required: All personnel having ambulance related duties must be certified as an EMT "A" (emergency medical technician ambulance)
by the Illinois department of public health. Such training and certification must be completed by the trainee within his/her probationary period. (1965
Code § 8-1-5)
6-1-6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
A. Fire Prevention Duties: It shall be the function and duty of the fire department and every member thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires and
to prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires.
B. Police Powers: All regularly appointed members of the department are hereby given the necessary special police powers for the purpose of enforcing
the provisions of this title. (1965 Code § 8-1-6)
6-1-7: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the officers and members of the fire department shall be prescribed from time to time by the village president and board of trustees.
(1965 Code § 8-1-7)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 113/307
6-1-8: FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND:
There shall be a firefighters' pension fund established in the village as provided by statute. (1965 Code § 8-1-8)
6-1-9: BADGE ISSUED:
Each member of the fire department shall be issued a badge designating his rank. (1965 Code § 8-1-9)
6-1-10: FIRE APPARATUS AND EQUIPMENT:
A. Apparatus And Equipment Required: The fire department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to
time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire.
B. Purchases: Recommendations for the apparatus and equipment needed pursuant to this section shall be made by the fire chief. Said recommendation
shall be approved by, and after approval, shall be purchased in such manner as may be designated by, the president and board of trustees.
C. Storage Locations: All equipment of the fire department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such place as may be designated by the president
and board of trustees.
D. Prohibited Acts:
1. Improper Use: No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose.
2. Injury To Equipment: No person shall wilfully or negligently break, deface or in any manner injure any fire engine hose, equipment or other fire
apparatus belonging to the fire department. (1965 Code § 8-1-10)
Footnote 1: 50 ILCS 740/1 et seq.
Chapter 2
MUTUAL FIRE AID PROGRAM
6-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a program of mutual aid between the village and other municipalities, whereby such municipality will be
obligated to come to the assistance of a neighboring municipality in the event of an emergency, fire or other disaster therein of such magnitude that the
local fire equipment and personnel cannot effectively cope with it. (1965 Code § 8-4-1)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AIDING MUNICIPALITY: A municipality furnishing fire equipment and personnel to a stricken municipality or to another aiding municipality.
MUNICIPALITY: A city or village.
MUTUAL AID AREA: The territory occupied within the village limits and other areas protected by the following departments and districts: Argonne,
Bolingbrook, Brookfield, Clarendon Heights, Clarendon Hills, Downers Grove, Downers Grove Estates, Forest View, Hinsdale, La Grange, La Grange
Park, Lemont, Lyons, McCook, Pleasantview fire district, Riverside, Tri-State protection district, Western Springs, Westmont, and Romeoville in Cook and
DuPage Counties.
MUTUAL FIRE AID PROGRAM: A plan or program as provided for in this chapter whereby the municipalities participating in the program agree to come to
one anther's assistance in case of emergency, fire or other disaster too large for local equipment and personnel to handle.
PARTICIPATING MUNICIPALITY: A municipality, in the mutual aid area, that participates in the mutual fire aid program by adopting an ordinance
authorizing or approving the program and entering into an appropriate agreement (substantially as provided herein) with other participating municipalities
for rendering and receiving aid in case of emergency, fire or other disaster.
STRICKEN MUNICIPALITY: A participating municipality in which an emergency, fire or other disaster occurs that is of such magnitude that it cannot be
adequately coped with by local fire equipment and personnel. (1965 Code § 8-4-2; amd. 2009 Code)
6-2-3: MUTUAL FIRE AID AGREEMENT:
The president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, hereby authorizes the chief of the fire department, on behalf of the village, to
enter into, and from time to time amend, an agreement with any or all of the municipalities in the mutual aid area defining and putting into effect a mutual
fire aid program, providing generally as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 114/307
A. Request For Aid: In the event that, in the judgment of the officer in charge of the fire department of a stricken municipality, the available fire equipment
and personnel of that municipality are inadequate to effectively cope with an emergency, fire or other disaster therein, said officer may call on a
neighboring participating municipality to furnish fire equipment and personnel (to the extent specified in the agreement) to the stricken municipality for
use either: 1) in assisting at an emergency; or 2) in combating a fire or other disaster; or 3) as a standby reserve to meet other calls that may occur
before the local fire equipment is free to take care of them.
B. Request For Standby Reserve: Each aiding municipality furnishing fire equipment and personnel to a stricken municipality shall have the right to call on
another participating municipality for fire equipment and personnel (to the extent specified in the agreement) as a standby reserve to take the place, in
part, of the equipment and personnel furnished to the stricken municipality until such equipment and personnel shall be returned.
C. Limitation On Furnishing Personnel And Equipment: On receipt of a call under subsection A or B of this section, the aiding municipality called upon shall
(to the extent provided in the agreement) furnish the equipment and personnel called for by the stricken municipality or by the aiding municipality;
except, that each municipality may always be permitted to retain sufficient fire equipment and personnel to fight any fire or to meet any emergency
within its own boundaries that may reasonably be anticipated. (1965 Code § 8-4-3)
6-2-4: MUTUAL FIRE AID PROGRAM ADOPTED:
A. A mutual fire aid program conforming to the provisions of section 6-2-3 of this chapter has been agreed upon by the respective fire chiefs of the
departments and districts of: Argonne, Bolingbrook, Brookfield, Clarendon Heights, Clarendon Hills, Downers Grove, Downers Grove Estates, Forest
View, Hinsdale, La Grange, La Grange Park, Lemont, Lyons, McCook, Pleasantview fire district, Riverside, Tri-State fire protection district, Western
Springs, Westmont, and Romeoville in either Cook or DuPage County, and has been submitted to the authorities of the village. This mutual fire aid
program is subject to change or abrogation by action of the president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and the fire chief of
the village, pursuant to section 6-2-3 of this chapter.
B. Unless and until so changed or abrogated, the mutual fire aid program is ratified as a binding agreement between the village and all other municipalities
who shall have adopted said program and shall have assumed the obligations thereby imposed upon them. (1965 Code § 8-4-4)
6-2-5: AUTHORITY TO SEND EQUIPMENT OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS:
The fire chief and the officers of the fire department shall have the authority to send fire equipment and personnel outside the corporate limits of the
village, as provided in the mutual fire aid program agreed to herein, whenever requested to do so by the officers or authorities of any participating
municipality that has agreed to conform to said program and has assumed the obligations imposed upon it thereby; provided, that the fire equipment and
personnel can be spared from service at the time the request is made. (1965 Code § 8-4-5)
Chapter 3
AMBULANCE SERVICE
6-3-1: TRANSPORT TO SPECIFIC LOCATIONS:
A. Locations Specified: The ambulances of the fire department shall be used to transport persons in emergency cases to the following hospitals and clinics
only:
1. Hines Hospital, Hines, Illinois.
2. John J. Madden Clinic, Maywood, Illinois.
3. La Grange Memorial Hospital, La Grange, Illinois.
4. Loyola-Foster G. McGaw Hospital, Maywood, Illinois.
5. MacNeal Hospital, Berwyn, Illinois.
6. Mount Sinai Hospital And Medical Center (child abuse cases only), Chicago, Illinois.
B. Deviation; Mutual Aid Call: Deviation from the hospitals and clinics listed in subsection A of this section is allowed only when operating on a mutual aid
call. (1965 Code § 8-1-11)
6-3-2: FEES:
A. Base Rates:
BLS:
Resident $ 600.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 115/307
Nonresident 1,000.00
ALS:
Resident 700.00
Nonresident 1,200.00
ALS 2:
Resident 800.00
Nonresident 1,400.00
Mileage 15.00 per mile
(Ord. 09-18-13-O2, 9-18-2013)
B. Riverside Lawn Fire Protection: The fire protection fee for Riverside Lawn for the calendar/fiscal year shall be two thousand one hundred dollars
($2,100.00). (1965 Code § 8-1-11; amd. 2009 Code)
6-3-3: AUTHORITY IN CHARGE:
When the service of an ambulance and/or rescue squad is called for, the highest ranking EMS member of the unit shall be in charge of the emergency and
will be responsible for all orders given and action taken. When the situation demands that the police, at the time of emergency, lend assistance, they shall
follow the orders of the member in charge of the unit. The authority of the fire department member extends only to the well being of the injured and not to
the administrative police matters in connection with the emergency calls not involving the incident. (1965 Code § 8-1-11)
6-3-4: VIOLATIONS; DISCIPLINARY ACTION:
A. Any member of the fire department violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to disciplinary action by the fire chief. Any other village
employee violating any of the provisions of this chapter while in the course of their employment shall be subject to disciplinary action by the employee's
department head.
B. Any members of the fire department, public works department, or the police department violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
disciplinary action by either the fire chief, the director of public works or the police chief, pursuant to any applicable labor agreement then in force.
(1965 Code § 8-1-11)
Chapter 4
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
6-4-1: CODES ADOPTED:
A. Adoption Of Codes: For the purposes of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the village
hereby adopts the following model codes:
1. NFPA life safety code 101 (2000 edition).
2. BOCA fire prevention code (1999 edition).
3. NFPA fire prevention code (2000 edition).
4. NFPA 33, standard for spray application using flammable or combustible materials (2000 edition).
5. NFPA 88B, standard for repair garages (2000 edition).
B. Conflicts; Stricter Standards Prevail: Wherein any one of the above codes conflicts with the other or with another adopted code, the stricter standard
shall apply. (1965 Code § 8-2-1)
C. Copies On File: One copy of each of the codes adopted in subsection A of this section is on file in the village offices for public use and inspection. (2009
Code)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases, when used in the fire codes adopted in section 6-4-1 of this chapter, shall have the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 116/307
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
GASES: Those gases as indicated in article 8, section 8.1 of the BOCA fire prevention code, 1999 edition, entitled "Scope"; provided, however, that said
section 8.1 shall be amended by adding thereto the following:
Whenever the word "gases" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean those gases as indicated in article 8, section 8.1 of the fire
prevention code, 1976 edition, entitled "Scope"; provided, however, that said section 8.1 shall be amended by adding thereto the following: This
article shall apply to bulk oxygen systems, the storage, handling and use of compressed gases, the gases liquified by means of low temperatures or
cryogenic temperatures.
MUNICIPALITY: The village of Lyons, Illinois.
VILLAGE ATTORNEY: The attorney for the village. (1965 Code § 8-2-2; amd. 2009 Code)
6-4-3: AMENDMENTS:
A. Automatic Sprinkler Systems: Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in all buildings as specified by the codes adopted by the village. Installation of such
systems shall further be required in all new commercial or industrial buildings having five thousand (5,000) square feet total building area or greater.
B. Fire Detection, Alarm And Communication Systems: All new buildings containing apartments (over 3 stories or more than 11 units), assembly, business,
correctional, daycare, educational, hotels/dormitories, healthcare and ambulatory healthcare, high rise, industrial, mercantile, residential board and
care and/or rooming houses shall have a fire detection, alarm and communication system installed. Existing buildings changing to one or more of the
above use groups shall be required to comply with this subsection. Buildings having one or more of the above uses shall further be required to install
such systems prior to sale of same. The design and installation of fire detection, alarm and communication systems shall be in compliance with the
adopted codes of the village. Apartment buildings having less than eleven (11) units or under three (3) stories in height shall have a hard wired smoke
detection system installed, but do not have to have an alarm or communication system. Such detection system shall be designed and installed
pursuant to the requirements of the adopted village codes. The fire chief shall have the authority to modify this requirement based upon the fire risk or
lack thereof associated with the building or use.
C. Spray Booths: All new and existing spray booths shall comply with NFPA standard 33, standard for spray application using flammable or combustible
materials (2000 edition). The authority having jurisdiction shall have authority to modify the requirements of this standard based upon the practical
difficulty of compliance and inherent risk factors associated with the building and use.
D. Automotive Repair Facilities: All new and existing automotive repair facilities shall comply with NFPA standard 88B, standard for repair garages. The
authority having jurisdiction shall have authority to modify the requirements of this standard based upon the practical difficulty of compliance and
inherent risk factors associated with the building and use. (1965 Code § 8-2-3)
6-4-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The fire chief shall be the authority having jurisdiction for this chapter. (1965 Code § 8-2-9)
6-4-5: FIRE LIMITS; STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES OR FLAMMABLES:
A. Storage Of Explosives And Blasting Agents: The limits referred to in the codes adopted in section 6-4-1 of this chapter in which the storage of
flammable liquids and/or gases in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as follows: All business zoned, industrial zoned and
residentially zoned property in the village except as permitted by the fire chief.
B. Flammable Liquids And Gases:
1. The limits referred to in the codes adopted in section 6-4-1 of this chapter in which the storage of flammable liquids and/or gases in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as follows: All business zoned, industrial zoned and residentially zoned property in the
village except as permitted by the fire chief.
2. The limits referred to in the codes adopted in section 6-4-1 of this chapter in which the bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids and/or gases
are prohibited are hereby established as follows: All business zoned, industrial zoned and residentially zoned property in the village except as
permitted by the fire chief.
C. Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gas: The limits referred to in the codes adopted in section 6-4-1 of this chapter in which bulk storage of liquefied
petroleum gas is restricted are hereby established as follows: All business zoned and residentially zoned property in the village. (1965 Code § 8-2-5;
amd. 2009 Code)
6-4-6: VEHICLE ROUTES FOR TRANSPORTING DANGEROUS MATERIALS:
A. Explosives And Blasting Agents: The routes referred to in the codes adopted in section 6-4-1 of this chapter for vehicles transporting explosives and
blasting agents are hereby established as follows: First Avenue (Route 171) only.
B. Hazardous Chemicals: The routes referred to in the codes adopted in section 6-4-1 of this chapter for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and
other dangerous articles are hereby established as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 117/307
1. Interstate Transport: The route for interstate shipments is First Avenue (Route 171) only. No stopping or parking of vehicles of interstate shipment
shall be allowed within the limits of the village except for the purpose of inspection by the fire prevention bureau to ensure compliance with the codes
adopted in section 6-4-1 of this chapter.
2. Intrastate Transport: The route for intrastate shipments shall be determined by the fire chief at the time of issuance of a permit, as the route will differ
depending on the destination of vehicles within the village. (1965 Code § 8-2-6; amd. 2009 Code)
6-4-7: FIRE LANES:
The fire lanes referred to in the codes adopted in section 6-4-1 of this chapter are hereby established as follows: Fire lanes shall be those lanes
designated and required by the fire chief. (1965 Code § 8-2-7; amd. 2009 Code)
6-4-8: ACCESS KEY BOXES:
The fire chief shall have authority to require an approved key box containing keys necessary to gain access to buildings and building areas, for all
occupancies having a fire alarm system. The fire chief may further require such boxes for all other occupancies as he deems necessary for life saving or
firefighting purposes. (1965 Code § 8-2-8)
6-4-9: NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter shall be noticed through the following process:
A. Violators shall first be issued a notice of violation which depicts the violation, the required compliance and a compliance deadline. A reasonable time
period shall be given for compliance, taking into account the immediacy of the hazard or risk and time required for corrections. Written warnings are not
required for repeat violations occurring within the same twelve (12) month period.
B. Upon expiration of the compliance time, or upon discovery of a repeat violation within the same twelve (12) month period, the enforcing agent may issue
a citation, seek a criminal warrant or seek remedies as provided for by law. (1965 Code § 8-2-10)
6-4-10: APPEAL:
Notices of violation may be appealed to the Lyons fire review committee, provided the required application and filing fee are submitted to the building
department prior to the expiration of the compliance time. The criteria for successful appeal shall be one of the following: a) the violation does not exist; b)
the code was misapplied; or c) the code was misinterpreted. The fire review committee shall consist of the fire chief, village manager, village president,
trustee liaison and building director. (1965 Code § 8-2-12)
6-4-11: PENALTIES:
A violation of this chapter may be prosecuted by code hearing adjudication, civil litigation or criminal process. Each day in violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense. Civil fines shall be no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day. Criminal violations shall be a misdemeanor,
punishable by a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and/or incarceration of not
more than sixty (60) days, per offense. The village shall not be limited by this section in seeking any and all remedies as provided for by state statutes.
(1965 Code § 8-2-11)
Chapter 5
GENERAL FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
6-5-1: OPEN BURNING1:
No open burning of leaves, uprooted weeds, grass clippings, waste materials, garbage, refuse products, glass or metal containers, paper, wood,
cardboard, ashes and cinders and discarded furniture and clothing shall be permitted upon any private lot or public ground within the village limits. (1965
Code § 8-3-1)
6-5-2: STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLES, REFUSE AND YARD WASTE ON PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse or materials in such way as to create a fire hazard, or to store or throw any refuse or materials
of any kind on any street, alley or other public place2. (1965 Code § 8-3-2)
6-5-3: BONFIRES:
It shall be unlawful to build or light a bonfire on any public street or sidewalk pavement or so close to any building or other structure as to endanger such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 118/307
building or structure. (1965 Code § 8-3-3)
6-5-4: FALSE FIRE ALARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or spread or maliciously turn in or cause to be turned in any false alarm in the village. (1965 Code § 8-
3-4)
6-5-5: OUTDOOR FIREPLACES AND RECREATION FIRES:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
OUTDOOR FIREPLACE: A unit constructed or manufactured, with all the design components in place, that is listed by Underwriter's Laboratories, or
comparable testing agency, that is designed to burn a limited quantity of wood which is burned for recreational purposes and which is designed so as to
contain the ashes and/or embers while in use and when the user is finished.
RECREATIONAL FIRE: A fire ignited and burned in a location outside of a structure for the purposes of amusement and not for the destruction of
refuse, cooking or heating purposes.
B. Recreational Fires: Recreational fires are permitted on residential and other properties subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
1. All such fires shall be contained at all times within an "outdoor fireplace", as defined in subsection A of this section.
2. All such fires shall be in locations that are clear of buildings or structures, electrical lines, and other hazards.
3. No such fire shall be permitted on wooden structures, balconies, porches or other areas attached to any building.
4. All such fires shall be attended at all times by an adult of not less than eighteen (18) years of age, and at all times there shall be a ready source of
water available to immediately extinguish the fire.
5. No person shall cause or allow the smoke or odors from a recreational fire to go beyond the boundaries of his/her property, so as to cause a
nuisance to neighboring properties.
C. Outdoor Fireplaces: Outdoor fireplaces shall not be modified or otherwise altered to create larger fires. Such fireplaces shall at all times be operated
within the manufacturer's specifications and allow for adequate collection of ash. Outdoor fireplaces shall be limited to the burning of firewood only. The
burning of garbage, trash, refuse or similar items is prohibited.
D. Authority To Require Extinguishment: The fire chief or his/her designee shall have the authority to require the immediate extinguishment of a
recreational fire, if he/she deems it necessary, for whatever reason and at any and all times. (1965 Code § 8-3-5)
6-5-6: RENTAL OF EQUIPMENT FOR FIRE USE:
The owner of property on which a fire has occurred is responsible for the actual costs incurred by the village for the use or rental of any equipment or
services not owned by the village or any fire departments providing mutual aid used to fight a fire on the owner's land. (1965 Code § 8-6-1)
Footnote 1: See also section 5-5-11 of this code.
Footnote 2: See also section 5-5-8 of this code.
Chapter 6
EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS1
6-6-1: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required; Revocation; Amount Of Explosives:
1. No person shall have, keep, sell, use, store or give away any gunpowder, guncotton, blasting powder, giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerin,
fulminate of mercury or any other explosives or combustible materials or other substance or compound or article having properties of such character
that it alone or in combination or contiguity with other substances or compounds may decompose suddenly and generate sufficient heat or gas or
pressure, or all of them, to produce rapid flaming combustion or administer a destructive blow to persons or property; or keep, sell, use, store, offer
for sale, transport or give away any loaded paper or detonators within the corporate limits of the village, excepting in the manner and upon the
conditions herein provided and under a license issued by the duly authorized officer.
2. The village president shall have the power to revoke any such license so issued in case there is any infraction of any of the provisions of this
chapter. (1965 Code § 4-27-2; amd. 2009 Code)
3. The maximum amount of any and all such explosives or combustible materials to be so kept by any such person at any one time shall not exceed
twenty five (25) pounds and shall be stored in metal receptacles constructed and placed to the satisfaction of the chief of the fire department. (1965
Code § 4-27-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 119/307
B. Application For License: Any person desiring a license to keep, sell, use, store, offer for sale or give away any gunpowder, guncotton, blasting powder,
giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerin, fulminate of mercury, their products or any other explosive or combustible material or other substances referred
to in this chapter, or loaded paper or metallic shot fills or percussion caps or detonators shall make application in writing to the village clerk for a license
so to do. (1965 Code § 4-27-3; amd. 2009 Code)
C. Issuance Of License; Payment Of Fee: When a satisfactory investigation shall have been made by the president of the board of such application, the
president shall transmit the same to the board of trustees for approval, who thereupon shall refer the approved application to the village clerk who shall,
upon payment to him of a license fee as set forth in section 4-1-3 of this code, and upon order so to do, issue to such applicant a license therefor,
authorizing such applicant to keep, sell, use, store or give away at the place designated in his application the articles covered by said application. (1965
Code § 4-27-4; amd. 2009 Code)
D. Blasting Prohibited; Exception: No blasting operations shall be permitted except upon license granted by order of the president and board of trustees.
(1965 Code § 4-27-5)
6-6-2: BOND REQUIRED:
Previous to the issuance of any license as herein prescribed, applicants shall furnish and file with the clerk a bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) with sureties approved by the president and board of trustees, conditioned for the payment of any loss, damage or injury resulting to persons
or property by reason of the use, sale, keeping, storage or giving away of such explosives or combustible materials. (1965 Code § 4-27-6; amd. 2009
Code)
6-6-3: MIXING OR MANUFACTURE OF EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, assemble or mix, anywhere within the corporate limits of the village, any gunpowder, guncotton, blasting
powder, giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerin, nitrochlorate, fulminate of mercury, their products or other similar combustible or explosive materials. (1965
Code § 4-27-1)
6-6-4: TRANSPORTATION:
A. Certificate Of Fitness: No explosives or combustible materials shall be transported in any vehicle of any sort through the streets unless such vehicle is
in the charge of a competent person holding a certificate of fitness for such person to be issued by the chief of the fire department. Said certificate of
fitness shall be issued only to employees of persons duly licensed to transport, use, sell, keep, store or give away such explosives. (1965 Code § 4-27-
7)
B. Vehicle Requirements And Restrictions:
1. Metal Tools Restricted: No metal tools or other pieces of metal shall be carried within the vehicle except in a separate tool box, and no percussion
caps or detonators or other combustible materials shall be transported in the same vehicle with explosives or other combustible materials.
2. Operation Of Vehicle: The vehicle carrying explosives or combustible materials shall be able to draw the load, and it shall avoid stoppage other than
to load and unload, and no unnecessary stops or stands shall be made.
3. Leaving Vehicle Unattended: No explosives or combustible materials shall be left in a vehicle unless such a vehicle is in the charge of an employee
with the certificate of fitness issued to him as hereinabove provided, and no employee, driver or chauffeur of any such vehicle loaded with explosives
or other combustible materials shall leave it unattended.
4. Identification Markings: Any vehicle carrying explosives shall have painted on the sides and back thereof, in easily legible letters at least six inches
(6") high, the words "Dangerous - Explosives" and shall also have the owner's name displayed thereon to be read easily at a distance of one
hundred feet (100') on each side, and in the event that a licensee has more than one vehicle, each such vehicle shall be plainly lettered and
numbered.
5. Avoid Heavy Traffic Areas: A vehicle carrying explosives and combustible materials shall avoid, whenever possible, those streets on which there are
large numbers of persons or those highways and thoroughfares heavily traveled by motor or other vehicles.
6. Intoxicated Persons; Smoking: No intoxicated person shall be permitted on a vehicle carrying explosive or combustible materials, and no smoking
shall be permitted within ten feet (10') of a vehicle with explosives or other combustible materials. (1965 Code § 4-27-8)
C. Compliance Required: No person shall carry or transport, on any street or elevated car or public conveyance in any railroad car running from point to
point within the corporate limits of the village, any gunpowder, guncotton, giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerin, fulminate of mercury, their products or
explosives, or combustible materials of a similar nature, in violation of any provision of this chapter. (1965 Code § 4-27-9)
6-6-5: LABELING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, sell, use, keep, store, give away or deliver to any person within the corporate limits of the village any gunpowder,
guncotton, giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerin, fulminate of mercury or combustible materials of similar nature under any false or deceptive marking,
description or other declaration unless the package or receptacle containing such gunpowder, guncotton, giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerin, fulminate
of mercury or combustible materials of similar nature shall be plainly marked so as to inform the person receiving, transporting, storing, or using such
explosives or combustible materials of the true character thereof at or before the time such delivery is made. (1965 Code § 4-27-10)
6-6-6: MINORS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 120/307
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to sell, use deliver or give away to any minor under eighteen (18) years of age any gunpowder, giant
powder, dynamite, nitroglycerin, fulminate of mercury or combustible materials of similar nature or other dangerous explosives or combustible materials.
(1965 Code § 4-27-11)
6-6-7: STORAGE AREA:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, store, use or maintain any gunpowder, guncotton, giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerin, fulminate of mercury or
other explosives of similar nature or combustible materials within two hundred feet (200') of any public highway, street or alley, church, school or public
building or private dwelling, or of any other building, house or dwelling where persons live, congregate, meet or work. (1965 Code § 4-27-12)
Footnote 1: See also title 5, chapter 3 of this code.
Title 7
POLICE REGULATIONS
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 3 of this code for alarm system regulations.
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
7-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION:
A. Establishment: There is hereby continued, created and established an executive department of the Village to be known as the Police Department. Said
department shall consist of the offices and positions hereinafter enumerated and such others as may be provided from time to time. (1965 Code § 9-4-
1)
B. Composition: The Police Department shall consist of one Chief of Police, who shall be appointed by the Village Manager, one Deputy Chief, three (3)
Commanders and such Sergeants, Patrol Officers and any other employees as may be authorized by the Village Board from time to time.
C. Reduction Of Commanders: The Illinois Council of Police and the Village are parties to a collective bargaining agreement scheduled to expire on
December 31, 2016. Pursuant to that agreement the Village shall not appoint a replacement for any Commander who resigns or retires after the
adoption of this subsection or the date that the collective bargaining agreement is approved by the Village, whichever occurs earlier. On January 1,
2017, any person on active duty holding the rank of Commander shall revert to the rank of Sergeant. (Ord. 06-04-14-O4, 6-4-2014)
7-1-2: SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT:
The Police Department shall at all times be subject to the orders and directions of the Village Manager and all rules and regulations of the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners. (1965 Code § 9-4-3)
7-1-3: POLICE CHIEF POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Management Of Department: The Chief of Police shall have the management and control of all matters relating to the Police Department, its officers
and members, subject to orders and directions of the Village Manager, and all rules and regulations of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. He
shall have the custody and control of the offices, stations, equipment, books, records and other property belonging to said department. (1965 Code § 9-
4-4)
B. Keeping Records: The Chief of Police, or someone designated by him for that purpose, shall keep a suitable record of all arrests and enter thereon the
number of arrests, date, name of prisoner, charge, name of officer making arrest, name of the court trying the charge, amount of fine imposed and the
costs, if any, and such other and further information as may be necessary or essential for the maintenance of said records for future reference, and
shall furnish a monthly report thereof to the President and Board of Trustees. (1965 Code § 9-4-5)
7-1-4: DEPUTY CHIEF:
The position of Deputy Chief is created. One Deputy Chief shall be appointed by the Chief of Police and is not subject to the appointment authority of the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. (Ord. 06-04-14-O4, 6-4-2014)
7-1-5: DEPARTMENT MEMBERS; POWERS, DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 121/307
A. Duties And Powers:
1. Duties Generally: The members of the police force, when on duty, shall devote their time and attention to the discharge of the duties of their stations,
according to the laws of the state and provisions of this code, and the rules and regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners and the
department, to preserve order, peace and quiet, and enforce the laws. (1965 Code § 9-4-8)
2. Power To Arrest: The members of the police force shall have power to arrest all persons found in the act of violating any law or provision of this code
or aiding and abetting in any such violation, and shall arrest any person found under circumstances which would warrant a reasonable person to
believe that such person had committed or is about to commit a crime. (1965 Code § 9-4-9)
B. Serving Warrants: The members of the police force shall have power and authority, and it shall be their duty, to serve and execute warrants and other
processes for the summoning, apprehension, and commitment of any person charged with a violation of any provisions of this code, or with any crime
or misdemeanor, or offense against the laws of the village or state. (1965 Code § 9-4-10)
C. Aiding Fire Department: It shall be the duty of the members of the police force to aid the fire department by giving alarms in case of fire and by clearing
the streets or grounds in the immediate vicinity of a fire so that the members of the fire department shall not be hindered or obstructed in the
performance of their duties. (1965 Code § 9-4-11)
D. Report Excavations: It shall be the duty of every police officer, on observing or being informed of any opening or excavation in any public way, to require
the person making such opening or excavation to exhibit the authority or permission therefor. If none has been given by the proper officer, or if such
exhibition thereof be refused, such police officer shall, without delay, report the same to the director of public works, and shall immediately arrest the
person so unlawfully making such excavation. (1965 Code § 9-4-12)
E. Assignment Of Duty: No member of the police force shall be assigned to any duty other than that strictly in the line of police work, except as herein
otherwise provided. (1965 Code § 9-4-16)
F. Attire Of Personnel: No member of the police force, except members thereof assigned to detective or confidential duty, shall wear citizen's dress while
on duty. (1965 Code § 9-4-17)
G. Badge Required: The chief of police shall have power and authority to prescribe an appropriate form of badge to be worn by members of the
department by which, and at all times, the authority and relation of such officers and members of said department may be known. He shall make
suitable regulations as to the wearing of such badge. Every member of the department of police shall wear a suitable badge. Any member who shall
lose or destroy the badge furnished by the village shall be required to pay the cost of replacing such badge. Whenever any member shall leave the
department, he shall immediately deliver his badge to the chief of police. (1965 Code § 9-4-18; amd. 2009 Code)
H. Resignations: No person shall resign any position on the police force except on two (2) weeks' notice in writing given to the chief of police and the board
of fire and police commissioners of the village. (1965 Code § 9-4-19)
7-1-6: COMPENSATION:
The compensation to be paid the members of the police force shall be fixed by the village president and board of trustees by the annual budget. (1965
Code § 9-4-21; amd. 2009 Code)
7-1-7: OATH OF OFFICE:
A. Form Of Oath: All members of the police department shall, before entering upon their duties as police officers, take and subscribe to an oath of office
substantially in the following form:
I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Illinois and that I will faithfully enforce the provisions of
the Village Code of Lyons and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of Police Officer of the Village to the best of my ability.
B. Swearing Of Oath: Said oath shall be subscribed and sworn to before some officer authorized by the laws of the state to administer oaths and a
certificate thereof filed in the offices of the clerk and board of fire and police commissioners. (1965 Code § 9-4-22)
7-1-8: POLICE PENSION FUND:
A. Fund Established: There shall be a police pension fund established in the village, as provided by law. (1965 Code § 9-5-1)
B. Board Of Trustees Of Fund:
1. The board of trustees of the said fund shall consist of five (5) members, two (2) appointed by the village president, and two (2) elected from the
active participants of the pension fund by such active participants, and one elected by and from the beneficiaries of the pension fund. The elections
shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April, and the term of each member shall be two (2) years. (1965 Code § 9-5-2; amd. 2009 Code)
2. The pension board shall meet at least quarterly, as provided by law, and shall hold such additional meetings as may be called by the president of the
pension board. (1965 Code § 9-5-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 122/307
C. Disposition Of Funds: All monies derived from taxes levied under the provisions of 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-125, as amended, shall be set apart
by the treasurer to constitute the police pension fund. The following shall also constitute the monies included in said fund:
1. Contributions by police officers under 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-125.1.
2. All monies that may have been accumulated in conformity with any previous legislation establishing a fund for the benefit of disabled or retired police
officers.
3. Donations, gifts or other transfers authorized by state law. (1965 Code § 9-5-3; amd. 2009 Code)
7-1-9: LOST, STOLEN OR SEIZED PROPERTY:
A. Custodian Of Lost And Stolen Property: The chief of police shall appoint from among the members of the police force a custodian of lost and stolen
property. (1965 Code § 9-4-6)
B. Delivery Of Seized Property To Custodian: All officers and members of the department into whose possession may come any property seized or taken
shall deliver the same at once to the custodian unless it is wanted for immediate use as evidence in any case, and in that event, a report and inventory
of the same shall be forwarded at once to the custodian. (1965 Code § 9-4-7)
7-1-10: NEGLECT OF DUTY:
Any member of the police force who shall refuse or neglect to perform any duty required of him, when such refusal or neglect to perform any such duty
shall tend to hinder, obstruct, or impair in any way the proper and strict enforcement of any law or provision of this code, or the rules and regulations of the
board of fire and police commissioners, or the efficiency of the police force, is hereby declared to be no longer qualified to be a member of the police force,
and shall be tried for such violation in accordance with the rules and regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners. (1965 Code § 9-4-13)
7-1-11: RESISTING, INTERFERING WITH OFFICER:
Any person who shall resist any officer of the police department in the discharge of his duties or shall in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent him
from discharging his duty as such officer, or shall offer or endeavor to do so, and whoever shall in any manner assist any person in the custody of any
member of the police force to escape or attempt to escape from such custody, or attempt to rescue any person in custody, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1965 Code § 9-4-15)
7-1-12: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER:
No person shall falsely assume or pretend to be a police officer or a member of the department of police, or without being a member of the department of
police, wear in public the uniform adopted as the police uniform, or a reasonable facsimile thereof. No person shall counterfeit or imitate, or cause to be
counterfeited or imitated, any badge, sign, shoulder patch, signal or device adopted by the department of police, nor shall any person use or wear any
badge, sign, shoulder patch, signal or device adopted or used by said department, or any similar in appearance, without authority so to do from the chief of
police. (1965 Code § 9-4-20)
7-1-13: AUXILIARY POLICE:
The village president may, with the advice and consent of the village board of trustees, appoint auxiliary police in such number as may be from time to time
deemed necessary. Auxiliary police shall not be members of the regular police department of the village. Auxiliary police shall not supplement members of
the regular police department in the performance of their assigned and normal duties, except as provided below:
A. Duties: Auxiliary police may be assigned to perform only the follow in duties in the village:
1. To aid or direct traffic within the village.
2. To aid in control of natural or manmade disasters.
3. To aid in cases of civil disorder as directed by the chief of police.
B. Identification Symbols: Identification symbols worn by auxiliary police shall be different and distinct from those used by members of the Village Police
Department.
C. Police Chief Supervision: At all times during the performance of their duties, auxiliary police shall be subject to the direction and control of the Chief of
Police. (1965 Code § 9-4-27)
D. Firearms: Auxiliary police shall not carry firearms except with permission of the Chief of Police, and while in uniform and in the performance of their
duties, and after completion of training as set by State regulations.
E. Appointment Per State Law: Members of the auxiliary police shall be appointed from the residents of the Village as per State law. (1965 Code § 9-4-27;
amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 123/307
F. Training And Study Courses: Prior to entering upon any of their duties, auxiliary police shall:
1. Receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures as shall be appropriate to the exercise of the powers conferred
herein.
2. Auxiliary police training and courses of study shall be determined and provided by the Village.
G. Fingerprinting, Background Check: Prior to appointment, the fingerprints of any applicant for the status of the auxiliary police shall be taken, and no
person shall be appointed as auxiliary police if such person has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude. (1965 Code § 9-4-
27)
H. State Law Applicable Upon Death In Line Of Duty: The Line of Duty Compensation Act2 shall be applicable to auxiliary police upon their death in the
line of duty as described therein. (1965 Code § 9-4-27; amd. 2009 Code)
7-1-14: PART TIME POLICE:
A. Employment: The Village may employ part time police officers from time to time as the Corporate Authorities deem necessary.
B. Duties: A part time police officer shall have all responsibilities of a full time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the general orders of
Police Department, but the number of hours a part time officer may work within a calendar year shall be restricted. Part time police officers shall not be
assigned to supervise or direct full time police officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the Illinois Law Enforcement Training
and Standard Board.
C. Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer must meet the following standards:
1. Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
2. Be at least twenty three (23) years of age.
3. Pass a medical examination.
4. Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
5. Possess a valid State of Illinois driver's license.
6. Possess no prior felony convictions.
7. Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been honorably discharged.
D. Discipline: Part time officers shall be under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Chief of Police. Part time police officers serve at the discretion of the
Village Manager, shall not have any property rights in said employment, and may be removed by the Village Manager at any time. Part time police
officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general orders issued by the Police Department. (Ord. 06-05-13-O2, 6-5-2013)
7-1-15: MINIMUM AGE FOR FULL TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
The Fire and Police Commission shall not appoint any person to the position of full time police officer unless that person is at least twenty three (23) years
old at the time of appointment. This requirement shall supersede any minimum age requirement established by the Fire and Police Commission. (Ord. 02-
20-18-O1, 2-20-2018)
Chapter 2
MUTUAL POLICE AID PROGRAM
7-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a program of mutual aid between the village and other municipalities whereby each such municipality will be
obligated to come to the assistance of a neighboring municipality in the event of an emergency of such scope that it cannot be effectively coped with by
the local police department's personnel and equipment. (1965 Code § 9-14-5)
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words or terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
AIDING MUNICIPALITY: A municipality furnishing personnel or equipment to a requesting municipality.
MUNICIPALITY: A city or village that is a participating member of the mutual aid program.
MUTUAL AID MEMBERS: The following municipalities are parties to the mutual aid agreement: Brookfield, Countryside, La Grange, La Grange Park,
Lyons, Riverside, and Western Springs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 124/307
MUTUAL POLICE: The plan or program as provided for in this chapter whereby the municipalities participating in the program agree to come to one
another's assistance in the event of an emergency of such scope that it cannot be effectively coped with by the village police department's personnel and
equipment.
PARTICIPATING: A municipality that has, by official action of the municipal board, adopted an ordinance authorizing or approving the mutual police aid
program and has entered into an appropriate agreement (substantially as provided herein) with the other participating municipalities for rendering and
receiving aid as provided in the mutual police aid program.
REQUESTING: A participating municipality in which an emergency of such scope that it cannot be effectively coped with by the local police department's
personnel and equipment has occurred or is occurring. (1965 Code § 9-14-6)
7-2-3: AGREEMENT TO EFFECTUATE PROGRAM:
The chief of the police department, with the approval of the village president, is authorized, on behalf of the village, to enter into, and from time to time to
alter and amend, an agreement with any or all of the municipalities that are parties to the mutual police aid agreement defining and putting into effect a
mutual aid program providing generally as follows:
A. Request For Aid: In the event that, in the judgment of the officer in charge of the police department of a participating municipality, the available police
personnel and equipment of that municipality are inadequate to effectively cope with the emergency therein, said officer may call in a neighboring
participating municipality to furnish personnel and equipment to the extent specified in the agreement, to the requesting municipality.
B. Request For Standby Reserve: Each aiding municipality furnishing personnel and equipment to a requesting municipality shall have the right to call on
another participating municipality for personnel and equipment, to the extent specified in the agreement, as a standby reserve to take the place, in part,
of the personnel and/or equipment furnished to the requesting municipality until such personnel and/or equipment shall return.
C. Limitation On Furnishing Personnel And Equipment: On receipt of a call under subsection A or B of this section, the aiding municipality called upon
shall, to the extent provided in the agreement, furnish the personnel and equipment called for by the requesting municipality, or by the first aiding
municipality; except, that each aiding municipality may always be permitted to retain sufficient personnel and equipment to meet any emergency within
its boundaries that may be reasonably anticipated. (1965 Code § 9-14-7)
7-2-4: OBLIGATION OF VILLAGE UNDER PROGRAM:
The village shall furnish personnel and/or equipment, for use outside its boundaries, as provided in the mutual police aid program agreed to as provided in
section 7-2-3 of this chapter, to any municipality that has agreed to conform to said program and has assumed the obligations imposed upon it thereby.
(1965 Code § 9-14-8)
Chapter 3
ALARM SYSTEMS
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ALARM BUSINESS: Any business operated for profit, which engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling,
servicing, or responding to a burglary or holdup alarm system or fire alarm, or which causes any of these activities to take place.
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIERS: Any person, firm or corporation that sells, leases or installs signaling devices which, upon activation, either
automatically or manually, will transmit an alarm.
ALARM SYSTEMS: Any signaling device which is electronically operated and which automatically sends visual and audible signals over a signal line to be
registered by indicators at a monitor panel in a receiving terminal of the police department and fire department and/or alarm company's receiving location,
or which sends, via telephone line to the police or fire department, a recorded message of a burglary, holdup or fire.
ALARM USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the village.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system which automatically sends over telephone lines a prerecorded voice message indicating the existence
of the emergency situation that the system is designed to detect.
DIRECT CONNECT: An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at an agency maintained by the police
communications center.
DIRECT LINE: A telephone line leading directly from a central station to the communications center of the police department or fire department that is for
use only to report emergency signals on a person to person basis.
EMERGENCY ALARM ADMINISTRATOR: An employee of the village, designated by the village manager, whose responsibility it is to coordinate the
administration and documentation of alarm businesses and system performance as it relates to the effective enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 125/307
of an alarm system or of his employee or agents. "False alarm" does not include alarm signals activated by violent conditions of nature, telephone line
interruptions, acts of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business installer or alarm user.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM: One which produces an audible signal at the premises protected.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM: An alarm system sounding and/or recording alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within protected
premises, the control center being under the supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises. If a "proprietary system" includes a signal line
connected directly or by means of an automatic dialing device to a police communications center, a central station, modified central station or an
answering service, it thereby becomes an "alarm system" as defined in this section.
RECEIVING AGENCY (CENTRAL STATION): An office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where trained and
experienced personnel are in attendance at all times to supervise the circuits and investigate signals.
SINGLE STATION SMOKE DETECTOR: An assembly incorporating the smoke detector control equipment and the alarm sounding device in one circuit
operated from a power supply either in the unit or at the point of installation.
VILLAGE ALARM CONTRACTOR: The alarm company contracted by the village for the installation and maintenance of the police or fire department
monitoring systems. (1965 Code § 9-15-1; amd. 2009 Code)
7-3-2: STATE BUSINESS LICENSE, NOTICE TO VILLAGE:
Every individual, firm or corporation that does engage in an alarm system business in the village shall notify the village manager in writing indicating that
such individual, firm or corporation is doing business in the village. Such written notice shall include the name of the business, its address, telephone
numbers where service personnel can be reached, and their license numbers given by the state of Illinois. (1965 Code § 9-15-2)
7-3-3: ALARM USER PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Application; Conditions For Issuance:
1. Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user permit from the village manager or his/her designee for each system used. Applicants already employing
an alarm system on the effective date hereof shall submit an application for a permit no later than sixty (60) days from the effective date hereof;
otherwise, use of an alarm system is prohibited until a permit is secured.
2. The application for an alarm system user permit shall include the following: name, address, and telephone numbers of the alarm user, and the type
of business organization (individual, partnership or corporation). If a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; and if a corporation, the
names and addresses of the principal officers, and the state where incorporated. The issuance of a permit shall in no way constitute a warranty of
the signaling device involved, and issuance of said permit shall be specifically subject to the village disclaimer of liability as detailed in this chapter
and further detailed in section 2-206 of the local governmental and governmental employees tort immunity act1. (1965 Code § 9-15-9; amd. 2009
Code)
3. The alarm user applicant shall provide a "hold harmless" statement with the application. The hold harmless statement will contain the following
wording:
In consideration of the issuance of a permit for the installation of the requested alarm system or local alarm system, the owner-applicant herein on
behalf of himself and his co-workers, if any, his heirs, administrators, executors and assigns, hereby releases the village, a municipal corporation, its
officers, employees and alarm monitoring contractor, from any and all liability, suits, judgments, claims of any kind or nature, including attorney fees
and court costs arising or which may arise from the use, utilization or maintenance of said alarm system upon the premises at (address), whether
such claim is brought by the applicant or any third party or entity, and the applicant further agrees to defend any legal action, whether it is based on
an allegation, jointly or severally, against the village, a municipal corporation, its officers, employees, and alarm monitoring contractor, for any action
or nonaction on their parts.
B. Permit Fees: The alarm user shall pay to the village a fifteen dollar ($15.00) fee at the time of application for each permit. If the alarm user desires to
renew the permit for an additional period of one calendar year, the alarm user shall pay to the village a renewal fee which shall be paid prior to the first
day of the calendar renewal year. Any permit holder who does not pay the permit fee on or before said last day of the current calendar year shall pay
an additional charge of fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee to defray the extra cost of notice, record keeping and collection.
C. Review Of Application For Renewal: Application for the renewal of alarm user permits will be reviewed by the village manager for acceptance or
rejection of the renewal application.
D. Permits Subject To Revocation: Alarm permits are subject to revocation for reasons outlined in this chapter.
E. Confidentiality Of Information: The information contained in an alarm user permit application required by this section and other information received by
the police and/or fire chief through correspondence or communications with an alarm user shall be securely maintained and restricted to inspection
only by the police and/or fire chief or certain officers or village employees specifically assigned the responsibility for having and processing alarm user
permits in the course of official duties. The police chief or fire chief and any such employee of the village shall not reveal the information contained in
the alarm user permit application or in correspondence or communications with an alarm user to any other person for any purpose not related to this
chapter or official law enforcement matters and without the express written consent of the alarm user supplying such information.
F. Noncompliance: Any alarm system user who operates an alarm system without first obtaining a permit as required by this section, or who, after having a
permit revoked or suspended, fails to disconnect his alarm system, shall be in violation of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 126/307
G. Remedy Defects: For any newly installed alarm system, it is intended that the alarm user will be allowed a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days
within which to cure or fix any defects in the alarm system. (1965 Code § 9-15-9)
7-3-4: AUTOMATIC DIALING SERVICE; PRERECORDED VOICE MESSAGES PROHIBITED:
Any automatic dialing device transmitting a prerecorded voice message into the police and/or fire department or to a telephone line directly serviced by
telephone company operators to be responded to by members of the police or fire department is prohibited. (1965 Code § 9-15-3)
7-3-5: DIRECT COMMUNICATIONS TO POLICE OR FIRE DEPARTMENT:
A. Termination Of Service Authorized: Upon the favorable recommendation of the police chief and fire chief and the approval of the village manager,
alarms for business premises and residences may be terminated in the police and/or fire department.
B. Central Monitoring System: The village shall provide a uniform central monitoring system to receive alarm signals and perform other related functions
over a signal line or lines at a central location. The system shall have a capacity to meet present needs and the ability to expand for future needs, and
shall be available to those who meet the requirements for permits under this chapter.
C. Right To Charge Line Fees: The village alarm contractor shall have the right to charge line fees, set by contract, during the length of the contract.
D. Rights Of Subscriber: Any subscriber or alarm user who obtains authority from the village manager to terminate its alarm in the police and/or fire
department may contract with any licensed alarm business of its choice for the sale, installation, maintenance, and/or servicing of the alarm system to
be installed on its premises.
E. Responsibility For Obtaining Leased Telephone Line: The alarm subscriber approved for a direct connection to the police department or the alarm
businesses contracting for servicing the subscriber's alarm system shall be responsible for obtaining the leased telephone line between the
subscriber's premises and the alarm receiving equipment, if required, in order to provide an input signal which is compatible with the receiving
equipment used to operate the alarm panel.
F. Transmitting Signal To Central Monitoring System: No alarm subscriber shall utilize a single pair of wires to transmit a burglar or holdup alarm signal and
a fire or other emergency signal. All police related signals shall cause only one signal to be transmitted to the central monitoring system upon a single
stimulus of the alarm device, and no pulsating or intermittent signal shall be allowed. All fire related signals transmitted to the central monitoring system
shall be upon a single stimulus of the alarm device, and no pulsating or intermittent signal shall be allowed. (1965 Code § 9-15-4)
7-3-6: INSTALLATION AND INSPECTION:
A. Compliance With Specifications: All such work pertaining to the installation, modification, service or repair of an "alarm system" in the village, as defined
in section 7-3-1 of this chapter, whether audible or silent, and the servicing thereof, shall be accomplished in accordance with the pertinent
specifications of the village building and electrical codes, requirements of federal regulations concerning security devices in national banking
institutions, regulations and standards provided in this chapter and all other existing laws and ordinances.
B. Right Of Entry For Inspection: For the purposes of enforcing the provisions of all applicable municipal codes and this chapter, the police chief and/or fire
chief and the village inspector shall have the authority, at a mutually agreeable time, to enter any premises in the village or other jurisdictional area in or
upon which alarm systems subject to this chapter are located, to inspect the installation and/or operation of such alarm systems. The right of the police
and/or fire chief to enter for the purposes herein described is in addition to any and all other rights of the police chief and fire chief to enter upon and in
premises within the village pursuant to any other village codes or any state law.
C. Report Of Violations; Remedial Action: If such inspection reveals any violations of the provisions of this chapter, a written report detailing such violations
shall be promptly sent to the village manager and to the owner, lessee or other person responsible for the alarm system violation of this chapter. Such
report shall require correction within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of the violation discovered, and shall state that a failure to comply may
result in the revocation of licenses and permits. The alarm user may be granted a reasonable extension of time to correct such violations, but in no
event shall said extension exceed a period of thirty (30) days. (1965 Code § 9-15-5)
7-3-7: TESTING EQUIPMENT:
No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the police and/or fire department shall be tested or demonstrated without first
obtaining permission from the police chief or fire chief. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting messages directly
to the police and/or fire department. (1965 Code § 9-15-6)
7-3-8: NOTICE OF DISRUPTION OF SERVICE:
When an alarm business's service to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason by the alarm business, or the alarm business becomes aware of such
disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscriber by telephone that protection is no longer being provided. If, however, the alarm business has written
instructions from its subscriber not to make such notification by telephone during certain hours, the alarm business may comply with such instructions.
(1965 Code § 9-15-7)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 127/307
7-3-9: LIABILITY OF VILLAGE LIMITED:
The village shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that alarm signals received by the central monitoring center are given appropriate attention
and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the village shall not be liable for any defects in operation of any alarm system, for any failure or neglect of
any person in connection with the installation and operation of equipment, the transmission of signals or the relay of such signals and messages. In the
event that the village finds it necessary to disconnect a defective device, the village shall incur no liability by such action taken pursuant to this chapter.
(1965 Code § 9-15-8)
7-3-10: REPAIR SERVICE:
Each alarm user in the village shall obtain a service contract from a licensed alarm business or have such licensed alarm business available to him on a
twenty four (24) hour basis to make inspections and/or repairs which become necessary for the proper function of the alarm and to minimize false alarms.
(1965 Code § 9-15-10)
7-3-11: ALTERNATE POWER SOURCE:
Each alarm user in the village should provide an alternate source of power for his alarm system to prevent false alarms due to failure of power supplied
from the utility company. Such alternate source of power shall provide a minimum period of power in accordance with applicable fire codes of the village.
(1965 Code § 9-15-11)
7-3-12: OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS:
A. Instructions Required: Every alarm business selling or leasing to any person an alarm system which is installed on such person's premises in the village
after the effective date hereof shall furnish that person with instructions that provide adequate information to enable persons using such device to
operate it properly and, if the device is to be serviced or maintained by another alarm business, shall furnish such other business with a manual or
other information necessary to enable it to service or properly maintain such device.
B. Incomplete Or Unclear Instructions: If the police chief or fire chief reasonably finds such information to be incomplete or unclear, or inadequate to
explain how the device operates and is constructed, he may require the alarm business to revise the information to meet his approval, and then to
distribute the revised information to persons who have had such devices installed as well as to persons subsequently having such devices installed.
(1965 Code § 9-15-12)
7-3-13: SPECIAL ALARM PROVISIONS:
A. Connection To Central Monitoring System: Automatic dialing devices shall, within sixty (60) days from the effective date hereof, be disconnected from
any primary trunk line of the village and shall be keyed to the central alarm monitoring system maintained at the police department. The content of the
recorded message to be transmitted by such device shall be a digital tone approved by the alarm company maintaining the central alarm monitoring
system.
B. Conversion To Digital Tone: All alarm users having an automatic dialing device which does not transmit a digital tone approved by the alarm company
maintaining the central alarm monitoring system shall be given sixty (60) days to obtain a central answering point other than the village. The alarm user
may, at his expense, convert such automatic dialing device to a compatible digital tone.
C. Sound Of Alarms: Local alarms shall not resemble the sound of any emergency signal or civil defense alarm or siren. All local alarms shall have the
capacity to reset themselves within ten (10) minutes. Local alarms presently in use as of the effective date hereof shall have three (3) months to comply
with the requirements of this subsection.
D. Sensory Mechanism: The sensory mechanism used in connection with any alarm system must be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire or
intrusion so that the devices will not be actuated by impulses due to transient pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises such
as the rattling or vibrating of doors or windows, vehicular noise adjacent to the installation, or other forces unrelated to genuine alarms.
E. Maintenance Of Components: All components comprising an alarm system must be maintained by the permit holder in good repair to assure reliability
of operation. (1965 Code § 9-15-13)
7-3-14: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or applied to necessarily require or excuse noncompliance with any provision of the laws of the state of Illinois or
the laws of the United States. (1965 Code § 9-15-15)
7-3-15: FALSE ALARMS, PENALTIES AND REVOCATION PROCEDURES:
A. Responsibility For Operation And Maintenance: Each person, firm or corporation servicing the operation or maintenance of an alarm of any type
covered by this chapter shall be responsible for any false alarms transmitted by the device which they service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 128/307
B. Record Of Alarms Transmitted: The emergency alarm administrator shall maintain a record of all alarms transmitted and, pursuant to the required notice
and opportunity to be heard, may revoke the permit for operation of an alarm involved in the transmission of six (6) false alarms in a calendar month
not caused by unusual weather conditions or interruption of any telephone line service which is not the fault of the permit user.
C. Temporary Disconnection For Alarm System Failure: The emergency alarm administrator may order any alarm temporarily disconnected upon twenty
four (24) hours' prior notice in the event of a failure by that alarm system that jeopardizes the operation of other alarm systems in the Lyons central
monitoring system. Pursuant to such action, a letter shall be sent no later than the first regular business day after such disconnect to the user informing
the user of this action. No alarm system shall be reconnected until repairs have been made.
D. Procedure Upon Recording False Alarm: If the emergency alarm administrator records a false alarm from the user's protected premises, the following
procedure shall be utilized:
1. Upon receipt of a fourth false alarm within a calendar or fiscal one-half (1/2) year (6 months), as established by the village board on adoption of this
chapter, the emergency alarm administrator shall issue a false alarm notice to the permit holder for each violation of this chapter which shall require a
penalty per occurrence according to the following schedule:
Penalty Schedule
False Alarm
Per 6 Month Period
Penalty
1st, 2nd, and 3rd No charge
4th, 5th and 6th Police response $ 25 .00
Fire department response 150 .00
7th, 8th and 9th Police response 50 .00
Fire department response 150 .00
10th or more Police response 100 .00
Fire department response 200 .00
Exception: No charge shall be imposed for false alarms for thirty (30) days from the date of installation and/or the date of major alterations, nor shall a
charge be made for false alarms activated by weather related conditions, telephone or electrical interruptions or other such unusual occurrences outside
the ability of the alarm user to prevent.
2. On receipt of the tenth false alarm within the six (6) month period, the emergency alarm administrator shall notify the permit holder and servicing
alarm business by certified mail that any additional false alarms shall be cause to begin the process to revoke the alarm permit.
3. On receipt of the eleventh false alarm within the six (6) month period, the emergency alarm administrator shall notify the permit holder and servicing
alarm business by certified mail that the alarm permit shall be revoked ten (10) days from the mailing date unless the alarm user and/or servicing
alarm business:
a. Submits a report indicating corrective action that has been taken to correct the problems that have resulted in false alarms; or
b. Requests a hearing with the emergency alarm administrator to indicate corrective action that has been taken or is planned, or reasons that the
problems cannot currently be corrected but will be corrected in the near future. Such hearing must take place within twenty (20) days of the mailing
of notice of intent to revoke the permit.
4. If the permit holder submits a written report, the alarm administrator shall determine if the corrective action may reasonably be expected to prevent
further false alarms. If he determines that the actions should prevent additional false alarms, he shall notify the permit holder in writing that the permit
will not be revoked.
5. If a hearing is requested, it shall be held within ten (10) working days of the request. The emergency alarm administrator shall provide the permit
holder with an opportunity to present such information as necessary to explain the false alarms and that actions have been or will be taken to prevent
further occurrences. If the emergency alarm administrator determines that corrective action is being taken to prevent false alarms, the permit holder
shall be advised that the permit will not be revoked.
6. If no report is submitted and no hearing requested, or if the information provided by the permit holder does not indicate that proper corrective action
is being taken to prevent false alarms, the emergency alarm administrator shall notify the permit holder that the alarm permit is revoked and that the
use of the alarm is not allowed.
7. If the permit holder is dissatisfied with the action taken by the emergency alarm administrator, the permit holder may request a hearing before the
village manager or his designee. Such request must be delivered in writing to the village manager within five (5) working days of the receipt of the
notice of revocation, and such hearing must be held within ten (10) days' notice of revocation. A finding shall be rendered within ten (10) days of the
hearing. No alarm will be disconnected by the village during the hearing process, which shall include: a) mandatory time allowed for the appeal of the
decision of the emergency alarm administrator; and b) the maximum time allowed to render an administrative decision.
8. Any building required to have a fire alarm system by the codes of the village or the rules and regulations of the Illinois state fire marshal shall be
exempt from the disconnection provisions of this chapter. However, all other penalties shall remain in effect.
9. No permit shall be issued until all penalties assessed by this chapter have been paid in full to the village offices. (1965 Code § 9-15-14)
7-3-16: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
The failure of any person to:
A. Obtain an alarm service system permit as required by this chapter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 129/307
B. Obtain an alarm user permit as required by this chapter;
C. Obey any order of the emergency alarm administrator of suspension or revocation of an alarm service permit or an alarm user permit; and/or
D. Correct any other violation of the provisions of this chapter; (1965 Code § 9-15-15)
constitutes an offense punishable by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day
that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (1965 Code § 9-15-15; amd. 2009 Code)
Footnote 1: 745 ILCS 10/2-206.
Chapter 4
GENERAL OFFENSES
7-4-1: COMMON LAW MISDEMEANORS:
In addition to the offenses described in this chapter and to misdemeanors described in other sections of this code, all offenses which constitute a
misdemeanor at common law or by the laws of the state shall constitute misdemeanors under this chapter. (1965 Code § 9-1-48)
ARTICLE A. OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
7-4A-1: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
A. Assault: Any person who shall assault another person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1965 Code § 9-1-13)
B. Battery: Every person who shall commit a battery upon the person of another shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1965 Code § 9-1-14; amd. 2009 Code)
7-4A-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
Any person who shall be guilty of disorderly conduct or shall make, aid, countenance or assist in making any improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of
the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the peace in the streets or elsewhere, or shall in loud and violent language advise any person to assault or
beat the person of another, or who shall collect with others in bodies or crowds for unlawful purposes or for any purpose, to the annoyance or disturbance
of citizens or travelers, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1965 Code § 9-1-15)
7-4A-3: DECEPTIVE PRACTICE:
A. Definition: To act with the "intent to defraud" means to act wilfully, and with the specific intent to deceive or cheat, for the purpose of causing financial
loss to another, or to bring some financial gain to oneself. It is not necessary to establish that any person was actually defrauded or deceived. Failure to
have sufficient funds or credit with the depository when the check or other order is issued or delivered, or when such check or other order is presented
for payment and dishonored on each of two (2) occasions at least seven (7) days apart, is prima facie evidence that the offender knows that it will not
be paid by the depository, and that he has the "intent to defraud".
B. Prohibited Act: It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to defraud, to pay any lawful obligation to the village, or to pay for property, labor or
services, including payment of any fees imposed by the village, by the issuance or delivery to the village of a check or other order upon a real or
fictitious depository for the payment of money, knowing that it will not be paid by the depository. (1965 Code § 9-1-52)
C. Proceeding Against Violator: A proceeding under this section may be instituted either in the circuit court in the manner otherwise provided by law, or by
the issuance of a notice to appear referring the matter to the village adjudicator for resolution1. If the proceeding is brought before the village
adjudicator, then the respondent may be served by any method otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, including by certified mail. (1965 Code § 9-
1-52; amd. 2009 Code)
D. Penalty; Reimbursement To Village: The penalty for violating this section shall be an order to reimburse the village the face amount of the check or
other order, of if two (2) different amounts appear on the face of the check or other order, to reimburse the village the higher amount, and in addition to
the foregoing, a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each separate check or other order
issued or delivered to the village otherwise in violation of this section shall be a separate offense. (1965 Code § 9-1-52)
7-4A-4: THEFT OF RECYCLABLES2:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 130/307
A. Prohibited Act: It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, obtain, possess or pick up any recyclable item placed for collection in front of a residence
as part of the collection program of the village unless such person is licensed as the exclusive residential recycling contractor of the village. (1965 Code
§ 9-1-58)
B. Violation; Penalty: Any person violating the terms and conditions of this section shall be subject to a fine not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), except where noted otherwise in any section, with each and every day that a violation is allowed to
exist constituting a distinct and separate offense under the terms of this section. In addition, the village may take whatever action it may deem
appropriate to enforce the terms of this section, including an action for injunction. All attorney fees and costs incurred by the village in enforcing the
terms of this section shall be paid by the violator. (1965 Code § 9-1-59)
Footnote 1: See title 1, chapter 5, article B of this code.
Footnote 2: See also subsection 5-5B-2B10 of this code.
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE, HEALTH AND SAFETY
7-4B-1: LOITERING:
A. A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances
that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether
alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly
endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object.
B. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford
the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and to
explain his or her presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not comply with the
preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if it had been believed by the police officer at the
time, would have dispelled the alarm. Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being a loiterer or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably
appears that the delay in arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the suspect's escape.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a police officer, or where a "No Loitering" sign or signs have been posted, to loiter, stand,
sit or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private property utilized for public
use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct
or prevent free access to the entrance to any building open to the public.
D. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
PUBLIC PLACE: An area generally visible to public view, including streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles (whether moving or not) and buildings open to the general public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and
the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
E. Any person found liable of violating this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) per violation. (Ord. 08-17-11-O2, 8-17-2011)
7-4B-2: TATTOO PARLORS:
No person shall, in any form, keep or maintain any tattoo store, shop or facility wherein any part or parts of the human body are indelibly marked or figured
by the insertion of pigment or dye under the skin or by the production of scars. (1965 Code § 9-1-56)
7-4B-3: POSSESSION OF BURGLAR TOOLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any nippers of the description known as burglar's nippers, any pick lock, skeleton key, key to
be used with a bit, jimmy or other burglar's instrument or tool of whatsoever kind or description, unless it be shown that such possession is for a lawful
purpose. (1965 Code § 9-1-35)
7-4B-4: ABANDONED CONTAINERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or discard in any place accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of one and
one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more which has an attached lid or door which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch, or for any
person, being the owner, lessee, or manager of such place, to knowingly permit such abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain
there in such condition. (1965 Code § 9-9-1; amd. 2009 Code)
7-4B-5: BURIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any human body or to deposit any such body in any vault within the limits of the village. (1965 Code § 9-1-49)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 131/307
7-4B-6: CROSSING POLICE, FIRE OR HOMELAND SECURITY LINE:
It shall be unlawful to cross a police line, fire line, or homeland security line. Said line shall be erected by an authorized public official and used for motor
vehicle traffic control and/or pedestrian control or restriction. Police, fire, and homeland security lines may be erected by use of barricades, rope, plastic
police/fire scene tape, temporary fencing, or other similar devices. (Ord. 03-18-08-03, 3-18-2008)
7-4B-7: GANG LOITERING:
A. Whenever a police officer observes a member of a criminal street gang engaged in gang loitering with one or more other persons in any public place
designated for the enforcement of this section under subsection B of this section, the police officer shall, subject to all applicable procedures
promulgated by the chief of police:
1. Inform all persons that they are engaged in gang loitering within an area in which loitering by groups containing criminal street gang members is
prohibited;
2. Order all persons to disperse and remove themselves from within sight and hearing of the place at which the order was issued; and
3. Inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail to obey the order promptly or engage in further gang loitering within sight or hearing
of the place at which the order was issued during the next three (3) hours.
B. The chief of police shall, by written directive, designate areas of the village in which the chief has determined that enforcement of this section is
necessary because gang loitering has enabled criminal street gangs to establish control over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering those
areas or to conceal illegal activities. Prior to making a determination under this subsection, the chief shall consult as he or she deems appropriate with
persons who are knowledgeable about the effects of gang activity in areas in which this section may be enforced. The persons may include, but need
not be limited to, members of the police department, or police departments of surrounding communities, with special training or experience related to
criminal street gangs; other personnel of the department or police departments of surrounding communities with particular knowledge of gang activities
in the proposed designated area; elected and appointed officials of the area; community based organizations; and participants in any neighborhood
watch program who are familiar with the area. The chief of police shall develop and implement procedures for the periodic review and update of
designations made under this subsection.
C. The chief of police shall by written directive promulgate procedures to prevent the enforcement of this section against persons who are engaged in
collective advocacy activities that are protected by the constitution of the United States or the state of Illinois.
D. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY: The commission, attempted commission or solicitation of the following offenses listed in the following sections of the
criminal code of 1961, being 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes act 5, provided that the offenses are committed by two (2) or more persons, or by an
individual at the direction of or in association with any criminal street gang, with the specific intent to promote, further or assist in any criminal conduct
by gang members:
720 ILCS 5/9-1 (murder);
720 ILCS 5/9-3.3 (drug induced homicide);
720 ILCS 5/10-1 (kidnapping);
720 ILCS 5/10-4 (forcible detention);
720 ILCS 5/12-2(a)(13) (aggravated assault- discharging firearm);
720 ILCS 5/12-4 (aggravated battery);
720 ILCS 5/12-4.1 (heinous battery);
720 ILCS 5/12-4.2 (aggravated battery with a firearm);
720 ILCS 5/12-4.3 (aggravated battery of a child);
720 ILCS 5/12-4.6 (aggravated battery of a senior citizen);
720 ILCS 5/12-6 (intimidation);
720 ILCS 5/12-6.1 (compelling organization membership of persons);
720 ILCS 5/12-11 (home invasion);
720 ILCS 5/12-14 (aggravated criminal sexual assault);
720 ILCS 5/18-1 (robbery);
720 ILCS 5/18-2 (armed robbery);
720 ILCS 5/19-1 (burglary);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 132/307
720 ILCS 5/19-3 (residential burglary);
720 ILCS 5/19-5 (criminal fortification of a residence or building);
720 ILCS 5/20-1 (arson);
720 ILCS 5/20-1.1 (aggravated arson);
720 ILCS 5/20-2 (possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary devices);
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(9) or (a)(12) (unlawful use of weapons);
720 ILCS 5/24-1.1 (unlawful use or possession of weapons by felons or persons in the custody of the department of corrections facilities);
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 (aggravated discharge of a firearm);
720 ILCS 5/25-1(d) (mob action-violence);
720 ILCS 5/33-1 (bribery);
720 ILCS 5/33A-2 (armed violence);
720 ILCS 550/5, 5.1, 7 or 9, cannabis control act, where the offense is a felony (manufacture or delivery of cannabis, cannabis trafficking,
calculated criminal cannabis conspiracy and related offenses); or
720 ILCS 570/401, 401.1, 405, 406.1, 407 or 407.1, state controlled substances act (illegal manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance,
controlled substance trafficking, calculated criminal drug conspiracy and related offenses).
CRIMINAL STREET GANG: Any ongoing organization, association in fact or group of three (3) or more persons, whether formal or informal, having
as one of its substantial activities the commission of one or more of the criminal acts enumerated under the definition of criminal gang activity herein,
and whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity.
GANG LOITERING: Remaining in any one place under circumstances that would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect
of that behavior is to enable a criminal street gang to establish control over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering those areas, or to
conceal illegal activities.
PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY: Two (2) or more acts of criminal gang activity of which at least two (2) acts were committed within five
(5) years of each other.
PUBLIC PLACE: The public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned.
E. Any person found liable of violating this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. (Ord. 08-17-11-O3, 8-17-2011)
7-4B-8: NARCOTICS RELATED LOITERING:
A. Whenever a police officer observes one or more persons engaged in narcotics related loitering in any public place designated for the enforcement of
this section under subsection B of this section, the police officer shall:
1. Inform all persons that they are engaged in loitering within an area in which the loitering is prohibited;
2. Order all persons to disperse and remove themselves from within sight and hearing of the place at which the order was issued; and
3. Inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail to obey the order promptly or engage in further narcotics related loitering within
sight or hearing of the place at which the order was issued during the next three (3) hours.
B. The chief of police shall, by written directive, designate areas of the village in which enforcement of this section is necessary because the areas are
frequently associated with narcotics related loitering. Prior to making a determination under this subsection, the chief of police shall consult as he or
she deems appropriate with persons who are knowledgeable about the effect of narcotics related activity in areas in which this section may be
enforced. The persons may include, but need not be limited to, members of the police department, or police departments of surrounding communities,
with special training or experience related to narcotics related activity; other personnel of the department or police departments of surrounding
communities with particular knowledge of narcotics related activities in the proposed designated area; elected and appointed officials of the area;
community based organizations; and participants in any neighborhood watch program who are familiar with the area. The chief of police shall develop
and implement procedures for the periodic review and update of designations made under this subsection.
C. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
NARCOTICS RELATED LOITERING: Remaining in any one place under circumstances that would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the
purpose or effect of that behavior is to facilitate the distribution of substances in violation of the cannabis control act, being 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 550 or the Illinois controlled substances act, being 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570.
PUBLIC PLACE: The public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned.
D. Any person found liable of violating this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. (Ord. 08-17-11-O4, 8-17-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 133/307
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES RELATED TO MORALS AND DECENCY
7-4C-1: GAMBLING:
A. Prohibited Act: Except for video gaming authorized pursuant to section 4-2-22 of this code, it shall be unlawful for any person to place, make, accept,
relay, deliver, or pay any wager or bet on any sporting event or other competition.
B. Lottery Excepted: This section shall not apply to the lottery owned and operated by the state of Illinois. (Ord. 07-18-12-O1, 7-18-2012)
7-4C-2: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any part of the nipple,
the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state or that portion of the buttocks which would be covered by a properly worn "thong" type bikini
bottom.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be
expected to be observed by members of the public. "Public places" include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and
commercial establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or
membership requirement), hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets, and meeting facilities utilized by religious, social, fraternal or
similar organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a "public place".
"Public place" shall not include enclosed, single sex public restrooms, enclosed, single sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities,
enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctors' offices, churches, synagogues or similar places
when used for circumcisions, baptisms or similar religious ceremonies, portions of hospitals and similar places in which nudity or exposure is
necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home; nor shall the term include a person appearing in a state of nudity in a modeling class
operated by: 1) a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 2) a private
college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation or an accredited private college. (1965 Code § 9-16-2)
B. Acts Of Public Indecency; Exemption:
1. Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards who performs any of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
a. An act of "sexual penetration" or "sexual conduct" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-12; or
b. A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
2. Breast feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency. (1965 Code § 9-16-1; amd. 2009 Code)
C. Nuisance Declared: A person who knowingly or intentionally encourages or facilitates another person's commission of the offense of public indecency
shall be deemed to have committed a public nuisance. (1965 Code § 9-16-4)
D. Interpretation:
1. This section is patterned after and shall be interpreted in the same manner as the Indiana public indecency statute upheld by the United States
supreme court in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 S. Ct. 2456 (1991).
2. The definition of "public place" set forth in subsection A of this section shall be interpreted to be no more broad than the definition of "public place"
set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9 (formerly Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 38, section 11-9) as upheld by the Illinois supreme court
in People v. Garrison, 82 Ill. 2d 444, 412 N.D. 2d 483 (1980). (1965 Code § 9-16-5)
E. Violation; Penalty: A person convicted of the offense of public indecency shall be fined not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense and may be enjoined from continuing the conduct determined to be public indecency. (1965 Code § 9-16-3)
7-4C-3: OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS:
No person shall exhibit, sell or offer to sell, give away or offer to give away, or have in his or her possession, with or without intent to sell or give away, any
obscene or indecent book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, lithograph, engraving, picture, photograph, stereoscopic picture, model, cast or instrument or article
of indecent or immoral use. (1965 Code § 9-1-38)
7-4C-4: OBSCENE CONDUCT AT GROUP MEETINGS:
A. Purpose And Intent: It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this section to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals of the village, to
promote the stability of property values and impose restrictions upon those activities which pander to gross sexuality in a manner that would detract
from the neighborhood, adversely affect the property values, increase crime and violence, and be repugnant to the morals of the village. In recognition
of the protections afforded to the citizens under the first and fourteenth amendments, it is not the intent of this section to inhibit freedom of speech or
the press, but rather to deter those of low morals from imposing their lack of morals upon the rest of the village, and further recognizing that those parts
of a community which become centers of loose moral conduct frequently become places of rowdiness, criminality, and indecent behavior. It is further
the belief that, just as advertising is designed to stimulate one's appetite for desiring goods or a service, an overabundance or preoccupation with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 134/307
sexual displays or material arouses the appetites of those so preoccupied and encourages violations of the criminal statutes involving sexual offenses
and is contrary to the health, safety and welfare of the village.
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC: The activity may be attended on a subscription basis, a membership fee arrangement or for a separate fee for each
activity or gathering.
DATE SWAPPING (FORNICATION)1: Sexual intercourse with another, not his or her spouse, if the behavior is open and notorious.
ILLICIT SEXUAL CONDUCT: Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
MATE SWAPPING (ADULTERY)2: Sexual intercourse with another, not his or her spouse, if the behavior is open and notorious; and 1) the person is
married and the other person involved in such intercourse is not his spouse; or 2) the person is not married and knows that the other person involved in
such intercourse is married.
OBSCENE: For the average person applying contemporary community standards:
1. The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole is to prurient interest, i.e., a shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity or
excretion; and
2. The matter depicts or describes, in a patently offensive manner, sexual conduct regulated (by the applicable state statute); and
3. The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity.
PROMOTE: To hold open an apartment, storefront, building, tent or any edifice whatsoever as a place of meeting or place to observe or participate in
obscene activities.
C. Promotion Of Gatherings For Illegal Purposes: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate any building or establishment for the purpose of
gathering people for the purpose of encouraging or promoting mate swapping, date swapping, sexual experimentation, group sex, pornography or any
illicit sexual conduct.
D. Offensive Business And Nuisance Declared: Any such place of meeting, establishment, or business is hereby ordained an offensive business and a
nuisance in fact3.
E. Penalty: Whoever violates this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (1965 Code § 9-1-54)
ARTICLE D. OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
7-4D-1: ACTIVITIES OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS:
No person shall engage in any game, sport, amusement or business, or exhibit any machine, show or animal, or indulge in any acrobatic feats or other
acts in the streets or upon the sidewalks which shall collect any crowd of persons so as to interfere with the passage of vehicles or persons passing along
the streets and sidewalks. (1965 Code § 9-1-12)
7-4D-2: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY GENERALLY:
A. Defacing Trees, Buildings: No person shall cut, injure, mark or deface any building or property not his own, or any tree, grass, shrub or walk. (1965
Code § 9-1-30)
B. Defacing Public Property: No person shall injure, destroy, or deface, or assist in injuring, destroying or defacing, any bridge, fence, building, school
house, church building, depot, house, public building, street sign, sidewalk, tree, lamppost or any other public property. (1965 Code § 9-1-31)
7-4D-3: DAMAGE TO LAMPPOSTS AND OTHER PROPERTY:
A. Defacing Lampposts, Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to carelessly or maliciously break, deface or carry away, or in any way injure or destroy,
any public lamp or lamppost or any sign, gate, sidewalk or fence, or climb upon or hitch any horse or other animal to any public lamppost, or hang or
place any goods or merchandise thereon, or place any goods, boxes, wood or any other heavy material upon or against the same. (1965 Code § 9-1-
19)
B. Damaging Streetlights Or Wires: Any person who shall carelessly or maliciously break, deface, disturb, interfere with, carry away or in any way injure or
destroy any electric light, lamp, globe or any part or appurtenance of any lamp or light of any kind used in or upon any street, alley or public place, or
who shall carelessly or maliciously break, injure, destroy or in any manner disturb or interfere with any electric light, telephone or telegraph wire or any
appurtenance thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1965 Code § 9-1-37)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 135/307
7-4D-4: TREES AND SHRUBS:
A. Damaging Shrubbery: Whoever shall cut down, dig up, sever, injure, bark or destroy any fruit or ornamental tree, cultivated root or plant, or food bearing
bush standing or growing on or located on the land or premises of another, or shall pick, destroy or carry away therefrom any branch, limb, stalk, bud,
flower or any part or portion of the fruit of any cultivated tree, plant, vine or bush without permission from the owner or occupant of said land or
premises, or shall, without lawful authority, cut down, uproot, destroy or injure any fruit or ornamental tree or shrubbery planted or growing on any
public thoroughfare, park or public grounds shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1965 Code § 9-1-43; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Branches Overhanging Property Of Another; Pests: No person shall erect or maintain any tree, shrub or growing object that shall overhang the property
of another if said tree, shrub or growing object shall harbor bugs, insects, vermin, offensive birds or animals which shall interfere with the enjoyment of
said adjoining property. (1965 Code § 9-1-44)
7-4D-5: DEPOSITING ICE OR SNOW ONTO PUBLIC WAYS:
A. Deposits Prohibited: No person, firm or corporation engaged in removing snow or ice from any building, private property, driveway, driveway apron or
public sidewalk shall sweep, plow, shovel, scrape, or in any other manner move or deposit snow or ice in such a way as to narrow the traveled portion
of any street or alley, block the vision of motorists at intersections, prevent parking at the curb, cover or interfere with the use of a fire hydrant, block
sidewalks or driveways, damage parkway trees, sod or curbing, or otherwise create a traffic hazard.
B. Responsibility For Actions Of Agents: Any owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person that contracts for the removal of snow or ice shall bear the
responsibility for actions of their agents. (1965 Code § 9-1-28)
7-4D-6: OBSTRUCTING SEWERS:
No person shall stop or obstruct the passage of the water of any street, gutter or public sewer, drain, culvert, water pipe or hydrant. (1965 Code § 9-1-29)
7-4D-7: THROWING MISSILES:
No person shall throw any stone or other missile upon or at any building, railroad car, tree or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in
any street, avenue, alley, lane, public place or enclosed or unenclosed ground, or aid or abet in the same. (1965 Code § 9-1-32)
7-4D-8: BARBED WIRE FENCES1:
A. Barbed Wire Prohibited: Except as provided in subsection 12-13-7N of this code, no person, being the owner, lessee or agent of any building, shall
erect or maintain or permit to be erected or maintained on or about the stairway in, or the entrance to, such building, or on or about its exterior building
line, or upon any portion of the sidewalk adjacent to such building any railing, fence, guard or protection of any kind, constructed of barbed wire, or
upon any part of which there shall be affixed or placed any spike, nail or other pointed instrument of any kind. (1965 Code § 9-1-34; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Each Day A Separate Offense: Each and every day any such person shall fail or neglect to remove such barbed wire or to remove from such railing,
fence, or other protection any such spike, nail or other pointed instrument, after notice in writing from any officer of the village so to do, shall constitute
a separate offense. (1965 Code § 9-1-34)
7-4D-9: EXCAVATIONS, PROTECTION:
A. Whoever shall dig or cause to be dug any excavation in or adjoining any thoroughfare or other public place and shall not, during the nighttime, cause
the same to be fenced in with a substantial fence at least three feet (3') high, the boards or rails of which shall not be more than one foot (1') apart,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1965 Code § 9-1-39)
B. Any village officer or contractor for public work who shall make any excavation in any thoroughfare and shall not cause poles or timbers raised at least
three feet (3') above the ground to be so placed as to prevent persons, animals or vehicles from falling into the same and, during the nighttime, cause
lighted barricades to be placed or secured thereon, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1965 Code § 9-1-40; amd. 2009 Code)
Footnote 1: See also subsections 12-13-7M and N of this code.
Chapter 5
MINORS
7-5-1: CURFEW HOURS:
A. Definitions: Whenever used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 136/307
CURFEW HOURS: The "curfew hours" shall be as follows:
1. Ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day; and
2. Eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. on any Friday or Saturday and until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: 1. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
2. A public or private agency with which a minor has been placed by a court.
MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PARENT: A person who is:
1. A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
2. At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
REMAIN: To:
1. Linger or stay; or
2. Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
B. Offenses:
1. A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. (1965
Code § 9-6-1)
2. A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or control of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control
allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours. (1965 Code § 9-6-1;
amd. 2009 Code)
3. The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
C. Defenses:
1. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section that the minor was: (1965 Code § 9-6-1)
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other person in custody or control of the minor; (1965 Code § 9-6-1; amd. 2009 Code)
b. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
c. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
d. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
e. Involved in an emergency;
f. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police
department about the minor's presence;
g. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 137/307
h. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or (1965 Code § 9-6-1)
i. Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the emancipation of minors act, as amended1. (1965 Code § 9-6-1; amd. 2009
Code)
2. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B3 of this section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
D. Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the
public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection C of this section is present.
E. Penalties: A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (1965 Code
§ 9-6-1)
7-5-2: EXPOSING MINORS TO HARMFUL MATERIALS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
DISTRIBUTE: To transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration.
EXHIBIT: To show or display, offer or present for inspection or produce in public so that it may be taken into possession or viewed by persons under
seventeen (17) years of age.
HARMFUL TO MINORS: That quality of any description or representation in whatever form of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or
sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
1. Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors; and
2. Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and
3. Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.
KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
1. The character and content of any material described herein which is reasonably susceptible to examination by the defendant; and
2. The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
MINOR: Any person under the age of seventeen (17) years.
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of
being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals,
pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person be a female, breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT: The condition of the human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Prohibited Materials: It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, loan for monetary consideration, distribute or exhibit to a minor:
1. Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body
which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or
2. Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in subsection B1 of
this section, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and
which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors.
C. Admitting Minor To Theater Or Presentation: It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for a monetary consideration to a minor or
knowingly to sell to a minor an admission ticket or pass, or knowingly to admit a minor for a monetary consideration to premises whereon there is
exhibited a motion picture, show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is
harmful to minors. (1965 Code § 9-6-9)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 138/307
D. Exceptions: Nothing in this section shall prohibit any public library or any library operated by an accredited institution of higher education from
circulating harmful material to any person under seventeen (17) years of age, provided such circulation is in aid of a legitimate scientific or educational
purpose, and it shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution for a violation of this section that the act charged was committed in aid of legitimate
scientific or educational purposes. (1965 Code § 9-6-9; amd. 2009 Code)
E. Misrepresentation Of Age: It shall be unlawful for any person under seventeen (17) years of age to state falsely, either orally or in writing, that he is not
under the age of seventeen (17) years, or to present or offer to any person any evidence of age and identity which is false or not actually his own for
the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material. (1965 Code § 9-6-9)
7-5-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS OF VANDALISM AND SIMILAR JUVENILE OFFENSES:
7-5-3-1: BACKGROUND; INTENT:
Acts of vandalism resulting in damage to real or personal property within the village have increased, posing a threat to the value of property and the
welfare of residents. It is in the best interests of the village that such acts be prosecuted by the village as a local offense; that penalties therefor be
imposed which are related to the nature of the act and the type of offender; and that parents or legal guardians of minors who allow such acts to be
committed by such minor be held criminally responsible for the failure to prevent the commission of such acts. The diligent pursuit of such interests will
tend to increase parental supervision of minors and reduce the incidence of juvenile vandalism, thus advancing the welfare of residents of the village.
(1965 Code § 9-1-51)
7-5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this section 7-5-3, the following definitions shall apply:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: Shall include a person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state, but does not include a person
appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Illinois juvenile court act2.
MINOR: A person who has attained eleven (11) years of age, but who has not yet reached eighteen (18) years of age.
PERSON: Shall include any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, the state of Illinois or any political
subdivision.
PROPERTY: Shall include any real estate including improvements thereon, and tangible personalty. (1965 Code § 9-1-51)
7-5-3-3: OFFENSES:
A. Prohibited Acts: Within the village, no person shall:
1. Knowingly or recklessly damage or cause to be damaged any property of another person without his consent; or
2. Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over any motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft, or any part thereof, of another
person without his consent.
B. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any minor living with his parent or guardian to neglect to restrain such minor
from committing any act prohibited by subsection A of this section. (The commission of any act prohibited by subsection A of this section by a minor
who is living with his parent or guardian shall raise the presumption that the parent or guardian has neglected to restrain such minor from committing
such act. It shall be an affirmative defense for the parent or guardian to prove that such parent or guardian exercised his duty to restrain the minor from
committing the act prohibited by subsection A of this section complained of in the pending action, but that such action on the part of the parent of or
guardian to attempt to restrain said minor, although exercised with due care, was unsuccessful.) (1965 Code § 9-1-51)
7-5-3-4: PENALTIES:
A. Penalties Imposed: Every person or minor found guilty of an offense under subsection 7-5-3-3A of this section 7-5-3 shall be subject to either or both of
the following penalties: (1965 Code § 9-1-51)
1. Fine: A fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1965 Code § 9-1-51; amd. 2009 Code)
2. Court Supervision; Conditions:
a. The court may, without entering a judgment of guilty, place such person under court supervision for any period not exceeding one year. Such
supervision may include any of the conditions provided in subsection A2b of this section as the court determines appropriate. If the person
completes the period of supervision without violating the conditions imposed by the court, the court shall discharge the defendant from supervision,
and dismiss the charge against him. If the person, while under court supervision, is convicted of any criminal offense in any jurisdiction and the
state's attorney or village prosecutor, as the case may be, moves for termination of supervision, the court shall terminate the supervision and enter
a judgment of guilty, on the plea or finding.
b. The conditions of court supervision may, in addition, require that the defendant:
(1) Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training;
(2) Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), whichever is less;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 139/307
(3) Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism; and
(4) If a minor, to reside with his parent or in a foster home; attend school; attend a nonresidential program for youth; or contribute to his own
support at home or in a foster home.
c. When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition for court supervision, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of payment.
When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of court
supervision, may impose an additional period of not more than two (2) years. Only the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such
additional period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence, including the authority to modify or enlarge the original
conditions and to revoke the penalty of court supervision if the conditions of payment are violated during such additional period.
d. When a petition is filed charging a violation of a condition imposed for court supervision, the court:
(1) May order a summons to the offender to appear; or order a warrant for the offender's arrest where there is danger of his fleeing the jurisdiction
or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to answer a summons. The issuance of such warrant or summons shall stay the
sentence of court supervision until the final determination of the charge, and the term of court supervision shall not run so long as the offender
has not answered the summons or warrant.
(2) Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may admit the offender to bail pending the hearing.
(3) Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of confrontation, cross examination and representation by counsel. The village has the
burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by a preponderance of the evidence.
(4) Shall not revoke court supervision for failure to comply with conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations upon the offender
unless such failure is due to his wilful refusal to pay.
(5) May modify the conditions of court supervision on motion of the village at its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice to all
parties and a hearing.
e. If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any time prior to the expiration or termination of that period, it may continue the
offender on the existing period, with or without modifying or enlarging the conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the
time of the initial penalty.
f. A judgment revoking a sentence of court supervision is a final appealable order. (1965 Code § 9-1-51)
B. Fine: Every person found guilty of an offense under subsection 7-5-3-3A of this section 7-5-3 shall pay a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(1965 Code § 9-1-51; amd. 2009 Code)
7-5-3-5: LIABILITY OF PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN:
The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or
reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for violation of this section 7-5-3; provided, that said minor has not paid said fine, or made restitution or
reparation within the time ordered by the court; and further provided, that said parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear
in the original cause against such minor and all proceedings thereafter. (1965 Code § 9-1-51)
7-5-4: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (1965 Code § 9-6-10)
Footnote 1: 750 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
Footnote 2: 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
Chapter 6
GRAFFITI; MALICIOUS DAMAGE TO PROPERTY
7-6-1: GRAFFITI:
A. Definition: "Graffiti" shall be defined as any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, picture or letter placed on the real or personal
property of the owner without the owner's express written permission.
B. Graffiti Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the real or personal, public or private property of another.
C. Allowing Deleterious Graffiti On Property: It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of fixed real or personal property located within public view
to place or give permission to place "graffiti", as defined in subsection A of this section, on said real or personal property if the graffiti incites violence by
referring to a gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity by referring to sexual activity or contains defamatory material about a public or
private person.
D. Possession Of Spray Paint Or Markers: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, while in any public building or facility, or while on private property,
any of the following materials with the intent to use such material(s) to violate this section: spray paint containers, paint, ink, marking pens containing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 140/307
nonwater soluble fluid, brushes, applicators or other materials for marking, scratching or etching.
E. Violations; Penalties:
1. Gang Members, Penalty: Any person convicted of violating this section who is also found to be a gang member, or a candidate for gang membership
at the time the offense is committed shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), in addition to other penalties.
2. Persons Not Gang Members, Community Service: Any person convicted of violating this section shall be subject to fifty (50) hours of community
service, if not a gang member. (1965 Code § 9-13-1)
7-6-2: SPRAY PAINT:
A. Sale:
1. No person shall sell, give away, deliver, transfer or offer to sell any spray paint, aerosol propelled paint, or any device designed to expel paint by
means of a compressed gas to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. For purposes of preventing the violation of this subsection, any person may refuse to sell spray paint, aerosol propelled paint or any device designed
to expel paint by means of a compressed gas to any person who cannot produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she
is over the age of eighteen (18) years. (1965 Code § 9-13-2)
B. Possession:
1. Except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, no person under the age of eighteen (18) years may possess, purchase or accept as a gift, a
2+2 paint or aerosol propelled paint or device designed to expel paint by means of a compressed gas.
2. The possession of spray paint, aerosol propelled paint or devices designed to expel paint by means of a compressed gas by persons under the age
of eighteen (18) years under the direct supervision of a parent or legal guardian of such person, or while such person is engaged in the performance
of the duties of their employment, or while at school and engaged in a function sanctioned or supervised by a teacher or other school officials, or
while on their own land or in their own abode is not prohibited by this subsection. (1965 Code § 9-13-3)
7-6-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The provisions of section 7-5-3 of this title are hereby adopted by reference as a part of this chapter. (1965 Code § 9-13-4)
7-6-4: PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
Upon proper notice by the village and opportunity to be heard, the owner of any property that has been defaced by the use of paint, spray cans, felt tip
pens, or other similar substances or devices shall be responsible for its removal within three (3) days of the date of the village notice. The village may
extend the compliance period for good cause such as weather or other conditions beyond the owner's control. (1965 Code § 9-13-5)
7-6-5: REMOVAL BY VILLAGE:
In the event the owner fails to remove the defacement within the time period specified by the village notice, the village will cause the removal of the
defacement, and the owner shall be liable for the expenses incurred. (1965 Code § 9-13-6)
7-6-6: PENALTY:
The penalties in section 1-4-1 of this code shall apply to this chapter. (1965 Code § 9-13-7)
Chapter 7
FIREARMS
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
FIREARMS: Such articles and objects defined as "firearms" under 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/0.01 et seq.
HANDGUNS: Any firearm of a size which can be concealed upon the person. (1965 Code § 9-12-1; amd. 2009 Code)
7-7-2: PROHIBITED SALES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 141/307
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell any firearm or device intended to propel or project any arrow, pointed dart, pellet or similar projectile to
any of the following persons:
A. Any person previously convicted of a felony.
B. Any person addicted to the use of narcotics or addicted to the use of alcohol. (1965 Code § 9-12-2)
C. Any person who is not licensed to own firearms by the state of Illinois, department of state police, or its successors, or governing body performing
similar functions, which license shall be evidenced by the possession of any Illinois firearm owner's identification card, or similar or substitute
identification. (1965 Code § 9-12-2; amd. 2009 Code)
7-7-3: STATE IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or possess firearms without first obtaining an Illinois firearm owner's identification card, or similar or
substitute identification, from the Illinois department of state police, or its successors in function. (1965 Code § 9-12-3; amd. 2009 Code)
7-7-4: SELLING FIREARMS; LICENSE AND FEE:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away to any person within the village more than five (5) handguns in any calendar
year without securing a license therefor. (1965 Code § 9-12-4)
B. License Fee: The fee fixed for a license to sell firearms is as provided in section 4-1-3 of this code. (1965 Code § 9-12-7; amd. 2009 Code)
7-7-5: EXISTING BUSINESSES:
Any gun shop licensed in the village prior to the effective date hereof shall be permitted to remain in its currently licensed location, and shall be exempt
from the provisions of any Cook County ordinance which would prohibit the operation of a gun shop within a proscribed radius from any park, school or
forest preserve. (1965 Code § 9-12-8)
7-7-6: HANDGUNS TO MINORS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sell or give to any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, any handgun. (1965 Code § 9-12-6; amd. 2009 Code)
7-7-7: DEFACING IDENTIFICATION MARKS:
A. Prohibitions: No person shall knowingly or intentionally change, alter, remove or obliterate the name of the importer's or manufacturer's serial number of
any firearm, and no person shall possess any firearm upon which any such importer's or manufacturer's serial number has been changed, altered,
removed or obliterated.
B. Exemptions: Nothing in this section shall prevent a person from making repairs, replacement of parts, or other changes to a firearm if those repairs,
replacement of parts, or changes cause the removal of the name of the maker, model, or other marks of identification other than the serial number on
the firearm's frame or receiver. (1965 Code § 9-12-5; amd. 2009 Code)
Title 8
ANIMAL CONTROL
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 3 of this code for alarm system regulations.
Chapter 1
GENERAL ANIMAL REGULATIONS
8-1-1: KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 142/307
A. Livestock: Keep, harbor, possess or maintain within the village any horse, cow, mule, goat, sheep, hog or other animal commonly classified as livestock.
(1965 Code § 9-7-1)
B. Poultry Or Fowl: Keep, harbor, possess or maintain within the village any roosters, ducks, geese or other fowl commonly classified as poultry, excluding
hens. (Ord. 04-21-15-O3, 4-21-2015)
C. Bees: Keep, harbor, possess, or maintain, or permit to be kept, harbored or maintained, at any place or in or upon any premises or part thereof in the
village any bees or beehives. (1965 Code § 9-7-3)
D. Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Animals: Keep, harbor, possess or maintain within the village any dangerous or potentially dangerous animals
such as, but not limited to, snakes, poisonous lizards, animals normally considered to be wild or any vicious domestic animal. (1965 Code § 9-7-4)
8-1-2: LIMIT ON NUMBER OF CERTAIN ANIMALS:
A. Number Limited: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, possess or maintain within the village more than three (3) rabbits, hamsters, or
other small domestic animals, male or female, over two (2) months old.
B. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to licensed pet shops, kennels, catteries and veterinary hospitals. (1965 Code § 9-7-5)
8-1-3: LIVESTOCK OR FOWL RUNNING AT LARGE:
A. Running At Large Prohibited; Impoundment: It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person to permit any cattle, swine,
sheep, goats, geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens, or other fowl owned by him or in his custody or control to run at large within the village, and any so
found shall be impounded by the chief of police, and the owner or person having possession of such animal or fowl and allowing the same to run at
large shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
B. Tying Or Herding: The tying or securing by means of a rope, chain or other contrivance of any animal of the species mentioned in this section upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public grounds within the limits of the village, the herding or keeping of any such animal or animals upon any
unenclosed ground within said limits (without the consent of the owner thereof or the person having control of the same) or in any public park, street,
avenue, alley or other public place in the village or permitting any of said animals to graze thereon, whether attended by drivers or watchers or not,
shall also be deemed a violation of this section, and such animals shall be deemed to be running at large under this chapter.
C. Absence Of Permission No Defense: It shall be no defense to any action under this section that the owner or possessor of any animal found at large
contrary to the provisions hereof did not authorize the running at large of such animal or animals. (1965 Code § 9-7-6)
8-1-4: DRIVING ANIMALS FROM ENCLOSED LOT:
No person shall take or drive any livestock or fowl from any enclosed lot or tract of ground, or from any stable or other building where such animal is not a
trespasser, or from outside of the village limits into the village limits, with the intent that such animal may be impounded. (1965 Code § 9-7-7; amd. 2009
Code)
8-1-5: DANGEROUS, VICIOUS OR WILD ANIMALS RESTRICTED; PARADE PERMIT:
A. Running At Large Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dangerous, unruly or fierce animal, or any vicious animal of any kind
owned by him or in his custody or control to run at large within the village. (1965 Code § 9-7-8)
B. Permit For Exhibitions Or Parades: Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted upon securing a
permit from the village clerk. (1965 Code § 9-7-8; amd. 2009 Code)
8-1-6: IMPOUNDING AT LARGE ANIMALS:
All police officials and public poundkeepers in and for the village shall seize and impound any and all animals running at large in the village. (1965 Code
§ 9-7-9)
8-1-7: CONFINED ANIMALS; OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS:
It shall be unlawful to own, keep, or use any premises in or upon which animals shall be confined so as to be offensive to those in the vicinity or to the
public. (1965 Code § 9-7-10)
8-1-8: NOISY ANIMALS:
The keeping of any animal within any yard, garage, veterinary hospital or other place within the village which, by barking, howling, crying, singing or
causing frequent or long continued noise between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., or at any other time, shall disturb the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 143/307
peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any neighboring dwelling or residence or of persons in the vicinity, shall be prohibited. (1965 Code § 9-7-11;
amd. 2009 Code)
8-1-9: SLAUGHTERING LIVESTOCK:
It shall be unlawful, and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance, to slaughter or kill any cattle, hogs or sheep, or keep, maintain or use therein any house or
place in which the business of slaughtering any of such animals may be carried on in the village. (1965 Code § 9-7-12)
8-1-10: DISPOSITION OF DEAD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person that keeps, harbors, possesses or maintains any animal within the village to permit the carcass of any such animal,
upon the death of said animal, to remain in the village more than twelve (12) hours after the death of same. The carcass shall be disposed of by burial or
cremation. (1965 Code § 9-7-13)
8-1-11: ANIMAL BITES:
A. Report To Police Department:
1. The owner, keeper or person having custody of any dog or other animal which has bitten any person shall report to the police department giving the
name of the person bitten, the date of the occurrence, the type of animal and whether or not the animal has been inoculated for rabies. (1965 Code
§ 9-7-15)
2. It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge that a person has been bitten by a dog or other animal to fail to notify the police department
promptly. (1965 Code § 9-7-15; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Selling Or Moving Animal Prohibited: No owner or keeper of any dog or other animal, when notified that such dog or other animal has bitten any person,
or has so injured any person as to cause an abrasion of the skin, shall sell or give away such dog or permit or allow such dog or other animal to be
taken beyond the limits of the village. (1965 Code § 9-7-15)
C. Observation By Veterinarian Required:
1. The police department shall instruct the owner of the dog or other animal to take the dog or other animal to a veterinarian for observation for ten (10)
days following the incident. (1965 Code § 9-7-15; amd. 2009 Code)
2. It shall be unlawful for the owner of such dog or other animal to refuse or fail to comply with the instructions of the police department to take the dog
or other animal to a veterinarian.
D. Report To Health Officer: The police department shall report the incident to the health officer who will notify the Cook County rabies control inspector.
(1965 Code § 9-7-15)
E. Stray Dog Or Other Animal: In the event of a person being bitten by a stray dog or other animal, the dog or other animal will be impounded, if possible,
in the village pound by any police officer or poundkeeper. The poundkeeper shall cause the dog or other animal to be observed by a veterinarian for ten
(10) days following the incident. (1965 Code § 9-7-15; amd. 2009 Code)
F. Expenses Borne By Owner: Any expenses incurred in the handling of any dog or other animal under this section shall be borne by the owner. (1965
Code § 9-7-15)
8-1-12: PENALTIES:
A. Penalty Imposed: Any person violating the terms and conditions of this title shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), with each and every day that a violation is allowed to exist constituting a distinct and separate offense
under the terms of this title. (Ord. 04-21-15-O3, 4-21-2015)
B. Remedial Action: In addition, the village may take whatever action it may deem appropriate to enforce the terms of this title, including an action for
injunction. All attorney fees and costs incurred by the village in enforcing the terms of this title shall be paid by the violator. (1965 Code § 9-7-97)
Chapter 2
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; WILDLIFE PROTECTION
8-2-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the village. Any person guilty of any of the following acts shall be guilty of a violation of this section:
A. Overloading, overdriving, overworking, beating, torturing, tormenting, mutilating or cruelly killing any animal or causing or knowingly allowing the same
to be done.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 144/307
B. Cruelly working any animal, or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done.
C. Unnecessarily failing to provide any animal in his charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink, shelter, air, veterinary care when
needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment.
D. Abandoning any animal.
E. Driving, or causing to be driven or kept, any animal in an unnecessary cruel manner.
F. Carrying or causing to be kept, any animal bound or tied by its legs, or bound down by the neck, so that it cannot freely stand in an upright position while
being transported or by carrying or causing to be carried. Keeping or causing to be kept any animal, in any crate or cage, so constructed as to permit
such animal to push its head between the slats, wires or other openings of such crate or cage, unless the space between such slats or wires is
sufficient to permit such animal to freely withdraw its head therefrom. (1965 Code § 9-7-20; amd. 2009 Code)
8-2-2: ANIMAL FIGHTS:
No person shall instigate, cause or procure any dogfight, cockfight, or any public or private fighting of any animals of any kind. (1965 Code § 9-7-22)
8-2-3: IMMORAL EXHIBITIONS:
No person shall instigate, cause, procure or assist in any indecent or immoral show or exhibition of any animal. (1965 Code § 9-1-2; amd. 2009 Code)
8-2-4: MISTREATMENT OF, INTERFERING WITH POLICE DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, or kill any dog used by the police
department of the village in the performance of the functions of such department, or to interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by said
department or any officer or member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of said department, or such member or officer. (1965
Code § 9-1-45)
8-2-5: KILLING OR WOUNDING BIRDS:
No person shall kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, by the use of firearms, slingshot, bow and arrow, pelting with stones or otherwise, any song,
plumage, or game bird within any private grounds, or public park, squares, streets or grounds (such bird not being the property of the person so offending),
or take the eggs of any such bird within any private enclosure or public grounds of the village for the purpose of doing any act prohibited in this section.
(1965 Code § 9-7-21)
8-2-6: FEEDING MIGRATING BIRDS, OTHER WILDLIFE:
It shall be unlawful to feed migrating birds or other wildlife in the area beginning at the east line of the property at 8030 Riverwalk Drive (tax index 18-02-
204-001-0000) going eastward to and including the bridge across the Des Plaines River leading to the village, which bridge commences at the junction of
Riverwalk Drive and Joliet Avenue. (1965 Code § 9-7-57; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 3
DOGS AND CATS
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
CAT: Includes all animals of the domesticated cat family (Feles domesticus) upward of the age of three (3) months.
DOG: Except where specifically distinguished, shall include all animals of the canine species, upward of the age of three (3) months.
HARBORING STRAY ANIMALS: A person who habitually feeds any cat, dog, or other domestic or wild animal, not owned by him, on a regular or irregular
basis, or cares for, or actively seeks the attention of said cat, dog or other domestic or wild animal, at or upon his or her property or within the village shall
be guilty of "harboring a stray animal".
OWNER: Includes any person who shall harbor or permit any animal to remain on any premises while said animal is under his or her charge or control.
(1965 Code § 9-7-30)
8-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 145/307
A. Licensing Requirements:
1. No person shall own or keep a dog or cat unless such dog or cat is licensed as hereinafter provided. Every person who owns or keeps a dog or cat
shall report to the village clerk his name and address and shall, at the time of application for the license, give the name, breed, color and sex of each
and every dog or cat owned or kept by such person, and shall pay to the clerk the sum of three dollars ($3.00) for each sterile dog or cat and five
dollars ($5.00) for each fertile dog or cat so owned or so kept, and shall cause such dog or cat to be registered for license in the office of the clerk.
2. Upon payment to the village clerk the fee herein provided, the clerk shall furnish to the person paying such fee a license tag and memorandum of
registry for each dog or cat for which the fee has been paid.
3. All such licenses shall expire on December 31 following the date of issue. In the event that a license is not obtained by any owner of a dog or cat
prior to June 1 of each year, then the cost for such license after said date shall be the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for each dog or cat. (1965 Code
§ 9-7-31)
B. Nonresidents Exempt: The provisions of this chapter relating to the licensing of dogs or cats shall not apply to dogs and cats of nonresidents remaining
temporarily in or passing through the village. (1965 Code § 9-7-43)
8-3-3: REGISTRY; ISSUANCE OF TAGS:
A. Registry: The village clerk shall keep a complete registry, in a book to be kept for that purpose, of all licensed dogs and cats, describing the same by
name, breed, color and sex, and shall also enter therein the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag. (1965 Code § 9-7-32)
B. Tags: The clerk shall provide, each and every year, such number of tags as may be necessary (the shape to be changed each year), having stamped
thereon the year for which the license fee is paid and the number of the tag, and he shall deliver one of such tags, numbered to correspond with the
registry number of the dog or cat, to the person who paid the license fee upon such dog or cat. (1965 Code § 9-7-32; amd. 2009 Code)
C. Duplicate Tag: If it appears that a license tag was lost, stolen or unlawfully taken from any dog or cat, and for which proof, satisfactory to the clerk, that
such dog or cat was so licensed and that a good and substantial collar was put around its neck with a license tag attached thereto as provided in this
chapter, the clerk shall, upon the payment to said clerk by such owner or keeper of such dog of a fee of one dollar ($1.00), deliver to such owner or
keeper a duplicate license tag to correspond with the license tag originally issued. (1965 Code § 9-7-32)
8-3-4: INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES:
No dog or cat shall be registered for a license by the village clerk or any other authorized representative of the village unless the owner or keeper of such
dog or cat exhibits at the time of registration a certificate by a licensed veterinarian that such dog or cat, during the current calendar year or the calendar
year immediately preceding such registration for a license, has been inoculated against rabies. It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor in the village a dog or
cat that has not been vaccinated against rabies for the current year. (1965 Code § 9-7-33)
8-3-5: COLLAR AND TAG:
A. Collar And Tag Required: Every dog or cat kept within the village shall be provided by its owner or keeper with a good and substantial collar. Such
owner shall cause to be attached thereto in a secure manner a license tag issued by the village clerk for such dog or cat for the current year, and also a
tag issued by the state rabies inspector, deputy inspector, or any licensed veterinarian, showing that such dog or cat has been inoculated against
rabies during the current or immediately preceding calendar year, and shall at all times cause such dog or cat to wear such collar with said tags
attached thereto. (1965 Code § 9-7-34; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Removing Collars, License Tags Or Muzzles: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly qualified police officer or poundkeeper, to remove the
collar, license tag or muzzle from any dog or cat within the limits of the village without the consent of the owner or keeper of such dog or cat. (1965
Code § 9-7-35)
8-3-6: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
A. Duty Of Owner: No person owning, keeping, or harboring a dog or cat shall allow such dog or cat to be at large in the village on any public street, park
or other public property or on private premises other than that of the owner or keeper of such dog or cat. No dog or cat shall be deemed to be at large
while attended by the owner or keeper or other person and firmly held by a chain or leash in such manner as to prevent said dog or cat from biting any
person or animal, or from running onto any private premises. The owner or keeper of any dog or cat who permits such dog or cat to be at large in
violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to penalty, and any dog or cat may be impounded as herein provided. (1965 Code § 9-7-36;
amd. 2009 Code)
B. Nuisance Declared: Any dog or cat running at large in the village and any dog or cat that may in any manner disturb the quiet of any person or
neighborhood or that shall so bite or so injure a person as to cause an abrasion of the skin is declared to be a nuisance, and such dog or cat shall be
taken up and impounded. If such dog or cat cannot be safely taken up and impounded, it may be killed by any police officer.
C. Restrictions In Parks And Play Areas: No dog or cat, whether or not attended by the owner or keeper or other person, and held or led by chain or leash
as provided in subsection A of this section, shall be permitted in the area of any public park set aside for the playing of tennis, baseball or other game,
or for use as a tot lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 146/307
D. Allowing Dogs Or Cats Upon Property Of Another: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog or cat to go upon the private property of any but
the owner of said dog or cat without the permission of the owner of the aforementioned property. (1965 Code § 9-7-36)
8-3-7: HARBORING STRAY ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor a stray or unowned or unclaimed domestic or wild animal. (1965 Code § 9-7-36)
8-3-8: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS:
A. Nuisance Declared; Impoundment: Any dangerous, fierce or vicious dog running at large in any street, alley or other public place within the village or
upon the private premises of any person, other than the owner or keeper thereof, and any dog which may in any manner unduly disturb the quiet of,
endanger or annoy any person or neighborhood within the village, or which shall bite any person or so injure any person as to cause an abrasion of the
skin is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and such dog shall be taken up and impounded in the manner provided in subsection 8-3-9A of this chapter.
B. Authority To Kill: If any dangerous, fierce or vicious dog cannot safely be taken up and impounded, such dog may be killed by any police officer of the
village; provided, however, that in all cases where any dog so killed has bitten any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of any such person, it shall
be the duty of the police officer killing such dog to forthwith deliver the carcass and the brain of such dog to the health department of the village for
examination. (1965 Code § 9-7-37)
8-3-9: IMPOUNDMENT; NOTICE; REDEMPTION:
A. Place Of Impoundment Designated; Impoundment Authorized: The village manager shall designate a place or places for the purpose of impounding
dogs, cats and other animals. It shall be the duty of all police officers to seize and impound any and all animals running at large in the village, and the
owner or keeper of such animal shall pay the impoundment fee agreed upon between the village manager and the designated pound. (1965 Code § 9-
7-38)
B. Notice To Owners:
1. Upon the impounding of any animal, the village shall notify the owner or keeper of the animal, personally or by mail, of such impounding, unless the
owner or the keeper is unknown and cannot be found. The notice shall advise the owner or keeper that unless he applies for redemption of the
animal, the animal will be destroyed or disposed of by the village at the end of three (3) days, unless a dog is impounded because it is considered or
alleged to be dangerous, fierce or vicious, or that it has bitten or injured or attempted to injure any person, or because it is suspected of having
rabies. In any of these instances, the period shall be fifteen (15) days instead of five (5) days after the notice has been given.
2. If the owner of the impounded animal cannot be identified, the animal will be destroyed or disposed of as the village manager shall determine and
direct. (1965 Code § 9-7-39)
C. Redemption Of Animals:
1. Except as herein provided, any animal impounded may be redeemed by the owner or keeper thereof at any time before the destruction, sale or other
disposition of such animal, upon payment of the redemption fee charged by the pound per day, or fraction thereof, to defray the cost of keeping the
animal, any pick up fee charged, and if the dog is not already licensed, payment of a full annual license fee for the current license year.
2. If a dog impounded is held on complaint that it is dangerous, fierce or vicious, or that it has disturbed in any manner the quiet of any person or
neighborhood, or that it has bitten or injured or attempted to injure any person, such dog shall not be redeemed until such complaint has been
disposed of, and then only if permitted under the order of the court which passes on such complaint.
3. No redemption shall be made of any dog suspected of having rabies unless and until it has been determined that the dog is not so afflicted. (1965
Code § 9-7-40)
8-3-10: NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS LIMITED:
A. Single-Family Residences: In single-family residential districts, as defined in the zoning regulations of the village, no person shall suffer or permit more
than three (3) dogs or cats to be on or remain in and about any one single-family residence.
B. Multi-Family Units: In multi-family residential units, the total amount of dogs and cats shall be no more than one dog or cat per unit. The property owner
shall determine how to divide the total allocation per building to each tenant, but in no case shall an individual tenant have more than three (3) dogs
and cats. (1965 Code § 9-7-44; amd. 2009 Code)
8-3-11: CONTROL AND REMOVAL OF DOG AND CAT EXCREMENT:
A. Removal Of Excrement Required:
1. No owner, keeper or person in control of a dog or cat shall cause or permit such dog or cat to be on any public property, public park or public street,
or on private property not owned or possessed by such owner, keeper or person in control, unless such owner, keeper or person in control of such
dog has in his immediate possession a device for the removal of dog and cat excrement and a depository for the transmission of the same to a
receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such owner, keeper or person in control. (1965 Code § 9-7-46; amd. 2009 Code)
2. No owner, keeper or person in control of any dog or cat shall fail or refuse to immediately remove excrement left by such dog or cat on any public
property, public park or public street, or on private property not owned or possessed by such owner, keeper or person in control of such dog or cat
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 147/307
and to transmit and deposit the same in a proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such owner, keeper or person in control of
said dog or cat.
B. Time Limit: It shall be unlawful to permit any dog or cat excrement to remain on property owned or possessed by a dog or cat owner or keeper for
longer than twenty four (24) hours unless deposited in a watertight receptacle with a close fitting cover. (1965 Code § 9-7-46)
8-3-12: DEFECATION BY DOGS OR CATS UPON PROPERTY OF OTHERS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dog or cat to defecate upon the property of any but the owner thereof or upon any private property without the permission
of the owner of said private property. (1965 Code § 9-7-47; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 4
PIGEONS
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter, they will have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
CARRIER PIGEON: Homing and racing pigeons which have the name of the owner stamped upon the wing or tail, or are banded upon the leg with the
name or initials of the owner or with an identification or registration number stamped on the band.
DEPARTMENT: The health department of the village and shall include the head of such department or any employee acting in his stead.
LOFT: Any structure in which carrier pigeons are housed.
RACING PIGEON: A pigeon registered with a national pigeon racing organization and used as a game competitive bird. The pigeons are not to be
identified or classified as fowl when raised and used in the sport and hobby of racing carrier pigeons. (1965 Code § 9-7-85)
8-4-2: PIGEONS PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall raise, maintain, keep or act in such a manner as to attract pigeons or other similar fowl. The
conduct prohibited by this section includes setting out food. The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to carrier pigeons. (1965 Code §§ 9-7-
86, 9-7-87; amd. 2009 Code)
A. Registration: The owner, keeper, or person having custody of any carrier pigeon shall register such pigeon with the village clerk. The clerk shall keep a
complete registry in a book to be kept for that purpose, of the name and address of all owners, keepers, or persons having custody of any carrier
pigeons, the type of pigeon, the owner's identifying mark, as stamped on the pigeon or on the leg band, and the number of pigeons kept on the
premises. (1965 Code § 9-7-88)
B. Certification: The owner, keeper, or person having custody of any carrier pigeon shall provide the clerk with a copy of the registration of the pigeons with
a national pigeon racing organization or a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian or other authority certifying that the pigeons are homing or racing
pigeons. (1965 Code § 9-7-89)
C. Identifying Mark: All carrier pigeons shall have the name of the owner stamped upon the wing or tail or be banded upon the leg with the name or initials
of the owner or with an identification or registration number stamped on the band. (1965 Code § 9-7-90)
8-4-3: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF LOFT:
A. Compliance With Zoning And Building Regulations: All lofts shall comply with the setback and height requirements for accessory structures in the
zoning district in which it is located. The loft shall comply with the building code and shall be maintained at all times in a clean, orderly condition and
kept in good repair. (1965 Code § 9-7-92)
B. Annual Inspection; Fee:
1. The village health officer shall annually conduct an inspection of every loft in the village to ensure that the lofts are kept in a sanitary condition and
are in good repair. (1965 Code § 9-7-93)
2. The owner, keeper, or person having custody of any carrier pigeon shall annually pay to the village a twenty five dollar ($25.00) inspection fee. (1965
Code § 9-7-94)
8-4-4: KILLING OR WOUNDING CARRIER PIGEONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, to shoot, kill, maim, or injure any Antwerp or homing pigeon, commonly called carrier pigeon,
knowing the same to be such, or entrap, catch, detain or remove any mark, band or other means of identification from such pigeon; provided, that such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 148/307
pigeon, at the time, shall have the name of the owner stamped or marked thereon or have thereon a band with the owner's name initialed or numbered.
(1965 Code § 9-7-95)
8-4-5: NUISANCES DECLARED:
It is hereby declared a nuisance for the owner of carrier pigeons to feed, house or train carrier pigeons in such a manner as to attract other birds to the
training house or feeding areas. It is also declared a nuisance for the owner of carrier pigeons to feed, house, or train their pigeons in such a way that
pigeons defecate upon another's property. Further, it shall be a positive duty of a carrier pigeon owner to remove or otherwise clean up the defecation of
their pigeons or other birds attracted to the training, housing or feeding areas of their carrier pigeons. This obligation shall extend to the licensee's property
and all public and private property where the owner consents to the entry of the licensee upon his property. (1965 Code § 9-7-96)
Chapter 5
KENNELS AND CATTERIES
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the content makes such meanings
repugnant thereto:
CATTERY: Any establishment or premises wherein or whereon cats are kept for any purpose.
KENNEL1: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more domesticated animals more than four (4) months of age are housed, groomed, bred, boarded,
trained or sold, or which offers provisions for minor medical treatment. (1965 Code § 9-7-55; amd. 2009 Code)
8-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
No person shall manage, conduct or carry on the business of operating a kennel or cattery without first having obtained a license therefor. In case the
business of buying or selling or dealing in birds, dogs, and other small animals used as household pets and for domestic purposes is conducted, operated,
managed or carried on in connection with the business of a "kennel" or a "cattery", as defined in section 8-5-1 of this chapter, in the same premises, and
by the same person, then only one license need be obtained, and that license shall be that which requires the payment of the highest license fee under the
provisions of section 4-1-3 of this code. (1965 Code § 9-7-56; amd. 2009 Code)
8-5-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
A. Application: Any person desiring to conduct, carry on or operate a "kennel" or a "cattery", as defined in section 8-5-1 of this chapter, shall make a written
application for a license so to do, which shall conform to the general requirements relating to applications for licenses. Such application shall also state
the number of animals which is proposed to be kept in the establishment or premises for which application for license is made. (1965 Code § 9-7-57)
B. Investigation By Health Officer; Issuance Of License: Upon receipt of such application, the health officer shall cause such investigation to be made as,
in his judgment, is necessary for the issuance of the license hereinbefore referenced. Upon completion of such investigation, the health officer shall
forward such application, together with his recommendations, to the village president, whereupon, in his discretion, he shall cause a license to be
issued to such applicant upon the payment of the license fee. (1965 Code § 9-7-58)
8-5-4: METAL TAGS:
With such kennel or cattery license, there shall be issued a number of appropriate metal tags equal to the number of dogs or cats authorized to be kept in
the kennel or cattery. Such tags shall be made in a form so that they may be readily distinguishable from the individual dog registry license tags required
for the same year. The licensee of a kennel or cattery shall at all times keep one of such tags attached to the collar of each dog or cat over six (6) months
old kept by him under such license. Such tags may be transferred from one dog or cat to another in the kennel or cattery whenever any dog or cat is
removed. (1965 Code § 9-7-59)
8-5-5: REMOVAL OF DOG OR CAT:
No dog or cat bearing any tag shall be permitted to stray or to be taken anywhere outside the limits of the kennel or cattery, unless such animal is on a
leash or is taken out temporarily for the purposes of hunting, breeding, trial show or exhibition. (1965 Code § 9-7-60)
8-5-6: SANITATION PROVISIONS:
All kennels and catteries shall be kept free and clean from decaying food and from filth of any kind. The kennels, buildings and pens shall be whitewashed
or disinfected from time to time and shall be kept in a sanitary condition satisfactory to the health officer. (1965 Code § 9-7-61; amd. 2009 Code)
Footnote 1: See also section 13-2-2 of this code, definition of same term.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 149/307
Chapter 6
VETERINARY HOSPITALS
8-6-1: DEFINITION:
The term "veterinary hospital", as used in this chapter, shall mean any institution, place or enclosure used for the harboring or reception, for care or
treatment, of two (2) or more horses, dogs, cats or other animals. (1965 Code § 9-7-70)
8-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION:
A. License Required; Fee: No person shall manage, conduct or carry on the business of operating a veterinary hospital without first having obtained a
license therefor. The license fee required shall be as indicated in section 4-1-3 of this code. (1965 Code § 9-7-71)
B. Application: Any person desiring to conduct, carry on or operate a "veterinary hospital", as defined in section 8-6-1 of this chapter, shall make a written
application for a license so to do, which shall conform to the general requirements relating to applications for licenses. Such application shall also state
the number of animals which is proposed to be kept in the establishment or premises for which application for license is made. (1965 Code § 9-7-76)
C. Investigation By Health Officer; Issuance Of License: Upon receipt of such application, the health officer shall cause such investigation to be made as,
in his judgment, is necessary for the issuance of the license hereinbefore referenced. Upon completion of such investigation, the health officer shall
cause a license to be issued to such applicant upon the payment of the fee required. (1965 Code § 9-7-77)
8-6-3: SANITATION PROVISIONS:
All veterinary hospitals shall be kept free and clean from decaying food and from filth of any kind. The kennels, buildings and pens shall be disinfected
from time to time and shall be kept in a sanitary condition satisfactory to the health officer. (1965 Code § 9-7-72)
8-6-4: CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS FOR OBSERVATION FOR RABIES:
Provisions shall be made in each veterinary hospital for securely impounding any animal confined for observation for rabies. Special precautions shall be
taken to securely and separately confine any such animal during such period of observation, and a report shall be made to the health officer of any such
animal so confined. (1965 Code § 9-7-73)
8-6-5: REPORT OF DISEASES:
It shall be the duty of any person in charge or control of a veterinary hospital to make a report to the health officer of any contagious or infectious disease
which may exist in such hospital. (1965 Code § 9-7-75)
Chapter 7
HENS
8-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
CHICKEN: An individual animal of the species Gallus gallus domesticus.
COOP: A structure that is designed to house hens which is enclosed on all sides with a roof, door and windows.
DWELLING UNIT: As defined in title 13 of this code.
DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY: As defined in title 13 of this code.
DWELLING UNIT, TWO-FAMILY: As defined in title 13 of this code.
HEN: The female of the species Gallus gallus domesticus or chicken.
ROOSTER: The male of the species Gallus gallus domesticus or chicken.
RUN: An outdoor area that is enclosed on all vertical sides by fencing. The run must be attached to or must surround a coop with a doorway or hatch that
allows access into the space by hens.
YARD, FRONT: As defined in title 13 of this code.
YARD, REAR: As defined in title 13 of this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 150/307
YARD, SIDE: As defined in title 13 of this code.
ZONING LOT: As defined in title 13 of this code. (Ord. 04-21-15-O3, 4-21-2015)
8-7-2: HEN REGULATIONS:
A. No person shall possess a hen unless a license has been issued as set forth in this chapter.
B. The number of hens allowed shall be a maximum of three (3) hens per property.
C. Roosters are prohibited within the village.
D. Licenses will only be granted to persons who reside on zoning lots with single-family and two-family dwelling units.
E. Care for hens shall follow the following provisions:
1. No hen shall be permitted to run at large. Hens shall be kept in a designated coop or run. Hens may be allowed to exercise in a rear yard with a six
foot (6') or higher fence with supervision.
a. If the coop and run are not within a fenced yard, hens must be kept within the coop and run at all times.
b. Fences must meet the standards outlined in title 12 of this code.
2. Feed must be stored in a fully enclosed, rodentproof container.
3. Hens must be kept in coops.
F. Housing for hens shall follow the following provisions:
1. Rear Yard Locations: The coop and run shall be located in the rear of the residential structure. The coop and run are allowed in the rear yard, but not
the side or front yards.
2. Location From Property Line: The coop and run shall be located at least five feet (5') from the property line and at least twenty feet (20') from any
neighboring dwelling.
3. Design: The coop must be built to provide ventilation, shade, protection from precipitation, protection from cold weather and to be secure from
predators, wild birds and rodents.
a. Openings in windows and doors must be covered by wire mesh or screens to deter predators.
b. Access doors must be sized and placed for ease of cleaning.
c. The enclosed run must be attached to the coop or must surround the coop. The sides of the run must be made of fencing or wire mesh that
discourages predators.
d. The run must be enclosed on all sides, including the top or roof plane.
4. Size: The coop shall provide a minimum of four (4) square feet of floor area per hen. The run shall provide a minimum of eight (8) square feet of floor
area per hen.
a. Coops will be considered an "accessory structure" as defined in title 13 of this code and must meet all standards outlined therein.
b. Coops over one hundred twenty (120) square feet will require a building permit.
5. Sanitary Condition: The coop and run shall be kept in a clean, dry and sanitary condition at all times. Manure, uneaten and discarded feed, feathers
and other waste must be removed regularly and at a minimum of once per week.
a. Odors from hens, manure or related substances shall not be detectable from property lines.
b. Manure must be stored and disposed of. Manure may be composted. All manure not composted must be removed from property regularly and at a
minimum of once per week.
G. No person shall maintain a coop without first obtaining a license from the village.
1. License Denial: The village may deny a license to any person who:
a. Owes money to the village; or
b. Has, in the last five (5) years prior to application for a license under this section been convicted or pled guilty to any violation of this title, title 12,
chapter 8, "Property Maintenance Code", or title 13, "Zoning Regulations", of this code.
2. Issuance: All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. Licenses may be automatically renewed if the
licensee has been in compliance during the previous year.
3. Eligibility: Only persons residing in one- and two-family dwelling units are eligible for a license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 151/307
4. License Per Lot: Only one coop license will be issued per zoning lot. A zoning lot consisting of multiple platted lots shall be considered one lot.
5. Nontransferable: Coop licenses are nontransferable.
6. Costs:
a. The coop license shall cost twenty five dollars ($25.00). This license shall renew automatically if the licensee is in compliance with all standards
set forth in this chapter.
H. In addition to the general penalty previously set forth in section 8-1-12 of this title, the owner of the coop is subject to the following additional penalties:
1. A person found to be keeping hens without a coop license will have seven (7) days from notification to achieve compliance with this chapter.
2. A licensee found to be in violation of the standards outlined in this chapter will have seven (7) days from notification to achieve compliance. If
compliance is not achieved, the license will be revoked. The licensee may apply for a new license, subject to site inspection. If the licensee is found
to be in compliance after inspection, a new license may be issued.
3. If the licensee is found to be in violation of these standards three (3) or more times, the license will be immediately and permanently revoked.
I. Hens, coops and runs not maintained according to this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance. (Ord. 04-21-15-O3, 4-21-2015)
Title 9
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 3 of this code for alarm system regulations.
Chapter 1
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSES
9-1-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the term "motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is propelled otherwise than by muscular power, including, but not limited to,
motorcycles, motor driven cycles, pole trailers, reconstructed vehicles, road tractors, school buses, semitrailers, special mobile equipment, specially
constructed vehicles, trackless trailer coaches, trailer trucks and truck tractors. (1965 Code § 10-14-1)
9-1-2: VILLAGE VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Annual License Required; Fee; Exemptions:
1. Each owner of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motor driven cycle who resides within the village, or whose vehicle has its situs or base within the
village, shall annually purchase a license for such vehicle and pay to the village an annual license fee for the use of such vehicle on any public street
or highway within the village. (1965 Code § 10-14-2)
2. The United States, the state, units of local government and school districts created under the laws of the state shall be exempt from the requirement
to obtain an annual license and pay the annual license fee for all vehicles owned by said public bodies and used exclusively for the public purposes
of said public body. Owners of "commercial motor vehicles", as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18b-101, that are registered under 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-402.1 shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain an annual license and pay the annual license fee. (1965 Code
§ 10-14-2; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Use Of Licensed Vehicle:
1. No person shall use, or cause or permit any agents or employees to use, any motor vehicle whose owner resides within the village or whose situs or
base is within the village upon the public streets or highways in the village unless such vehicle is licensed.
2. Leased or rented vehicles may be licensed in the name of the owner or custodian of the vehicle, and if such vehicle is in custody of the resident of
the village assigned its total use, that person shall be required to license such vehicle in accordance herewith unless said vehicle has a current
license from another corporate entity.
3. It shall constitute prima facie evidence that a motor vehicle is operated upon the public streets or highways within the village when the motor vehicle
is registered to a named person at an address within the village boundaries or when the motor vehicle has its situs or base within the village.
C. Situs Or Base: A motor vehicle has its situs or base where it is principally garaged or from whence it is principally dispatched or where the movements
of such vehicle usually originate.
D. Resident Owners: Resident owners of motor vehicles shall not be required to display on their vehicles the license required herein if their vehicles are
displaying a license issued by the place wherein the vehicle has its situs or base.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 152/307
E. Commercial Vehicles:
1. No commercial vehicle shall be parked in the village for any length of time unless a current vehicle license sticker is affixed to its front windshield
from the village or from some other corporate entity.
2. Such commercial vehicle may be licensed in the name of its actual owner, or in the name of the person in the village or entity which is the custodian
of the vehicle. (1965 Code § 10-14-2)
9-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
Every owner of a motor vehicle shall make application to the village clerk upon forms which set forth the name and address of the applicant and a
description of the motor vehicle for which the license is desired. Upon payment by the applicant of the license fee, the village manager or his/her designee
shall issue a license, which shall be attested by the village clerk, authorizing the use of such motor vehicle within the village until the expiration of such
license. (1965 Code § 10-14-3; amd. 2009 Code)
9-1-4: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
The fees to be paid annually as provided in this chapter, to the village, shall be as follows:
Vehicle
License Type
Issue Fee
May/June
Late
July 1
Late
August
1
Late
September
1
Late
November
1
Late December
1 Through April
30
Passenger $ 40.00 $
60.00
$ 65.00
$ 80.00 $ 80.00 $ 80.00
Motorcycle 15.00 20.00 24.00 30.00 30.00 30.00
Senior (62 years and over) discount of above fees (proof of age
required); handicapped plate discount off above fees
5.00 10.00 10.00 15.00 15.00 15.00
Taxis 100.00 150.00
175.00
200.00 225.00 250.00
RV 100.00 150.00
175.00
200.00 200.00 200.00
Trucks - B plate - 8,000 pounds or less 60.00 90.00 100.00
120.00 120.00 120.00
Trucks - C, D, E, F plates - 8,001 to 16,000 pounds 100.00 150.00
175.00
200.00 225.00 250.00
Trucks - G, H, J, L plates - 16,001 to 36,000 pounds 125.00 200.00
225.00
250.00 275.00 300.00
Trucks - N, P, R plates - 36,001 to 50,000 pounds 150.00 225.00
275.00
300.00 325.00 350.00
Trucks - S, T plates - 50,001 to 64,000 pounds 175.00 250.00
300.00
350.00 400.00 450.00
Trucks - V plates - over 64,000 pounds 200.00 300.00
350.00
400.00 500.00 600.00
Newly purchased vehicles registering within 30 days of purchase shall get June rate, otherwise penalty applies
(Ord. 02-21-17-O1, 2-21-2017)
9-1-5: LICENSE FEES DUE AND PAYABLE:
A. Annual Payment: The license fees required under this chapter shall be due and payable annually on or before May 1 of each year. Beginning in 2012
and thereafter, the license shall be issued for each year beginning May 1; provided, that if the owner or operator of any vehicle comes into possession
or ownership of the same, for operation on the streets of the village after December 31 of any license year, then and then only, the license fee shall be
one-half (1/2) of the annual fee provided in section 9-1-4 of this chapter.
B. Purchase Deadline: The owner of a motor vehicle who resides within the village shall purchase and display a license emblem on or before June 30 of
each year for each motor vehicle owned on June 1 of that year.
C. Vehicle Acquired During License Year: For each motor vehicle purchased or acquired during the license year, but not owned on June 1 of that license
year, by any owner who resides within the village, such owner shall transfer a previously issued sticker emblem or purchase a new vehicle sticker
emblem and display the same on the purchased or acquired vehicle within fifteen (15) days of such purchase or acquisition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 153/307
D. Additional Late Payment Fee: Each owner of a motor vehicle required to purchase a motor vehicle license by this chapter who fails to pay the
prescribed fee on or before the deadline established by this chapter shall be required to pay, in addition to the required fee, a late fee as provided in
section 9-1-4 of this chapter, which shall expire after the deadline or due date thereof. This late fee is in addition to the penalties described in
subsection 9-1-8B of this chapter.
E. New Residents: Each owner of a motor vehicle who becomes a resident of the village after June 1 of any year shall purchase and display a license
emblem within thirty (30) days of establishing permanent residency in the village. Permanent residency shall be evidenced by the establishment of an
account with the village water department, the initiation of a lease term or any other evidence deemed appropriate by the village clerk as proof of
residency.
F. Prior Delinquencies: All owners and operators of motor vehicles who are required to have and obtain a motor vehicle license, as provided in this chapter,
for the year previous to the year for which a license is applied for, and who have not paid the fee nor obtained the license for the previous year, shall
not be entitled to a license for the current year unless the fees, and any applicable penalties, for the previous year or years have been fully paid. (Ord.
11-16-2011-O1, 11-16-2011)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 03-05-19-O1 - VEHICLE STICKER FEES. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-6: STICKERS OR PLATES GENERALLY:
A. Attaching Sticker Or Plate To Vehicle:
1. Upon the issuance of a license under this chapter, the village clerk shall deliver to the applicant a decal bearing a number and the name of the class
to which the vehicle in question belongs and the year for which the license is issued, and it shall be the duty of such applicant to affix such decal in a
conspicuous place on the right side of such vehicle where it can be easily seen; which sticker shall indicate the class to which the vehicle belongs
and the year for which such license was issued; and the sticker shall be fastened upon the lower inside corner of the windshield on the right hand
side thereof.
2. It shall be unlawful for any licensed motor vehicle, although duly licensed, to be used upon the streets, avenues, or alleys of the village unless such
sticker is attached thereto.
3. It shall be the duty of the applicant for a license under this chapter to use a motor bicycle or motor tricycle upon the streets, avenues, or alleys to
affix such license upon such vehicle in such a position that the number thereof may be clearly visible.
B. Issuance Of Duplicate License; Fee:
1. If and whenever a motor vehicle license issued by the village clerk by virtue of this chapter is lost or has been destroyed, or when the motor vehicle
for which the license is issued is sold or destroyed, a duplicate thereof shall be issued by the village clerk to the person to whom such motor vehicle
license was originally issued; provided, that application for such duplicate license shall be made in writing by the person to whom the original was
issued, which application shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the applicant stating his/her name, age, address, place and conditions under which
such motor vehicle sold, and to whom, or that the same was destroyed, the amount of the license fee paid therefor by him/her, date of payment, and
if destroyed, the manner of its destruction.
2. The applicant shall pay to the village clerk a fee of two dollars ($2.00) for the issuance of the duplicate license sticker. Such a license sticker so
issued as a duplicate shall be plainly marked as such. (1965 Code § 10-14-6)
9-1-7: REMOVAL OF STICKER OR DECAL; TRANSFER OF VEHICLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any sticker referred to in section 9-1-6 of this chapter from any motor vehicle and to transfer the same to any
other motor vehicle, or to sell or transfer the same to any other motor vehicle, or to sell or transfer any motor vehicle without first removing and destroying
the license sticker. The license from a transferred or destroyed motor vehicle shall be presented with the application for a duplicate sticker thereof. (1965
Code § 10-14-7)
9-1-8: PENALTIES:
A. Penalty Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined no less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each and every offense. (1965 Code § 10-14-8)
B. Fines For Specific Violations: Any person violating section 9-1-2, or 9-1-5 or 9-1-6 of this chapter for failure to purchase and properly display a valid
vehicle license, of the class required by section 9-1-4 of this chapter, shall be fined as provided in section 9-2-4 of this title. (1965 Code § 10-14-9)
9-1-9: ENFORCEMENT OF LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
Citations or tickets for violations of this chapter may only be issued to a vehicle owner for a vehicle that is either registered in the village or that is required
to be registered in the village by the owner pursuant to this code. (Ord. 11-16-2011-O1, 11-16-2011)
Chapter 2
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 154/307
9-2-1: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE; DIRECTING TRAFFIC:
Members of the police department and auxiliary police assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of
this title or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order, signal or direction of a police officer. Except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to
direct traffic. (1965 Code § 10-2-1; amd. 2009 Code)
9-2-2: SCENE OF FIRE:
The fire department officer in command or any firefighter designated by him may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in directing traffic at
the scene of any fire or where the fire department has responded to an emergency call for so long as fire department equipment is on the scene in the
absence of or in assisting the police. (1965 Code § 10-2-2)
9-2-3: MINOR TRAFFIC OFFENSES PROCESSING:
The following procedure governs the issuance of citations (P tickets) in certain traffic violation cases:
A. Applicable Sections:
1. Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a person without a warrant because of a violation of any section or provision of this code in respect
to any of the following sections:
PASSENGER VEHICLES
Illinois
Vehicle
Code,
Offense
Number
Compliance And
Equipment Violations -
Passenger Vehicles
Settlement
Amount -
Original
Settlement
Amount -
First
Court Date
Settlement
Amount -
Second
Court Date
11-1406 Obstruction to driver's view $50.00 $100.00 $150.00
11-1407 Improper opening of door into traffic 50.00 100.00 150.00
11-1411 Following fire apparatus 50.00 100.00 150.00
11-1426 Using ATV/go-cart/minibike on street 50.00 100.00 150.00
11-1428 Using golf cart on streets 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-101 Driving unsafe vehicle 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-201(A) No motorcycle light 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-201(B) No lights when required/no or 1 taillight 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-201(C) No registration light 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-210 Failure to dim headlights 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-211 Improper lighting - 1 headlight 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-212 Illegal lights (red, flashing or other) 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-215 Illegal use of oscillating or flashing lights 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-401 Use of illegal tires 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-405 Use of unsafe tire 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-502 No rearview mirrors 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-503(C) Tinted windows 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-602 Defective/loud muffler 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-603.1 Failure to wear seat belt 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-604 Television receiver visible from driver's seat 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-608 No vehicle bumpers 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-610.1 Use of electronic communication device in school zone, construction zone,
emergency scene
75.00 150.00 225.00
12-610.2 Use of electronic communication device 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-611 Illegal operation sound amplification system 50.00 100.00 150.00
12-710 Inadequate or no splash guards 50.00 100.00 150.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 155/307
13-111 No valid safety sticker 50.00 100.00 150.00
3-413(A) No front or 1 license plate 50.00 100.00 150.00
3-413(F) Expired license plates 50.00 100.00 150.00
15-109 Spilling load or load not secure 50.00 100.00 150.00
15-109.1 Failure to cover load when required 50.00 100.00 150.00
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Illinois Vehicle Code,
Offense Number
Compliance And Equipment Violations -
Commercial Vehicles
Settlement
Amount -
Original
Settlement Amount -
First Court Date
Settlement Amount -
Second Court Date
11-1406 Obstruction to driver's view $75.00 $125.00 $250.00
11-1407 Improper opening of door into traffic 75.00 125.00 250.00
11-1411 Following fire apparatus 75.00 125.00 250.00
11-1426 Using ATV/go-cart/
minibike on street
75.00 125.00 250.00
11-1428 Using golf cart on streets 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-101 Driving unsafe vehicle 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-201(A) No motorcycle light 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-201(B) No lights when required/no or 1 taillight 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-201(C) No registration light 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-210 Failure to dim headlights 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-211 Improper lighting - 1 headlight 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-212 Illegal lights (red, flashing or other) 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-215 Illegal use of oscillating or flashing lights 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-401 Use of illegal tires 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-405 Use of unsafe tire 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-502 No rearview mirrors 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-503(C) Tinted windows 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-602 Defective/loud muffler 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-603.1 Failure to wear seat belt 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-604 Television receiver visible from driver's seat 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-608 No vehicle bumpers 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-610.1 Use of electronic communication device in school
zone, construction zone, emergency scene
100.00 200.00 300.00
12-610.2 Use of electronic communication device 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-611 Illegal operation sound amplification system 75.00 125.00 250.00
12-710 Inadequate or no splash guards 75.00 125.00 250.00
13-111 No valid safety sticker 75.00 125.00 250.00
3-413(A) No front or 1 license plate 75.00 125.00 250.00
3-413(F) Expired license plates 75.00 125.00 250.00
15-109 Spilling load or load not secure 75.00 125.00 250.00
15-109.1 Failure to cover load when required 75.00 125.00 250.00
2. The police officer may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in court, in the first instance, issue to such alleged violator, a citation (P ticket):
a. Advising said person that he has violated a specified ordinance;
b. Requesting him to make payment in an amount applicable to said alleged violation as set forth above as settlement of said violation claim; and
c. Informing him that upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be filed in the circuit court of Cook County charging him with such violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 156/307
B. Settlement: Pursuant to said citation, the person so accused of said violation may settle and compromise the violation claim in respect to such code
violation by paying to the village the applicable amount as shown in the schedule set forth as the settlement amount in subsection A of this section,
within a period to be specified in said citation, not more than fourteen (14) days from the time said alleged offense was committed. Such payment shall
be made in accordance with the instructions contained in the aforesaid citation, at the village office, where a receipt shall be issued for the money so
received, and said amount shall be promptly remitted to the village treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund.
C. Final Notice; Penalty: In the event that the person to whom said citation is issued fails to settle and pay said violation within the time specified in the
citation, a final notice shall be mailed to him. When, in fact, the final notice has been mailed, the violation may then be settled and compromised by
paying two (2) times the amount set forth in subsection A of this section, up to a maximum of ninety dollars ($90.00), within the time specified in the
final notice.
D. Issuance Of Complaint: In the event that the person to whom the citation is issued fails to settle and pay said violation claim within the time specified in
the final notice (if one is served or mailed to him), then the police officer is authorized to cause the citation (notice to appear, P ticket) to be served upon
said alleged violator, and is authorized to file the same as a complaint in the circuit court of Cook County and prosecute the same. The officer, as an
alternative, may file a formal complaint in the circuit court of Cook County in lieu of the citation.
E. Court Penalty; Settlement Before Court Date: In the event that payment is not made within the time prescribed in the final notice and the citation or a
complaint is filed in the circuit court, payment of any fine and costs shall be in such amounts as may be determined and established by the circuit court,
but not to exceed the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one violation; provided, that the offenses may be settled and compromised
for the amount specified in the notice to appear at least ten (10) working days before the court date. Such amount shall be two (2) times the amount set
forth in the schedule set forth in subsection A of this section, plus ten dollars ($10.00).
F. Correction Of Violation: The payment of an amount as settlement herein will not excuse securing of and the payment of a license fee provided for in this
code and correction of the violation.
G. Parking Violations: The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which is illegally operated or parked is registered with the secretary of state in the
name of said alleged violator; or in the alternative, in the event that a vehicle sticker issued by a municipality has been issued in the name of and to
said alleged violator, shall be proof that said alleged violator was in control of or was the operator of the automobile or motor vehicle at the time of such
alleged violation. The commercial lessor of any vehicle, whether or not the registered owner, shall be responsible for such parking violation and subject
to the penalty therefor. (Ord. 06-18-14-O2, 6-18-2014)
9-2-4: FEES AND FINES ASSESSED:
Fines assessed by the police department shall be as follows:
PARKING VIOLATIONS
Village
Code
Section Description
Base
Fine
14 Days
Overdue
Fine
90 Days
Overdue
Fine
Village Vehicle Stickers
9-1-2 Failure to purchase vehicle sticker See
below
See
below
See
below
9-1-6 Failure to display vehicle sticker See
below
See
below
See
below
Fines For Violation Of Sections 9-1-2 And 9-1-6 Of This Title
Motorcycles and passenger vehicles $
35.00
$ 70.00 $ 95.00
Taxis and recreational vehicles 40.00 80.00 120.00
Trucks - B plates - 8,000 pounds or less 40.00 80.00 120.00
Trucks - C, D, E, F plates - 8,001 pounds to 16,000 pounds 40.00 80.00 120.00
Trucks - G, H, J, L plates -16,001 pounds to 36,000 pounds 45.00 90.00 130.00
Trucks - N, P, R plates - 36,001 pounds to 50,000 pounds 55.00 110.00 165.00
Trucks - S, T plates - 50,001 pounds to 64,000 pounds 65.00 130.00 195.00
Trucks - V plates - 64,001 pounds and up 90.00 180.00 270.00
9-6-2 On any street with no valid license plates or a missing plate 50.00 100.00 150.00
9-6-3 On the left side of the street 35.00 70.00 95.00
Over 12 inches from curb 35.00 70.00 95.00
Outside of a marked angled parking area 35.00 70.00 95.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 157/307
9-6-5A In any intersection 40.00 80.00 120.00
9-6-5B In a crosswalk 40.00 80.00 120.00
9-6-5C Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the approach thereto 45.00 90.00 130.00
9-6-5D Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb 35.00 70.00 95.00
9-6-5E Within 30 feet of a traffic signal or stop sign 40.00 80.00 120.00
9-6-5F Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk 40.00 80.00 120.00
9-6-5G At any place where the parked vehicle will reduce the usable roadway width to less than 18 feet 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-6-5H Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant 45.00 90.00 135.00
9-6-5I Blocking the use of a driveway 40.00 80.00 120.00
9-6-5J Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-6-5K Within 20 feet of the driveway to any fire department station and on the street opposite, within 75 feet
of the entrance
45.00 90.00 135.00
9-6-5L On any sidewalk or parkway 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-6-5M At any place where official signs prohibit parking 40.00 80.00 120.00
9-6-5N Front or side yard of building in a residential area except on a hard surfaced driveway 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-6-5O In a designated and marked fire lane 50.00 100.00 150.00
9-6-5P In a designated space for handicapped persons 205.00
210.00 215.00
9-6-6A In an area during street cleaning operations 40.00 80.00 120.00
9-6-6B Parking a vehicle for sale on the street or to sell merchandise from a vehicle 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-6-6C Reducing the roadway to less than 10 feet or blocking any garage access within an alley 40.00 80.00 120.00
9-6-7 In an area during snow removal operations 40.00 80.00 120.00
9-6-8 For more than 30 minutes to load or unload passengers in any area designated as a loading zone or
within 75 feet from the entrance to a public building between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
except on Sundays
35.00 70.00 105.00
9-6-9 In an area designated as a cab stand or a bus loading zone 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-6-10A1
On the east side of Custer Avenue - posted "Residential Parking Only" 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-6-10A2
On the 4100 block of Lawndale Avenue - posted "Residential Parking Only" 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-6-10B On specific "no parking" streets 45.00 90.00 135.00
9-6-14C Parking on private property without the owner's consent 45.00 90.00 135.00
Commercial Motor Vehicle Parking Violations
9-6A-1A A commercial vehicle with a license above a B plate parked overnight on any street 80.00 160.00 240.00
9-6A-1B A commercial vehicle with a license above a B plate parked on a parkway or public way or on any front
setback area
80.00 160.00 240.00
9-6A-1C A commercial vehicle used for storage 80.00 160.00 240.00
9-6A-1D A commercial vehicle parked or stored on private property in violation of zoning regulations 255.00
260.00 265.00
9-6A-2 Commercial and recreational vehicles parked outside a totally enclosed garage or other building
unless otherwise allowed in the rear or side yards
55.00 110.00 165.00
9-6A-3 Recreation vehicles used as living quarters 55.00 110.00 165.00
9-6A-5 Parking or storing transport vehicles (limousines, hearses, buses, ambulances, etc.) on a street or on
public or private property except for loading and unloading purposes
55.00 110.00 165.00
Abandoned/Wrecked/Inoperable Vehicles Violations
9-10-2A Abandonment of vehicles on any street or on private or public property is prohibited 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-10-2B1
A vehicle left unattended which creates a traffic hazard or nuisance 55.00 110.00 165.00
9-10-2B2
A vehicle left unattended and its physical appearance causes the impedance of traffic 55.00 110.00 165.00
9-10-2B3
A vehicle left unattended and parked illegally on any public way 55.00 110.00 165.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 158/307
9-10-2B4
A vehicle which is occupying any portion of a street or alley in violation of a limited parking zone in
excess of 5 times the allowed parking time
55.00 110.00 165.00
9-10-2B5
A vehicle that has not been moved or used for 7 consecutive days and is apparently deserted 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-10-2B6
A vehicle in a state of disrepair, rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven and is apparently
deserted
35.00 70.00 105.00
9-10-2B7
A vehicle left unattended upon private property without the owner's consent 35.00 70.00 105.00
9-10-3 Inoperable vehicles on any street or on public or private property which are declared a public nuisance
35.00 70.00 105.00
9-10-5A Storing, parking or leaving inoperable vehicles in excess of 7 days upon private property 35.00 70.00 105.00
(1965 Code title X, appendix A; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 09-15-09-01, 9-15-2009)
9-2-5: PENALTIES:
A. Penalty Imposed: Unless otherwise provided, any person violating the terms and conditions of this title shall be subject to a fine of not less than thirty
five dollars ($35.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), with each and every day that a violation is allowed to exist constituting a
distinct and separate offense under the terms of this title. (1965 Code § 10-2-4; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Injunctive Relief: In addition, the village may take whatever action it may deem appropriate to enforce the terms of this title, including an action for
injunction.
C. Attorney Fees And Costs: All attorney fees and costs incurred by the village in enforcing the terms of this title shall be paid by the violator. (1965 Code
§ 10-2-4)
ARTICLE A. IMMOBILIZATION OF TICKET OFFENDERS (BOOT)
9-2A-1: AUTHORITY FOR IMPLEMENTATION:
The chief of police shall have the authority for implementing the parking enforcement provisions of this article. (1965 Code § 10-19-7)
9-2A-2: IMMOBILIZATION FOR VIOLATIONS, WARRANTS OUTSTANDING:
A motor vehicle parked upon the public way at any time may, by or under the direction of an officer or member of the police department, be immobilized in
such a manner as to prevent its operation, if there are three (3) or more outstanding or otherwise unsettled traffic violation notices, or one or more warrants
issued for any such violations pending against the owner of such motor vehicle. (Ord. 08-17-10-O1, 8-17-2010)
9-2A-3: NOTIFICATION:
A. Notice Upon Vehicle: Upon immobilization of such motor vehicle, the officer or employee shall cause to be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous
manner, notice sufficient to warn any individual that such vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in
damage to such vehicle.
B. Notify Vehicle Owner: As soon as practicable, the officer or employee shall inform the owner of the immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances
of the prior outstanding or unsettled traffic violation notices or warrants for which, or on account of which, such vehicle was immobilized. (1965 Code
§ 10-19-2)
9-2A-4: RELEASE:
A. Conditions For Securing Release: The owner of such immobilized vehicle, or other authorized person, shall be permitted to secure release of the
vehicle upon:
1. The depositing of the bond for his appearance in court to answer for each violation; and
2. Depositing the amount of the fine or penalty for each violation for which there is an outstanding or otherwise unsettled traffic violation notice or
warrant, and the payment of the fees as required by section 9-2A-6 of this article.
B. Right To Appear In Court: The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or other authorized person, shall have the right to a postimmobilization court date to
determine the validity of such immobilization, towing and any towing or storage charges. Such court date must be requested within fifteen (15) days
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 159/307
after the vehicle is immobilized. (1965 Code § 10-19-3)
9-2A-5: LENGTH OF IMMOBILIZATION:
The immobilizing device or mechanism shall remain in place for forty eight (48) hours unless the owner has complied with section 9-2A-4 of this article. If
such compliance has not occurred within forty eight (48) hours, the vehicle shall be towed or impounded. Towing and storage fees, as specified in section
9-2A-6 of this article, shall be paid, along with fees specified in section 9-2A-4 of this article before the owner of such vehicle, or authorized person, shall
be permitted to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle, unless the owner has posted bond and requested a court date as specified in section 9-2A-
4 of this article. (1965 Code § 10-19-4)
9-2A-6: IMMOBILIZATION FEE:
The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall be subject to a fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for such immobilization. The owner of an immobilized vehicle
which was subsequently impounded shall be subject to a fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for immobilization, plus the towing and storage charges
actually incurred by the village in such cases. (Ord. 06-17-08-04, 6-17-2008)
9-2A-7: UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to attempt to remove or to remove the vehicle immobilizing device. (1965 Code § 10-19-6; amd. 2009
Code)
9-2A-8: RIGHT TO HEARING:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to deprive any person of the constitutional right to a hearing or trial as to the violations charged. (1965 Code § 10-
19-8)
9-2A-9: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this article for which no specific penalty is otherwise provided shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (1965 Code § 10-19-8)
ARTICLE B. IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES USED IN ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES
9-2B-1: ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES ENUMERATED; IMPOUNDMENT PROVISIONS:
A. Impoundment Authorized; Liability For Fees And Charges: A motor vehicle operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of record that
is used in connection with any of the following violations for which the driver or registered owner is arrested shall be subject to tow and impoundment
by the village, and the owner of record of said vehicle shall be liable to the village for an administrative processing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
in addition to any towing and storage fees for the following violations:
1. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or attempted commission of any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 et seq.; or
2. Driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other intoxicating compounds, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501; or
3. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the commission or attempted commission of any felony offense or in a felonious violation of
the provisions of the Illinois cannabis control act1; or (1965 Code § 10-22-1)
4. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the commission or attempted commission of any offense in violation of the Illinois controlled
substances act2; or unlawful use of a weapon in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1; reckless discharge of a firearm in violation of 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.5; or unlawful possession of a firearm and firearm ammunition in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1;
or (1965 Code § 10-22-1; amd. 2009 Code)
5. Driving while driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303; except,
that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving), or due to failure to
comply with emission testing; or
6. Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possession, or attempting to solicit or possess "cannabis" or a "controlled substance", as defined
by the Illinois cannabis control act3, or the Illinois controlled substances act4; or
7. Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code5, where the period of
expiration is greater than one year; or
8. Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle
code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age; or
9. Operation or use of a motor vehicle by the driver or registered owner against whom a valid, executable federal, state, or municipal warrant has been
issued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 160/307
10. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the commission or attempted commission of any offense in violation of the sections of the
Illinois criminal code related to prostitution or soliciting prostitution, including the following sections:
720 ILCS 5/11-14
720 ILCS 5/11-14.1
720 ILCS 5/11-15
720 ILCS 5/11-15.1
720 ILCS 5/11-16
720 ILCS 5/11-18
720 ILCS 5/11-18.1.
B. General Regulations:
1. This article shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal laws or village ordinances pertaining to seizure, towing and
impoundment.
2. The owners shall be subject to all fees set forth in this article in addition to any penalties that may be assessed by a court of law for the underlying
violations.
3. This article shall not apply to a vehicle which was stolen at the time of impoundment so long as the theft was reported to appropriate police
authorities within twenty four (24) hours of its discovery.
4. Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this article shall be those approved by the chief of police and shall be uniform for all similarly situated
vehicles.
C. Probable Cause: Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to tow and impoundment pursuant to this article, the
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the police department, if the towing of the vehicle is supported by probable
cause or is in furtherance of public safety or community caretaking functions. Prior to towing, the officer shall notify any person identifying himself as
the owner of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, and who was physically present at
the scene of the alleged violation, that the vehicle will be towed and impounded and of their right to an administrative hearing to be conducted during
the village's regularly scheduled monthly adjudication hearing which occurs on the fourth Tuesday of every month. (1965 Code § 10-22-1)
9-2B-2: NOTICE AND ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
A. Right To Request Administrative Hearing; Bond Required:
1. Under subsection 9-2B-1C of this article, the person in control of the vehicle shall be notified at the time of the towing of the vehicle of the right to
request an administrative hearing. Within forty eight (48) hours after a vehicle is towed/impounded pursuant to this article, the village shall notify the
owner of record by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address of the owner as it appears in the records of the secretary of state, of the
towing/impoundment of the vehicle. The notice shall inform the registered owner of the right to request an administrative hearing of the violation of
section 9-2B-1 of this article at the village's regularly scheduled adjudication hearing which occurs on the fourth Tuesday of every month.
2. The registered owner, or his/her designee, must post a five hundred dollar ($500.00) bond with the police department to appear at an administrative
hearing to determine whether the vehicle was used in connection with a violation set forth in section 9-2B-1 of this article. The five hundred dollar
($500.00) bond must be posted within ten (10) days of the mailing of the certified letter notifying the owner of the tow/impoundment of the vehicle.
The village police department shall hold the cash bond in escrow until such time as the hearing is completed in conformance with this article. Upon
posting the bond, the owner/designee shall be provided a release to claim the vehicle from the towing company and will be notified of the date, time,
and location of a hearing that will be conducted pursuant to this section.
3. The hearing shall be conducted by the adjudication hearing officer of the village who is appointed by the village manager.
B. Conduct Of Hearing; Decision; Disposition Of Bond:
1. The owner/designee shall appear at the administrative hearing, and all interested parties shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At
any time prior to the hearing, the hearing officer may, at the request of the village or the owner/designee, direct witnesses to appear and give
testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
2. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in connection with a violation set
forth in this article, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of the vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), and the bond held in escrow by the village shall be forfeited in payment of the administrative fee.
3. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor of the village.
4. If the hearing officer finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the vehicle was not used in connection with a violation set forth in section 9-2B-
1 of this article, the hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the cash bond. (1965 Code § 10-22-2)
9-2B-3: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE A DEBT TO VILLAGE:
The administrative fee imposed pursuant to this article shall constitute a debt due and owing the village. The debt may be satisfied by the bond posted
pursuant to this article, or where no bond is posted, by cash, money order, certified check or approved credit card payment service. If a hearing is not
requested by the posting of a five hundred dollar ($500.00) bond as provided for in section 9-2B-2 of this article and the administrative fee is not paid
within ten (10) days for vehicles older than seven (7) years and within thirty (30) days for vehicles less than seven (7) years old, the vehicle shall be
deemed unclaimed and disposed of in the manner provided for by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois vehicle code. (1965 Code
§ 10-22-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 161/307
9-2B-4: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
Except as otherwise provided by law, no owner, lien holder or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded under this
article until the bond or administrative fee is paid. Whenever a person with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure
proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she pays the village administrative fee. (1965 Code § 10-22-4)
9-2B-5: LIEN HOLDER:
A lien holder asserting its right to possession of an impounded vehicle pursuant to its conditional sales agreement may obtain possession of such vehicle
by paying the applicable towing fee and submitting a photocopy of the conditional sales agreement and title certificate, an affidavit stating that the
purchaser is in default of the agreement and an indemnification certificate executed by an authorized agent of the lien holder. (1965 Code § 10-22-5)
Footnote 1: 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
Footnote 2: 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
Footnote 3: 720 ILCS 550/3.
Footnote 4: 720 ILCS 570/102.
Footnote 5: 625 ILCS 5/6-101.
ARTICLE C. AUTOMATED RED LIGHT ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM
9-2C-1: TITLE:
This article shall be called the AUTOMATED RED LIGHT ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
9-2C-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, words or terms shall have the following meanings unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning is intended:
ADMINISTRATOR: The village of Lyons traffic control administrator as assigned by the village manager.
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: A device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal
to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red light signal in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code
(IVC) or a similar provision of a village ordinance.
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION: A violation described in section 11-208.6 of the Illinois vehicle code or a "notice of violation" as described in this
article.
CERTIFIED REPORT: A report concerning five (5) or more unpaid fines or penalties for automated traffic law violations made by the village to the
secretary in accordance with section 6-306.5 of the IVC.
IVC: The Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION: An automated traffic law violation notice issued pursuant to sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the IVC and pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
PAST DUE NOTICE OR A NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION: A notice issued pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the IVC and pursuant to the provisions
of this article.
RECORDED IMAGES: Images showing the time, date and location of an automated traffic law violation recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement
system on: a) two (2) or more photographs; b) two (2) or more microphotographs; c) two (2) or more electronic images; or d) a video recording showing the
motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle.
SECRETARY OR SECRETARY OF STATE: The Illinois secretary of state.
SUSPENSION NOTICE: A notice of impending driver's license suspension issued pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the IVC and pursuant to the provisions
of this article.
SYSTEM: Individually, an automated traffic law enforcement system or, collectively, automated traffic law enforcement systems established in the village
pursuant to this article.
VILLAGE: The village of Lyons, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
9-2C-3: ADMINISTRATOR:
There is hereby established the office of administrator, which shall be filled by appointment of the village manager. The administrator or his designee shall
be authorized to adopt, distribute and process violation notices and other notices required by sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the IVC, collect monies
paid as fines and penalties for automated traffic law violations and operate an administrative adjudication system for automated traffic law violations. The
administrator is also authorized to make a certified report to the secretary pursuant to section 6-306.5 of the IVC, and any such certified report shall
contain the information required under section 6-306.5(c) of the IVC. The administrator is authorized to review and/or dismiss violations pursuant to this
article and state statutes. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 162/307
9-2C-4: AFFECTED INTERSECTIONS:
The village hereby determines to establish systems at those intersections located within the corporate limits of the village that are mutually agreed upon by
the village and the contract business based on an assessment of those intersections that need this type of system. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
9-2C-5: AGREEMENTS WITH CONTRACTED BUSINESSES:
The village manager is authorized to enter into agreements for the design and implementation of the system(s) and for services related to the system(s).
The agreements shall be subject to final modification by the attorneys for the village and the contracted agency. The village manager is hereby authorized
and directed to execute the agreements, once finalized, thereby binding the village to the terms of the contract. The village clerk is authorized and directed
to attest to the village manager's signature, as necessary. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
9-2C-6: VIOLATION NOTICE:
A violation notice, the contents of which shall comply with the requirements of sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the IVC, as amended, shall be served by
mail to the address of the registered owner of a vehicle cited for an automated traffic law violation as recorded with the secretary within thirty (30) days
after the secretary notifies the village of the identity of the owner of the vehicle, but in no event later than ninety (90) days after the violation. Service of a
violation notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. The original or a facsimile of a violation notice or, in the case
of a violation notice produced by a computerized device, a printed record generated by the device showing the facts entered on the violation notice, shall
be retained by the administrator, and shall be a record kept in the ordinary course of business. A violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance
with this article and section 11-208.3 of the IVC, a copy of the violation notice or the computer generated record shall be prima facie correct and shall be
prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the violation notice. The violation notice, copy or computer generated record shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings. Fines shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-
2008)
9-2C-7: VIOLATION REVIEW:
Before a citation may be issued for any automated traffic law violation, a determination must be made by a technician employed or contracted by the
village that, based on inspection of recorded images generated by the system, the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of section 11-208.6 of the
IVC or an ordinance of the village. If the technician determines that the vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in order to yield
the right of way to an emergency vehicle, a citation shall not be issued. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
9-2C-8: PAST DUE NOTICE:
A past due notice, the contents of which shall comply with the requirements of sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the IVC, as amended, shall be served by
mail to the address of the registered owner of a vehicle cited for an automated traffic law violation as recorded with the secretary after twenty one (21)
days past the original date of the violation notice. A past due fine or late fee will be imposed in addition to the original fine. Service of a past due notice
shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. A past due notice served in accordance with this article and section 11-208.3
of the IVC, a copy of the violation notice or the computer generated record shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness
of the facts shown on the past due notice. The past due notice, copy or computer generated record shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative
or legal proceedings. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
9-2C-9: RIGHT TO ADJUDICATORY HEARING:
The registered owner of the vehicle cited in a violation notice shall have the opportunity for a hearing in which said owner may contest the merits of the
alleged violation. The lessee of a vehicle cited in a violation notice likewise shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing of the same kind afforded the
registered owner. The formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply at any such hearing. Such hearings shall be recorded, and the person
conducting the hearing on behalf of the administrator shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers. Persons appearing at such a hearing may be represented by counsel at their own
expense. Any individual requesting such hearing and found liable for the violation shall be required to pay the fine and court costs at the end of the
hearing. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
9-2C-10: FINAL DETERMINATION:
A. Village Liability:
1. A final determination of automated traffic law violation shall occur following: a) the hearing in front of the adjudicator; b) the failure of a person
requesting an adjudicatory hearing to appear at such hearing; or c) after a request for the administrator to review such red light violation and the
administrator makes such ruling.
2. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing
officer's determination of violation liability shall be final when: a) a denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or b) upon expiration of
the period for filing such a petition without a filing having been made.
B. Determination Notice: A final determination notice, the contents of which shall comply with the requirements of section 11-208.3 of the IVC, as
amended, shall be sent following a final determination of automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion of judicial review procedures taken
under section 11-208.3 of the IVC. A final determination notice shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the
registered owner of the cited vehicle as recorded with the secretary of state or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last
known address recorded in a United States post office approved database or, under section 11-1306 of the IVC, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 163/307
last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last
known address recorded in a United States post office database. Service of the determination notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of
deposit in the United States mail.
C. Final Determination Challenge: A person who had an order of final determination or a past due notice for an automated traffic law violation penalty may
file a petition to set aside a final determination of such liability within ten (10) days after service by the village of a determination notice. Such a petition
shall be filed by sending the same, together with any documentation in support thereof, to the administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested,
or by personal delivery to the administrator. The grounds for such a petition shall be limited to: 1) the person not having been the owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued; 2) the person having already paid the fine or penalty for the violation in question; and 3)
excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. A hearing on such a petition shall be held at the next available adjudicatory hearing
date. In the event that such a petition is granted upon a showing of just cause, and the subject determination of automated traffic law violation liability is
thereby set aside, the registered owner shall be provided with a hearing on the merits for that violation. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
9-2C-11: SUSPENSION NOTICE:
A. Failure To Pay Fines: A suspension notice, the contents of which shall comply with the requirements of sections 6-306.5 and 11-208.3 of the IVC, as
amended, shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more unpaid automated traffic law
violations. The suspension notice shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary or, if any
notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database. Service of a
suspension notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
B. Suspension Notice Challenge: If the administrator provides a suspension notice to a vehicle owner and subsequently makes a certified report to the
secretary, the subject vehicle owner may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing. To do so, the vehicle owner must submit to the
administrator a written statement under oath, together with any supporting documentation, establishing one of the following grounds for challenging the
accuracy of the certified report: 1) that the person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle or vehicles receiving five (5) or more automated
traffic law violations on the date or dates such violation notices were issued; or 2) that the person already paid the fines or penalties for the five (5) or
more automated traffic law violations indicated on the certified report. Such statement and supporting documentation must be sent to the administrator
by certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand delivered to the administrator within five (5) days after the person receives notice from the secretary
that the person's driver's license will be suspended at the end of a specified period of time unless the secretary is presented with a notice from the
village certifying that the fines or penalties due and owing have been paid or that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified report was in error.
C. Nonresident Challenge: Nonresidents of the village who receive violation notices or past due notices may contest the merits of the alleged automated
traffic law violation without attending a hearing by sending a signed statement, under oath, together with any supporting documentation, to the
administrator via certified mail, return receipt requested, within ten (10) days after service of the violation notice. Such a statement shall set forth the
reasons why a finding of liability should not be entered. The administrator shall rule on such a statement within ten (10) days after receipt of same, and
shall inform the nonresident of his decision within ten (10) days thereafter. Nonresidents who wish to contest merits violation by allowing the
administrator to rule on the violation shall forfeit any review of the violation in the adjudicatory hearing. (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
9-2C-12: PENALTY:
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle cited for an automated traffic law violation received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the time of the
violation, the owner of the motor vehicle is subject to a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. In the event that such penalty is not paid
within twenty one (21) days after service of a violation notice, the penalty shall increase to two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 06-17-08-01, 6-17-2008)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
9-3-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
In lieu of using any section or in addition to any section of this title, the officer issuing a citation may issue said citation by using any of the sections of the
Illinois vehicle code, which sections of said Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, and all amendments made from time to time, are hereby
incorporated by reference as part of this title, and every numbered section in said Illinois vehicle code shall be referred to by number "9" prefixing said
section number. All citations so issued shall be issued in the name of the village and referred to in the uniform traffic ticket or complaint as an ordinance
violation. (1965 Code § 10-17-1; amd. 2009 Code)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ALLEY: A public way within a block generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.
BICYCLES: Every device propelled by human power, upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is more than twenty
inches (20") in diameter.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory of the village contiguous to and including a highway when within any six hundred feet (600') along such highway there
are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings
which occupy at least three hundred feet (300') of frontage on one side or three hundred feet (300') collectively on both sides of the highway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 164/307
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of commercial, industrial or
business enterprise and includes any other vehicle operated for compensation.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every street or highway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same except at such points only as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such street or highway.
CROSSWALK: That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the sidewalk lines at street intersections.
DRIVERS: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, vehicles of the fire department, ambulances, vehicles carrying a state, county or municipal officer or employee in
response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service corporations on emergency calls.
EXPLOSIVE: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which
contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion, or by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS: Any liquid which has a flashpoint of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) or less, as determined by Tagliabue or equivalent closed
cup test device.
IMPROVED HIGHWAY: A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel.
INTERSECTION: A. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadway of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
B. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways forty feet (40') or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate "intersection".
LANED ROADWAY: A street, the roadway of which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
MERGING TRAFFIC: A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging roadways to permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction
thereof, wherein the driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with any other
vehicle.
METAL TIRES: Every tire, the surface of which in contact with the roadway is wholly or partially of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle that is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wires, but not
operated upon rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of
persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or property abutting thereon.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the village, the county or any park district, school district, the state of Illinois, or the United States government.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle originally designed or permanently converted and used for living quarters or for human habitation, for
recreational, camping or travel use and which has its own motor power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, and includes any housecar, mobile
home, house trailer, travel trailer, camper trailer, including those with collapsible side walls, truck campers, van or panel campers, van conversions, and
bus conversions. Also included within this definition, for the purpose of this title, are the following vehicles not designed for living quarters or for human
habitation, but used for recreational use: boats, snowmobiles, swamp buggies, dune buggies or dune schooners and trailers upon which such boats or
vehicles are mounted or transported.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory of the village contiguous to and including a highway, not comprising a business district when the property on such
highway, for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or more, is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
REVERSIBLE LANE: A lane of a two (2) or more lane roadway upon which traffic may be directed to move in either direction by means of a lane control
signals or other devices, in conjunction with official signs.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a "safety zone".
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 165/307
organization solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.
SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material that does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
SPEED CHANGE LANE: An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the
through traffic lanes.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicle traffic.
SUBURBAN DISTRICT: That portion of the village other than the business and residence districts.
THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every highway or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to stop
before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, whether singly or together while using any highway, for the purpose of
travel.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK-TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part
of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: When required by an official sign, the act of granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic within
the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left; provided, that when the roadway is clear, the vehicle may proceed into the intersection.
(1965 Code § 10-1-1; amd. 2009 Code)
9-3-3: UNLAWFUL SIGNS AND LIGHTS:
A. Certain Signs Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the village any sign, signal, marking or device, other than a traffic sign or signal
authorized by the board of trustees or the Illinois state department of transportation, which purports to be or is an imitation of or reasonably resembles
an official traffic control device, or railroad sign or signal, in view of any street or highway, and it shall be unlawful to place or maintain any sign which
hides from view any lawful traffic control device. (1965 Code § 10-3-8; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Flashing Or Rotating Beacon Or Light: It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate in view of any street or highway any flashing or rotating beacon or
light. (1965 Code § 10-3-8)
Chapter 4
DRIVING RULES
9-4-1: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. (1965
Code § 10-8-1)
9-4-2: RIGHT TURN ONLY ON SPECIFIC STREET:
A. Right Turn Only: The northbound intersection of Fern Avenue and Ogden Avenue is designated "right turn only". It shall be unlawful to either make a left
turn or continue straight through this intersection. (1965 Code § 10-6-23)
B. Penalty: The penalty for violating this section is as provided in the Illinois vehicle code. (1965 Code § 10-6-23; amd. 2009 Code)
9-4-3: TRAFFIC AT RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS:
A. Signal Device: The driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing when a signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train
shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest track of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 166/307
B. Crossing Gate: The driver of a vehicle shall stop at and not traverse such grade crossing when a crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman or
automatic signal warns of the approach of a train.
C. Vehicles Carrying Passengers Or Flammables: The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or any school bus carrying any
schoolchildren, or any vehicle carrying explosives or flammable liquids as cargo shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet (50') but not less than ten feet
(10') from the nearest rail of the tracks and shall listen and look in both directions along such tracks from which a train might come before proceeding
across such tracks at a grade crossing. Provided, that no such stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic control signal
directs traffic to proceed. (1965 Code § 10-8-9)
9-4-4: RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING:
A. Driving From Alley, Driveway Or Garage: The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto a sidewalk, or across a sidewalk line projected across such alley, and shall exercise extreme care in driving upon said sidewalk or across
such lines. (1965 Code § 10-6-5)
B. Driving On Sidewalks Or In Safety Zones: No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway, nor
at any time into or upon any portion of a roadway marked as a safety zone. (1965 Code § 10-6-6)
C. Backing: The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interference with other
traffic. (1965 Code § 10-8-13)
D. Restricted Areas Of Access: No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled or limited controlled access roadway except at such entrances
and exits as are established by public authority. (1965 Code § 10-8-14)
9-4-5: SCHOOL BUSES:
The driver of a vehicle on any street or highway, upon meeting or overtaking, from either direction, any school bus which has stopped on the highway for
the purpose of receiving or discharging any schoolchildren shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on the bus a
visual signal as required by statute for operation while the bus is transporting pupils; provided, that the driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway of which
the roadways for traffic moving in opposite directions are separated by a strip of ground at least four feet (4') wide which is not surfaced or suitable for
vehicular traffic, or on a controlled access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross, need not stop his vehicle upon meeting or passing a
school bus which is on the opposite roadway. (1965 Code § 10-8-17)
9-4-6: TRUCK TRAFFIC AND OPERATING PERMITS:
A. Purpose And Definitions:
1. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect the residential neighborhoods of the village while creating relatively little inconvenience to truck
traffic. The corporate authorities of the village find that the provisions of this section are necessary to preserve the characteristics of the different
zoning districts, promote pedestrian safety throughout the village, enhance community business districts and protect the infrastructure and surfacing
of the roadways within the village street system.
2. Definitions Of Words And Phrases: The following words and phrases when used in this section shall, for the purpose of this section, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection, except when the context otherwise requires and except where another definition set forth
in another chapter of this code and applicable to that chapter or a designated part thereof is applicable:
AXLE LOAD: The total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose centers may be included between two (2) parallel transverse vertical
planes forty inches (40") apart extending across the full width of the vehicle.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial
enterprise, for hire or not for hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that
purpose, or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR): The value specified by the manufacturer or manufacturers as the maximum loaded weight of a
single vehicle. The GVWR of a combination of vehicles (commonly referred to as the "gross combination weight rating" or GCWR) is the GVWR of
the power unit plus the GVWR of the towed unit or units. In the absence of a value specified by the manufacturer, GCWR is determined by adding
the GVWR of the power unit and the total weight of the towed unit and any load on the unit.
GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle whether operated singly or in combination without load plus the weight of the load thereon.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY: Every vehicle as defined in the Illinois vehicle code and designed and adapted exclusively for agricultural,
horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for lifting or
carrying an implement of husbandry.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires, but not operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs. For this definition, motor vehicles
are divided into two (2) divisions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 167/307
a. First Division: Those motor vehicles, which are designed for the carrying of not more than ten (10) persons.
b. Second Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for carrying more than ten (10) persons, those motor vehicles designed or used
for living quarters, those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight, cargo or implements of husbandry, and those motor
vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second division.
PERMIT ROUTE: The route authorized by the issuing authority with proper jurisdiction over the roadway(s) for which permission has been granted
to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles that is in itself indivisible or carrying an indivisible load that exceeds normal dimensions or weight or a
combination thereof.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
TANDEM AXLES: Any two (2) or more single axles whose centers are more than forty inches (40") and not more than ninety six inches (96") apart,
measured to the nearest inch between extreme axles in the series, except as provided in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 for special
hauling vehicles.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn
by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other
than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
VILLAGE: The village of Lyons.
B. Overweight And/Or Overdimension Vehicles:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to park, or move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be
parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the village, any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding
the size and weight limitations stated in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes sections 5/15-102 (width), 5/15-103 (height), 5/15-107 (length), 5/15-111
(weight) and 5/15-316 (local restrictions).
2. Size and weight limitations while operating on village streets shall not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal operations owned
or operated by or for any governmental body or to implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a combination in the furtherance of a
farm or agricultural endeavor and to any vehicle or combination of vehicles operating under the terms of a valid oversize and/or overdimension
permit issued by the village under the authority of subsection C of this section. These exceptions do not include operation over a posted weight
restricted elevated structure.
3. Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are imposed by ordinance under authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes sections 5/15-
111, 5/15-316 and 5/15-317, and signs indicating such limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination
of vehicles in excess of such size or weight limitations or in violation of such restrictions.
4. Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this section, the owner and/or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of such violation and either or both the owner and driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.
5. In addition to the restrictions contained herein, the village may further restrict size and weight limitations by ordinance pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/15-316.
C. Permits For Overweight And/Or Overdimension Vehicles:
1. A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a nondivisible load on roadways and bridges within the
jurisdiction of the village which exceeds the dimension and weights permitted for the particular roadways to be traversed.
2. The village with respect to any street or highway under its jurisdiction may upon application to the village police department on forms provided by the
police department and good cause being shown therefor issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination
of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes sections 5/15-102
(width), 5/15-103 (height), 5/15-107 (length), and 5/15-111 (weight). The applicant shall furnish the following information in the special permit
application:
a. The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle.
b. Applicant's name.
c. Type of permit request whether it be for a single trip, round trip, or multiple routing.
d. The description and registration number of the power unit.
e. Description of the object or vehicle to be moved.
f. The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles.
g. The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem or series axles.
h. Maximum gross weight of the vehicle.
i. The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and load.
j. Requested routing over village streets to and from a specific location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 168/307
3. For purposes of this subsection, the following definitions apply:
MULTIPLE MOVES: Those in such close proximity to each other in distance or in time that the police department would consider incorporating two
(2) or more permit moves within one permit application. Multiple move permits when granted by the police department shall be for a period of time
not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of issuance.
ONE-WAY OR SINGLE TRIP MOVEMENT: One move from the point of origin to the point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of
origin and the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are effective for seven (7) consecutive days from the date of
issuance unless otherwise directed by the police department.
ROUND TRIP MOVEMENT: Two (2) trips over the same route in opposite directions. Round trip permits are effective from the day of issuance to
fourteen (14) consecutive days after the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the police department.
4. The owner or his or her agent shall submit an application fee based on the following schedule. Permits are valid only for the date periods specified
on the permit and for the specific vehicle, load and routing as established by the chief of police or designee. No substitution of vehicle, load or routing
is permitted without expressed written permission by the chief of police or his or her designee and the permit must be carried in the vehicle to which
the permit applies.
FEE SCHEDULE
Permit Size
Fee
Single Trip Round Trip Multiple
Weight (with load):
Up to 100,000 pounds $ 50.00 $ 75.00 $150.00
100,001 - 120,000 pounds 75.00 100.00 200.00
120,001 - 150,000 pounds 100.00 125.00
Over 150,000 pounds 125.001 125.001
Width (with load):
Up to 12' 25.00 40.00 75.00
12'1" - 13'6" 50.00 75.00 100.00
Over 13'6" 50.001 75.001
Height (with load):
13'6" - 14'6" 25.00 40.00 75.00
Over 14'6" 50.001 75.001
Length (with load):
Up to 100' 25.00 40.00 75.00
Over 100'0" 50.001 75.001
Note:
1. Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage fees.
If a vehicle requires a permit due to multiple weight and/or dimension issues, the total fee will be based on the largest individual weight or dimension
factor only.
5. The chief of police or his or her designee is authorized to approve the application for approved routes. Upon approval and payment of all required
fees, the police department shall issue a permit allowing passage of the oversize and/or overweight vehicles over village streets. The permit shall be
specific and contain:
a. Permit number.
b. The dates the permit is valid.
c. Whether the permit is for single, round, multiple trip routing.
d. The description of object or vehicle to be moved.
e. Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and height.
f. The authorized routing over village streets including the origin and termination point within the village.
g. The fee paid.
h. The date and signature of the chief of police or his or her designee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 169/307
i. In addition, the permit will specify general conditions that the permittee must comply with that are consistent and reasonable for the protection of
the general public and village streets. A copy of all permits issued will be provided to the village manager for informational purposes.
6. It is the duty of the permittee to read and familiarize himself or herself with the permit provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit move is
deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and that:
a. The permittee is in compliance with all operation requirements;
b. All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will not be exceeded;
c. All operation, registration and license requirements have been complied with;
d. All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal requirements have been met; and
e. The permittee assumes all responsibility for injury or damage to persons or to public or private property, including his or her own, or to the object
being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the transportation or movement of vehicles and objects authorized under the permit. He or she
agrees to hold the village harmless from all suits, claims, damages, or proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the village for any claim it may be
required to pay arising from the movement.
7. The permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies at all times while operating on streets within the village and shall be exhibited
upon demand to any law enforcement officer, police officer or authorized official of the village.
8. Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a village permit whether it be by size, weight or general provisions, and either or
both the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty and either or both the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such
violation.
D. Vehicles Prohibited On Certain Streets:
1. As provided under the authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes sections 5/15-111 and 5/15-316, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle upon
any street where the operation of that vehicle is prohibited by ordinance and where signs of such prohibition are posted. Vehicles operating under the
authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/15-111 or 5/15-316 while utilizing village streets under "reasonable access" rules will be
considered in violation of this section if they are not utilizing the most direct route to points of loading and unloading.
2. It shall be unlawful to operate a construction vehicle, as defined in the Illinois vehicle code, on any street in the village when signs that prohibit
construction vehicles are posted on that street. Where the chief of police, with approval of the village board, establishes truck routes, construction
vehicles will utilize only those established routes to service those areas of the village under construction.
E. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates, disobeys, neglects, fails to comply with or resists enforcement of the provisions of this
section will be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each calendar day a violation occurs. In addition to seeking a fine, as hereinabove provided, the village attorney may institute
any proper action in the name of the village of Lyons to enjoin the violation of any provision of this section.
F. Truck Traffic:
1. Prohibited On Certain Streets: It shall be unlawful to drive any truck, except for the purpose of making a delivery, on any street so designated by
ordinance and properly signposted.
2. Limited Load Streets: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the village when the gross weight on the surface of the road through
any axle of such vehicle exceeds sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds. Where lower limits are imposed by ordinance and signs indicating such
limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of making delivery or
picking up a load, in which case, such vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose. (Ord.
06-05-2013-O1, 6-5-2013)
9-4-7: PROCESSIONS:
A. Driving Through Processions: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are
in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in subsection C of this section. (1965 Code § 10-8-10)
B. Drivers In Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand side of the roadway as practicable and shall
follow the vehicle ahead as close as practicable and safe. (1965 Code § 10-8-11)
C. Identification: A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by having the lights of each vehicle lighted. (1965 Code § 10-8-
12; amd. 2009 Code)
9-4-8: MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS:
A. Clinging To Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle, or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his
vehicle to any moving motor vehicle or wagon. (1965 Code § 10-8-6)
B. Toy Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk.
(1965 Code § 10-8-7)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 170/307
C. Riding On Running Boards: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fender, running board or outside step of any vehicle. (1965 Code § 10-8-
8)
9-4-9: USE OF MOBILE TELEPHONES WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE:
A. Definitions: For purpose of this section, the following terms shall apply:
HANDS FREE DEVICE: An external device that connects to a mobile telephone that allows the user to engage in a telephone call without touching the
user's mobile telephone.
MOBILE TELEPHONE: A cellular, analog, wireless or digital telephone or other device capable of sending or receiving telephone messages without an
access line for service.
ONBOARD COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE: A communications system or device that is hard wired into the motor vehicle.
USE: Talking or listening to another person, text messaging, sending, reading or listening to an electronic message or browsing the internet.
B. Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided in subsection C of this section, no person shall operate a motor vehicle while using a mobile telephone.
C. Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. Any person using a mobile telephone or onboard communications device for nonpersonal use in the course of ordinary business in their employment
with a village, state or federal agency or authority;
2. Any person using a hands free device for voice communication, provided that such person does not touch the mobile telephone connected to such
hands free device while operating or using the vehicle;
3. Any person using a mobile telephone to call 911 or other emergency telephone numbers to contact public safety forces;
4. Any person using a mobile telephone while maintaining a motor vehicle in a stationary and parked position.
D. Penalty: Any person who violates subsection B of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), provided however, that if a
violation occurs at the time of traffic accident, the driver shall be subject to an additional fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 06-18-
14-O2, 6-18-2014)
Chapter 5
THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS; ONE-WAY STREETS AND
ALLEYS
9-5-1: THROUGH STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets of the village designated by law as through streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a vehicle shall
stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so
close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard unless directed otherwise by a traffic officer or a traffic control signal. (1965 Code § 10-5-1)
9-5-2: ONE-WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any of the following streets or alleys designated as one-way streets or alleys by law in any direction other
than that so designated:
Barrypoint Road, between Joliet Avenue and Ogden Avenue, shall be one-way westbound.
Clyde Avenue, from 45th Place to 47th Street, shall be one-way northbound.
Elm Avenue, between 41st Place and 43rd Street, shall be one-way southbound.
Elm Avenue, between 44th Street and 45th Street, shall be one-way southbound between eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and three thirty o'clock (3:30)
P.M. on school days.
Gage Avenue, from the first alley south of Ogden Avenue to 41st Place, shall be one-way southbound.
Hawthorne, between 45th Place and 47th Street, shall be one-way southbound.
Leland Avenue, between Salisbury to the northernmost alley, shall be one-way northbound between eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and three thirty o'clock
(3:30) P.M. on school days.
Maple Avenue, between 41st Place and 43rd Street, shall be one-way northbound.
42nd Street, from Lawndale to Leland, shall be one-way westbound.
43rd Place, from Clyde to the alley west of Lawndale, shall be one-way eastbound.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 171/307
46th Street, from Riverside Avenue to Lawndale Avenue, shall be one-way eastbound. (1965 Code § 10-5-2)
9-5-3: STOP STREETS:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected pursuant to law at one or more entrances
thereto, and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so obligated to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event, compliance with the directions of
the police officer is required. (1965 Code § 10-5-3)
9-5-4: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY STREETS:
A. Requirement To Yield: Any street designated by law as a yield right of way street and so posted is hereby declared to be a yield right of way street. The
driver of a vehicle, in obedience to a yield right of way sign, shall reduce the speed of his vehicle to not more than twenty (20) miles per hour and shall
yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting street either from the right or left or which are approaching so closely on
such intersection as to constitute a hazard; but said drivers having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
B. Collision; Prima Facie Evidence: If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past
a yield right of way sign, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield right of way. (1965 Code § 10-5-4)
9-5-5: SIGNS POSTED:
Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through, stop and yield right of way streets; all one-way streets and alleys; and all stop intersections. (1965
Code § 10-5-5)
Chapter 6
PARKING REGULATIONS
9-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
VEHICLE OR MOTOR VEHICLE: Except where specifically distinguished, every vehicle which is self-propelled.
VEHICLES OF SECOND DIVISION: Except where specifically distinguished, those motor vehicles which are designed for carrying more quarters and
those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo. (1965 Code § 10-10-1)
9-6-2: STATE REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to park or stand on any village street without current state registration. When two (2) registration plates are issued
by the state for motor vehicles, one shall be attached thereto in the front and one in the rear. (1965 Code § 10-10-2)
9-6-3: METHOD OF PARKING:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established
curb line; except, that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such
marks. (1965 Code § 10-10-6)
9-6-4: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (1965 Code
§ 10-6-3)
9-6-5: PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand at any time in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device:
A. In any intersection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 172/307
B. In a crosswalk.
C. Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the approach thereto.
D. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
E. Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon, or sign on the approaching side.
F. Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk.
G. At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
H. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant, measured parallel to the curb line in both directions.
I. At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
J. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing.
K. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly signposted.
L. On any sidewalk or parkway.
M. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
N. In the front yard or side yard of any building in any residential area except on a hard surfaced driveway.
O. In a designated and marked fire lane.
P. In a designated handicapped space, unless in compliance with state law. (1965 Code § 10-10-2; amd. 2009 Code)
9-6-6: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Street Cleaning: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion thereof in the village at any time when such street is being
cleaned. Signs indicating when a street or portion thereof is being cleaned shall be posted. (1965 Code § 10-10-4)
B. Vehicles For Sale Or Selling Merchandise: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any
vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled. (1965 Code § 10-10-7)
C. Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. And no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1965 Code § 10-10-8)
9-6-7: RESTRICTED WINTER PARKING; SNOW REMOVAL:
A. Restriction: It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time longer than three (3) minutes for loading and unloading passengers, or thirty (30)
minutes for loading and unloading of property at any place, whether designated a loading zone or not, so designated on any through street or any
street upon which public transportation is operated between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. after November 15 and
before April 1 of each year, or any time after snow begins to fall and for a period of eight (8) hours after snow stops falling, if the snow on the street
exceeds two inches (2") in depth; provided, that said eight (8) hour parking restriction shall continue during snow removal operations until completed.
(1965 Code § 10-10-3; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Signs: The village president has power to designate by appropriate signs any place on any other street where no parking is permitted during the hours
in the season described in this section. (1965 Code § 10-10-3)
9-6-8: LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes, in any place designated by the board of trustees as a loading zone and marked as such, or at any place
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 173/307
not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb line before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M., except on a Sunday. (1965 Code § 10-10-23; amd. 2009 Code)
9-6-9: CAB STANDS AND BUS STANDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle other than a licensed taxicab in any area designated by ordinance as a cab stand; and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any vehicle other than a bus in a place so designated as a bus loading zone. (1965 Code § 10-10-24)
9-6-10: PARKING PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS ON SPECIFIC STREETS:
A. Resident Parking Only: Unless a resident of the area, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the following streets or portions of streets posted as
"Resident Parking Only": (1965 Code § 10-10-2; amd. 2009 Code)
1. On the east side of Custer Avenue.
2. On the 4100 block of Lawndale Avenue. (1965 Code § 10-10-2)
B. No Parking Areas: It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle at any time at the following places, which are hereby designated as "no
parking" areas:
Street Side Area
Gage Avenue East From Ogden Avenue to the north edge of the first alley
Lawndale
Avenue
East and west
From the centerline of Ogden Avenue to a point 300 feet south thereof
East and west
From a point 300 feet north of the centerline of 47th Street to a point 300 feet south of the centerline of 47th
Street
Ogden Avenue North and
south
From a point 300 feet east of the centerline of Lawndale Avenue to a point 300 feet west of the centerline of
Lawndale Avenue
Pershing Road North and
south
From Haas Avenue west to Ogden Avenue
North From Harlem Avenue west to a point 100 feet east of Powell Avenue
South From Harlem Avenue west to Powell Avenue
47th Street North From Harlem Avenue west to Custer Avenue
South From Lawndale Avenue east to Joliet Avenue
(1965 Code § 10-10-20)
C. Fifteen Minute Parking For Pick Up Only: The following parking limitation is established for:
Street Side Area
Joliet Avenue West 108 feet south of the intersection of Ogden Avenue and Joliet Avenue and extending south 170 feet
(Ord. 04-20-10-02, 4-20-2010)
9-6-11: HANDICAP PARKING SIGNS:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
ACCESSIBILITY: The means by which a disabled person overcomes physical barriers to access his residential property.
DISABLED PERSON: Any resident of the village who has met the criteria of the state of Illinois for obtaining and has actually obtained a handicap
license plate or motor vehicle placard.
HANDICAP PARKING SIGN: A sign erected by the village decreeing a specific public area to be for motor vehicle parking by handicapped persons
only.
B. General Requirements:
1. Request For Sign: All requests for handicap signs shall be in accordance with this section.
2. Condition For Issuance: A handicap parking sign shall only be issued under the following prerequisites:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 174/307
a. The disability must be permanent in nature as determined by the Illinois secretary of state.
b. Only the resident for which the handicapped signage is issued shall be parked in the designated handicapped space.
c. The applicant must hold title to the vehicle for which the signage has been installed.
d. The applicant must reside at the address at which the sign is requested.
e. If the residence for which the signage is requested includes a driveway or garage, and if the distance from the driveway or garage is less than the
distance from the requested handicapped designated parking space, then no handicapped parking sign will be installed.
3. Reasons For Denial Of Request Or Removal Of Sign: The village shall deny an application for a handicap sign or remove a handicap sign for one or
more of the following reasons:
a. Fraudulent or misleading information provided on an application.
b. The applicant is not disabled or has recovered from his disability.
c. The applicant no longer lives at the subject address.
d. A nuisance or hazardous condition will be created by the installation of the sign and/or its attendant handicap parking space.
C. Application Requirements:
1. Filing Of Application With Police Department: Persons seeking the issuance of a handicap parking sign shall fill out an application for such sign at
the police department.
2. Documentation Of State Plate Or Placard: The applications shall be submitted with documentation from the state of Illinois establishing that the
applicant has obtained a handicap license plate or placard from the state.
3. Proof Of Residency Adjacent To Sign Location: Proof of residency adjacent to the public sign location shall be presented with the application.
4. No Fee: There shall be no fee for the application. (Ord. 08-18-09-01, 8-18-2009)
9-6-12: SIGNS POSTED:
Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited, indicating such limitation or prohibition. (1965 Code § 10-10-10)
9-6-13: REGISTRATION, PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such
person was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation. (1965 Code § 10-10-11)
9-6-14: IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
A. Whenever any vehicle is parked illegally in such a manner as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic or interfere with the sweeping or repair of
streets or removal of snow therefrom, the chief of police, or any person authorized by the chief of police, is hereby authorized to cause such vehicle to
be removed from the public street and conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the police department to an authorized garage or storage
area. (1965 Code § 10-10-14)
B. Any vehicle parked in violation of traffic regulations or any vehicle parked so as to obstruct the free movement of traffic or to cause a traffic hazard may
be immediately removed upon order of the police department. Any such vehicle removed by the police department shall be kept under the control of
the police department until the owner or authorized agent pays a reasonable cost of removal and storage in addition to the penalty provided for such
improper parking. Any such vehicle shall be deemed to be improperly parked after a period of three (3) minutes, unless said vehicle is parked in a
regularly marked parking area, when it shall be deemed to be improperly parked after any period of time longer than that designated by a meter or
proper sign. (1965 Code § 10-11-8)
C. If at any time a vehicle is parked upon private property without the consent of the owner of such property, the police department is hereby authorized to
remove said vehicle therefrom and to cause the same to be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of, provided the owner of such private
property has first signed a complaint against the owner or operator of said vehicle. Any such vehicle removed by the police department shall be kept
under the control of the police department until the owner or authorized agent pays a reasonable cost of removal and storage in addition to the penalty
provided for such improper parking1. (1965 Code § 10-11-9)
9-6-15: FINES:
The fines for all violations of this chapter shall be as provided in section 9-2-4 of this title. (1965 Code § 10-10-25)
9-6-16: RIGHT TO HEARING:
The registered owner of the vehicle cited has a right to hearing and to review by the village adjudicator under title 1, chapter 5, article A of this code. Any
individual requesting such hearing shall be required to present a bond prior to said hearing that shall be the face value of the current fine as well as pay an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 175/307
administrative court fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00). Should an individual be found not liable (not guilty), said fee may be refunded upon order of the
hearing officer. (Ord. 06-19-07-06, 6-19-2007)
ARTICLE A. COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING1
9-6A-1: COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. Overnight Parking: No commercial vehicle or portion thereof with a license above a B plate or licensed for a gross weight, including vehicle and cargo,
of eight thousand one (8,001) pounds or more may be parked overnight on any street of the village. "Commercial vehicles", excluding transport
vehicles, as defined in section 9-3-2 of this title that are licensed below a B plate or for a gross weight of vehicle and cargo of eight thousand (8,000)
pounds or less are permitted to park overnight on any street of the village, provided such vehicle has a valid village vehicle sticker.
B. Parking Prohibited In Certain Areas: No commercial vehicle with a license above a B plate or licensed for a gross weight, including vehicle and cargo, of
eight thousand one (8,001) pounds or more shall be parked at any time on any parkway or public way in the village; nor shall any such vehicle be
parked on the front setback area between the plane of the front of the building and the front lot line.
C. Vehicles Used As Warehouses Or Storage Bins: No commercial or recreational vehicle shall be used for warehouses, storage bins or loading bins
within the village.
D. Parking On Private Property: No commercial vehicle shall be parked or stored on private property unless:
1. Such parking or storage is conducted on land improved with concrete or asphalt as regulated by the village zoning regulations and otherwise
approved by the village as a commercial parking lot, truck terminal or accessory parking lot.
2. Such parking is conducted as part of a village licensed truck terminal or commercial parking lot, or the parking of the vehicle in question is accessory
to and on site at a licensed commercial or industrial use.
E. Parking On Unimproved Or Unoccupied Land; Penalties:
1. Parking or storage on unimproved or unoccupied land, or in accessory parking lots while not accessory to the lawful primary industrial or commercial
occupant, or while such enterprise is closed, is expressly prohibited.
2. Vehicles in violation of subsection E1 of this section are subject to immediate immobilization as provided for in chapter 2, article A of this title. The
fine for a violation of subsection E1 of this section shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each twenty four (24) hour period in violation. The
registered vehicle and/or property owner may be cited as responsible parties for this violation. Such violations may be appealed to the village code
hearing officer, provided a bond in the amount of the total fine is filed with the village as enumerated in chapter 2, article A of this title. (1965 Code
§ 10-18-1)
9-6A-2: LOCATION OF COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
A. Use Of Enclosed Garage Or Building: All commercial vehicles and recreational vehicles, except as otherwise provided in subsections B and C of this
section, shall be parked within a totally enclosed garage or other building or parcel of land in any residential district.
B. Rear Yard Parking: In the rear yard, open parking of a recreational vehicle shall be permitted, in addition to private passenger vehicles; provided, that
only one such vehicle may be so located in the open, in the rear yard; and screening in the form of shrubbery, fencing or other means adequate to
shield such vehicle from adjoining properties is provided and maintained. A recreational vehicle with collapsible walls shall be stored in a collapsed
position.
C. Side Yard Parking: In the event that the residence and garage buildings are so located on any lot or parcel of ground in any residence district that, in the
opinion of the zoning administrator, either no rear yard exists or physical access to the rear yard for open parking of a recreational vehicle as provided
in subsection B of this section is not possible or otherwise feasible, then and only then, the open parking of such recreational vehicle may be permitted,
in addition to private passenger vehicles, in any side yard area located at the side of the main residence building and to the rear of the actual building
line or any front portion of such residence building; provided, that only one such vehicle may be so located in the open in the side yard, and screening
in the form of shrubbery, fencing or other means adequate to shield such vehicle from adjoining properties is provided and maintained.
D. Lot Line Restrictions: Location of a parked vehicle shall conform to all lot line restrictions of the village zoning regulations. (1965 Code § 10-18-2)
9-6A-3: OCCUPANCY OF VEHICLES FOR LIVING QUARTERS PROHIBITED:
While parked, stored or otherwise kept on any improved lot or parcel of ground in any zoning district, no recreational vehicle shall be occupied or used for
living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes, and no water, gas, sewerage or electrical service connection shall be attached to such vehicle. (1965 Code
§ 10-18-3)
9-6A-4: TEMPORARY LOADING AND DELIVERIES PERMITTED:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, any recreational vehicle may be parked in the driveway area of any residentially improved lot or parcel of
ground in any residence district for loading or unloading purposes for a continuous period not exceeding forty eight (48) hours, and any commercial vehicle
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 176/307
may be parked in the driveway area of any residential lot or parcel of ground for a temporary period of time necessary to make deliveries or other service
to the property owner. (1965 Code § 10-18-4)
9-6A-5: TRANSPORT VEHICLES REGULATED:
A. Prohibited Parking: Transport vehicles, including limousines, taxicabs, hearses, buses, ambulances and similar vehicles, are prohibited from being
parked or stored on any public street, parkway, sidewalk, private or public drive or private property located within areas zoned or utilized as residential
within the village.
B. Exceptions: Exceptions to subsection A of this section are as follows:
1. Wherein such vehicles are in the process of picking up, delivering, transporting or otherwise engaged in actual transportation of human cargo as part
of a lawful commercial enterprise.
2. Public or private school buses parked on school property or on the street while driver occupied awaiting student pick up.
3. One limousine and one taxicab, owned or operated by a Lyons resident, parked upon his own private residential property on an improved surface,
provided it is not otherwise in conflict with village ordinances. The parking of such vehicles shall be on an improved surface in a location that would
otherwise be approved for a residential driveway and may not in any way be parked over a public sidewalk or parkway. If, in the determination of the
code enforcement officer, the limousine can properly and safely access the back yard, such parking shall be placed in that location.
4. Private accessory parking lots within the village limits may be utilized for the parking of one school bus that is otherwise operated solely for the use
of a public or private accredited educational institution and operated by a Lyons resident. Written authorization for such parking must be obtained
from the owner of the parking lot and from the village code enforcement officer. Approvals for a second or subsequent bus shall be prohibited until
such time as the preceding approval has been withdrawn. The village shall base its decision on the availability of parking on the lot, the potential
interference with business and traffic and whether such parking will be significantly out of character with the neighborhood and zoning district. The
code enforcement officer shall communicate all approved parking locations to the police department to assist in the prevention of mistaken
enforcement. (1965 Code § 10-18-5)
9-6A-6: FINES:
The fines for all violations of this article shall be as provided in section 9-2-4 of this title. (1965 Code § 10-18-6)
9-6A-7: CONFLICTS; STRICTER STANDARDS PREVAIL:
In the event this article conflicts with any other village code provision or village ordinance, the stricter standard shall apply. (1965 Code § 10-18-7)
Footnote 1: See also subsection 13-12-2I of this code.
Chapter 7
PEDESTRIANS
9-7-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Signals Not In Place: Where traffic control signals or pedestrian control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right
of way, slowing down or stopping if need be, for a pedestrian crossing the roadway or street within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked
crosswalk. (1965 Code § 10-9-1; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Signals In Place: Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or a marked crosswalk between intersections, the
pedestrian shall have the right of way over the drivers of vehicles; and at such marked places, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk, and any pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of way over any vehicle so stopped.
C. Stopping For Vehicle Stopped At Crosswalk: The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any vehicle proceeding in the same
direction is stopped at such crosswalk for the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross. (1965 Code § 10-9-1)
9-7-2: CROSSING ROADWAYS:
A. Direct Route: At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any
place other than a crosswalk, he shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. (1965 Code § 10-9-2)
B. Use Of Crosswalks:
1. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
2. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district. (1965 Code § 10-9-5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 177/307
C. Obedience To Signals: At intersections where traffic is directed by a police officer or by a stop and go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
cross the roadway other than with the released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. (1965 Code § 10-9-3)
9-7-3: STANDING IN ROADWAYS, ON SIDEWALKS:
A. Roadways:
1. No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. (1965 Code § 10-
9-2)
2. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. (1965 Code § 10-9-6)
B. Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as near as reasonably possible to the building line or curb line, if such
standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians. (1965 Code § 10-9-4)
9-7-4: WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
A. Sidewalks Provided: Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon any adjacent roadway.
B. Sidewalks Not Provided: Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the
left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic and, upon meeting a vehicle, shall step off to the left. (1965 Code § 10-9-6)
9-7-5: PEDESTRIANS WITH DISABILITIES:
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to a pedestrian with clearly visible disabilities. (1965 Code § 10-9-7; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 8
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
9-8-1: SAFE VEHICLES REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway, any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required by statute, or which is equipped in any manner in
violation of state statutes. (1965 Code § 10-12-4)
9-8-2: CLEAR VISION; MIRROR:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or in such a condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the
roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle. Any vehicles with the view of the roadway to the rear so obstructed shall be equipped with a mirror
so attached as to give him a view of the roadway behind him. (1965 Code § 10-12-1)
9-8-3: LIGHTS:
A. General Requirements: It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not equipped with adequate lights conforming to the
requirements of state law; provided, that vehicles may be parked at nighttime without lights on any street or portion thereof designated by ordinance as
a place where vehicles may be so parked at nighttime. (1965 Code § 10-12-9)
B. Motor Vehicles, Motorcycles And Trailers: During the period from sunset to sunrise, or at any other time when visibility is so limited as to require the use
of lights for safety, every motorcycle operated on any street or other public place in the village shall carry and exhibit one lighted lamp, commonly
known as a driving light, and every motor vehicle, two (2) such lighted lamps showing white lights, or lights of a yellow or amber tint, visible at least five
hundred feet (500') in the direction toward which each motorcycle or motor vehicle is proceeding, and each motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer shall
also exhibit at least one lighted lamp which shall be so situated, as to throw a red light visible for at least five hundred feet (500') in the reverse
direction; provided, that every trailer having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds or less, including the weight of the trailer and maximum
load, shall be equipped with two (2) lighted lamps, one on each side of the rear of such trailer, which shall be so situated as to throw a red light visible
for at least five hundred feet (500') in the reverse direction. (1965 Code § 10-12-17)
C. Vehicles Owned By Firefighters: Any motor vehicle owned or fully operated by a firefighter may be equipped with not to exceed two (2) lamps which
shall emit a blue light as provided by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-215(c). (1965 Code § 10-12-8; amd. 2009 Code)
D. Bicycles: Every bicycle, when upon a street during the period from sunset to sunrise, shall be equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a white
light, or light of a yellow or amber tint, visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of the bicycle and with at least one lighted lamp
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 178/307
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear. (1965 Code § 10-12-16)
9-8-4: SIGNAL LAMPS AND DEVICES:
A. Every motor vehicle and trailer having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds and less, including the weight of the trailer and the maximum
load, shall be equipped with a signal lamp or signal device which is so constructed and located on the vehicle as to give a signal of the intention to stop
which shall be red or yellow in color, and signals of intention to turn to the right or left, all of which signals shall be plainly visible and understandable in
normal sunlight and at night from a distance of one hundred feet (100') to the rear but shall not project a dazzling or glaring light; except, that a stop
signal need be visible only from the rear.
B. All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated during the period from sunset to sunrise or when visibility is limited as to require the use of lights
for safety. (1965 Code § 10-12-13; amd. 2009 Code)
9-8-5: HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES:
A. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible signaling device in efficient working condition. Such signaling device shall be
sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of a vehicle, but such horn or other signaling device shall not be sounded for any
purpose other than as a warning of impending danger.
B. No motor vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle, shall be equipped with a siren or gong signaling device. (1965 Code § 10-12-7)
9-8-6: BRAKES:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless such vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working condition, as
required by the state traffic law, or to operate any vehicle which is so loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the mechanics operating the
brakes of such vehicles. (1965 Code § 10-12-6)
9-8-7: TIRES; NONSKID DEVICES:
A. It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which is not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the Illinois state traffic
law. (1965 Code § 10-12-14)
B. It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped with any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or nonflexible portion
thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway. (1965 Code § 10-12-11)
9-8-8: NOISE CONTROL; MUFFLERS:
A. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise.
B. No driver of any motor vehicle shall operate or permit operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside the vehicle from seventy
five (75) or more feet unless the system is being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation. This subsection does not pertain to
authorized emergency vehicles or vehicles engaged in advertising. (1965 Code § 10-12-3)
C. No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle is provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition. The use of a cutout
is prohibited. (1965 Code § 10-12-10)
9-8-9: GAS AND SMOKE EMISSIONS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or
as to endanger the drivers of other vehicles. (1965 Code § 10-12-2)
9-8-10: SIZE AND LOAD OF VEHICLES:
A. The maximum width, length and height of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed the limits expressed in the Illinois state traffic law.
B. No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a load extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor
extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof.
C. No combination of vehicles, coupled together, shall consist of more than two (2) units, but such limitation shall not apply to vehicles operated in daytime
when transporting pipes, poles, machinery and other objects which cannot be readily dismembered, nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a
public utility when engaged in emergency repair work; but such loads carried at night shall be clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full
dimensions of the load.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 179/307
D. No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3') in front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle. (1965 Code § 10-12-12)
9-8-11: SPILLING LOADS:
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops onto any street or alley in the city. (1965 Code § 10-12-5)
9-8-12: ENGINE BRAKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate or cause to be used or operated within the village an engine braking system that emits excessive noise on any motor vehicle
within the village. For the purposes of this section, an engine braking system shall be deemed to be any device which uses the force of the engine in any
motor vehicle to slow or alter the speed of the vehicle by the application of force to the drive train thereof, including, but not limited to, engine brakes,
exhaust brakes, or other similar systems. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be emitting excessive noise if the vehicle is operating an engine braking
system, and if the motor vehicle is not equipped with an adequate sound muffling system on the exhaust of the motor vehicle. It is a defense to this section
that the driver used an engine braking system that emits excessive noise in an emergency to avoid a collision with a person or another vehicle. (Ord. 08-
21-13-O1, 8-21-2013)
Chapter 9
MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES
9-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, except where the context otherwise requires:
AREA: The geographical boundaries within which an operating motorcycle or operating motor driven cycle can be heard.
MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter propelled by a motor which produces not to exceed five (5) horsepower, and
every bicycle with motor attached.
MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE: A motorcycle or motor driven cycle.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
NONRESIDENT: Every person who is not a resident of the state of Illinois.
NONRESIDENT'S OPERATING PRIVILEGE: The privilege conferred upon a nonresident by the laws of the state of Illinois pertaining to the operation by
such person of a motor vehicle, or the use of a vehicle owned by such person, in the state of Illinois.
OPERATOR: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a street or who is exercising control of or steering a vehicle
being towed by a motor vehicle.
RACING OF MOTOR: The sudden acceleration or deceleration of the motor of a motorcycle or motor driven cycle.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way, including alleys, publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to use of the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
STUNTING: Operating a vehicle in a manner causing it to weave or suddenly change course, or the loss of body contact with the seat by a driver or
passenger, and not for the purpose of safe operation of such vehicle.
TOURING: Any repetitious driving in the same area which causes a disturbance or is done with the intent of calling attention to an operator of a motorcycle
or motor driven cycle. (1965 Code § 10-15-1)
9-9-2: OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a motorcycle or motor driven cycle upon any street within the corporate limits of the
village except in compliance with the following:
A. Driver's License Required: The operator of such vehicle shall have upon his possession a valid driver's license issued by the state of Illinois (or if such
operator is a nonresident, such operator shall have upon his possession evidence of a nonresident's operating privilege) and which has not been
suspended, limited or canceled.
B. Condition Of Vehicle: Such vehicle shall, at such time of operation, be capable of performing in accordance with the standards then fixed by the motor
vehicle laws of the state of Illinois and by the ordinances of the village.
C. Compliance With Vehicle Laws: The operator shall operate said vehicle in accordance with the motor vehicle laws of the state and ordinances of the
village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 180/307
D. Noise Control; Muffler; Exhaust System: Such vehicle shall be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order, sufficient to prevent excessive
or unusual noises; and no such vehicle shall be equipped with any muffler cutout, removable exhaust pipe cover, or any bypass in a muffler, or any
muffler from which the baffle plates, screens, or other original internal parts have been removed or altered; nor shall any such vehicle be equipped with
an exhaust system which has been modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that
emitted by the exhaust system originally installed on the vehicle; nor shall such vehicle be equipped with an exhaust system which has been modified
or altered in any way from that furnished by the vehicle manufacturer; provided, however, that equipment equivalent to that originally installed may be
substituted when parts are replaced.
E. Ability To Operate: Before operating a motorcycle or motor driven cycle upon a public street, the operator thereof shall have first become sufficiently
proficient in the operation thereof to control said vehicle without unreasonable danger to others; and if said vehicle is rented, leased or borrowed from
another, said operator shall first have demonstrated to the lessor, renter or lender of such equipment that he is sufficiently proficient to operate such
vehicle upon a public street without unreasonable danger to others.
F. Minors: No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall purchase, rent, lease or borrow a motorcycle or motor driven cycle unless he has first
obtained written consent from either of his parents, or his legal guardian; and no such person under eighteen (18) years of age shall take possession of
and operate any motorcycle or motor driven cycle unless, on the occasion of such purchasing, or on the first occasion of such renting, leasing or
borrowing of such motorcycle or motor driven cycle, such person under eighteen (18) years of age obtains and files with such seller, renter, lessor or
lender an acknowledgment in writing, signed by either parent of such minor or such minor's legal guardian, in the presence of and witnessed by such
lessor, renter or lender or his duly authorized agent, to the effect that permission is granted for such child to purchase a vehicle, or to rent or borrow a
motorcycle or motor driven cycle from such renter, lessor or lender, and that such parent or guardian consents to such sale, and/or consents to the
renting, leasing or lending of a motorcycle or motor driven cycle to such child, and assumes full legal responsibility for acts or actions of such child in
the operation of any such motorcycle or motor driven cycle then or thereafter sold, rented, leased or lent to such child; and such responsibility and
commitment of such parent or guardian shall continue until it is revoked in writing by either parent or by said guardian by written instrument delivered to
such seller, lessor, renter or lender.
G. Passengers: No motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall be operated in such a manner that it carries more than one passenger in addition to the
operator, nor shall it be operated in any manner that places a passenger in front of the operator.
H. Side By Side Operation: Not more than two (2) motorcycles or motor driven cycles shall be operated side by side in any one lane of traffic upon any
street.
I. Prohibited, Dangerous Operations:
1. No motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall be operated in any manner so as to cause a disturbance in any area of the village. Touring, stunting, or
racing of motors are prohibited in any hospital or nursing home area and in residential areas.
2. No operator of a motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall engage in maneuvers, stunting or other operations dangerous to himself or his passenger or
to the persons or property of others; and except, when done for the better control of a vehicle, in emergencies or to maneuver rough passages of a
street, an operator must at all times keep body contact with the saddle or seat of such vehicle. (1965 Code § 10-15-2)
J. Handgrips: No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor driven cycle having handgrips higher than the height of the shoulder of the operator when the
operator is seated in the normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle occupied by the operator. (1965 Code § 10-15-2; amd. 2009
Code)
9-9-3: BUSINESSES RENTING, LEASING OR LENDING MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES:
A. Regulations: Any person engaging in the business of renting, leasing, or lending motorcycles or motor driven cycles shall:
1. License Required: First obtain a license as provided in this chapter.
2. Age Of Licensee; State License Required: Be twenty one (21) years of age, if an individual or manager of a corporation, and shall possess any
license required by the laws of the state of Illinois.
3. Application For License: Make application for a license on forms provided by the village clerk and containing the following:
a. If an individual, the name and address of the individual.
b. If a partnership, the name, residence and business address of each partner.
c. If a corporation, the name, date and state under whose laws such corporation was organized, and if a foreign corporation, whether authorized to
do business in the state of Illinois and the names of the principal officers, directors and local representatives, their residences and business
addresses.
d. The location where the business of renting motorcycles will be conducted, and the number of motorcycles that will be maintained on the premises
for rental purposes.
4. Location: Not conduct such business within any zoned residential district or within two hundred feet (200') thereof.
5. Records Kept: Maintain precise records of vehicle rental indicating the name of the person to whom the rental was made, his address, the registered
motor number of the vehicle rented or leased, together with other identifying data, the parent or guardian's written approval of a minor's application
and his agreement to be responsible for the action of such minor in the use of the vehicle, the date and hour of its rental and the time of its return to
the possession of the licensee.
6. Minors: Not rent to anyone under eighteen (18) years of age until he has on file in his possession an acknowledgment in writing, signed by either
parent of the applicant's legal guardian, in the presence of and witnessed by the licensee or his duly authorized agent, to the effect that permission is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 181/307
granted for such child to rent, lease or borrow a motorcycle or motor driven cycle from such renter, lessor or lender, and that such parent or guardian
consents to the renting, leasing or lending of a motorcycle or motor driven cycle to such child, and assumes full legal responsibility for acts or actions
of such child in the operation of any such motorcycle or motor driven cycle then or thereafter rented, leased or lent to such child, and such renter,
lessor or lender may rely upon such written consent as compliance with this chapter until it is revoked in writing by written revocation, signed by
either of such parents or by such guardian, and delivered to such renter, lessor or lender.
7. Driver's License Required: Rent vehicles only to persons who have and can show a valid motor vehicle operator's license.
8. Maintenance Of Vehicles: Maintain all motorcycles in a safe manner and provide each with all equipment required by law.
9. Hours Of Operation: Operate the business between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. There shall be no rental after
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. or the returning of motorcycles between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (1965
Code § 10-15-3)
10. Financial Responsibility: Provide proof of financial responsibility in compliance with all pertinent provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-101
et seq. (1965 Code § 10-15-3; amd. 2009 Code)
11. Number Of Vehicles: Have only the number of rental motorcycles on the premises as provided for in his application.
12. Compliance With Laws: Comply with all ordinances and regulations of the village, including any reasonable regulations set by the chief of police to
effectuate this chapter. (1965 Code § 10-15-3)
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for a person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or lending motorcycles or motor driven cycles shall be as
provided in section 4-1-3 of this code. (1965 Code § 10-15-4; amd. 2009 Code)
9-9-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (1965 Code § 10-15-6)
Chapter 10
ABANDONED, WRECKED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES1
9-10-1: DEFINITIONS2:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ABANDONED: Any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition or any vehicle that has not been moved or
used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
ANTIQUE OR HISTORICAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle twenty five (25) years of age or older.
DERELICT VEHICLE: Any inoperable, unregistered, discarded motor vehicle, regardless of title, having lost its character as a substantial property and left
unattended without justification on the owner's and, contrary to the public policy expressed in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-301.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or
other parts have been altered, or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle"
shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary
service or repair operations.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for conditional sale or lease thereof with the
right of purchase upon the performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with the immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be
deemed the "owner" for the purposes of this chapter.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
PART: Any vehicle shell, essential part, component part or chassis.
PROPERTY: Any real property within the village which is not a street or highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of a highway and every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, whether subject to or
exempt from registration, excepting, however, bicycles, snowmobiles and devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1965 Code § 10-11-1;
amd. 2009 Code)
9-10-2: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 182/307
A. No person shall abandon a motor vehicle or other vehicle, or any part thereof, on any street or highway in the village. No person shall abandon a motor
vehicle or other vehicle, or any part thereof, on private or public property anywhere in the village.
B. A person commits abandonment of a vehicle when he is the owner of a vehicle that is within the village limits and that vehicle is:
1. Left unattended and is creating a traffic hazard or nuisance because of its position in relation to the highway;
2. Left unattended and its physical appearance is causing the impedance of traffic;
3. Left unattended upon any public way and is parked illegally and in violation of the law;
4. Occupying any portion of a street or alley in violation of a limited parking zone for a vehicle of five (5) times the permitted parking time;
5. Has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted;
6. In a state of disrepair, rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition and its apparently deserted; or
7. Left unattended upon private property without the property owner's consent. (1965 Code § 10-11-2)
9-10-3: ABANDONED, INOPERABLE, JUNKED VEHICLES DECLARED A NUISANCE; EXEMPTIONS:
The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperable, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof on any streets or public or
private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This section shall not
apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise actively operated with an
office on the subject premises and properly operated in the appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning laws of the village. (1965 Code § 10-11-3)
9-10-4: ABANDONED, WRECKED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. Storing, Parking Or Leaving Dismantled Or Inoperable Vehicles Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in charge of a vehicle or
other personal property to park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, inoperable, rusted, junked or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any street or other public property within the
village for a period of time in excess of seventy two (72) hours. (1965 Code § 10-11-3)
B. Notice Prior To Removal:
1. Any vehicle left at any place within the village on any street or other property in violation of subsection A of this section shall not be removed and
impounded as provided herein until the police department shall have given written notice to remove said vehicle seventy two (72) hours prior to the
intended removal date. Such notice shall be given by:
a. Affixing notice on such vehicle; and
b. Sending notice by mail to the owner of such vehicle at his last known address if the owner is reasonably ascertainable.
2. The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this chapter, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with
the notice to remove, the village or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner. (1965 Code
§ 10-11-14)
C. Removal Of Vehicle: If, after proper notification as outlined in subsection B of this section, the vehicle is not removed by the owner, the police
department shall remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the corporate limits of the village on any village property which
reasonably appears to be in violation of subsection A of this section or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed
or disposed of in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-204 to 5/4-213. (1965 Code § 10-11-15; amd. 2009 Code)
9-10-5: ABANDONED, WRECKED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Storing, Parking Or Leaving Dismantled Or Inoperable Vehicles Prohibited3: It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in charge of a vehicle or
other personal property to park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, inoperable, rusted, junked or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any private property within the village for a
period of time in excess of seven (7) days. (1965 Code § 10-11-21)
B. Notice To Remove:
1. Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department that any nuisance, as defined in section 9-10-3 of this chapter exists in the village, a
notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner
of the property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in subsection A of this
section. (1965 Code § 10-11-22)
2. The police department shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where the nuisance is located at least seven (7)
days before the time of compliance. Such notice shall be given by: (1965 Code § 10-11-23)
a. Affixing notice on such vehicle; and
b. Sending notice by mail to the owner of such vehicle at his last known address if the owner is reasonably ascertainable; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 183/307
c. Sending notice by mail to the person owning or controlling the property on which such vehicle is located; or (1965 Code § 10-11-23; amd. 2009
Code)
d. If none of the above methods is possible, then by posting notice in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located.
(1965 Code § 10-11-23)
3. The notice shall contain the request of removal within the time specified in this chapter, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with
the notice to remove, the village or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of the removal to be levied against the owner or occupant
of the property. (1965 Code § 10-11-24; amd. 2009 Code)
C. Removal Of Vehicle; Notice:
1. If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the seven (7) day period of compliance, the chief of police or his designee shall
have the right to take possession of the vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, hinder or refuse to
allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. (1965 Code
§ 10-11-27)
2. Within forty eight (48) hours after removal of such vehicle, the police department shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known,
and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the article was removed, that said vehicle or vehicles have been impounded or
stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the location of where the vehicle or vehicles are stored and the costs incurred by the village
for removal. (1965 Code § 10-11-29)
D. Responsibility For Removal And Costs: Upon proper notice, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperable vehicle and the owner or
occupant of the private property on which the same is located shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the
village, the owner or occupant of the private property where same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. (1965 Code § 10-11-28)
9-10-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The chief of police or his delegated representative may enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting such vehicle or
vehicles, posting notice thereon and removing and impounding such vehicle or vehicles, and it shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the chief of
police or his delegated representatives from entering upon private property for purposes of carrying out his duties hereunder or to interfere with him in the
lawful performance of his duties under the provisions of this chapter. (1965 Code § 10-11-4)
9-10-7: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. In addition to such penalty, fines shall be as
provided in section 9-2-4 of this title. (1965 Code § 10-11-5)
Footnote 1: See also subsection 13-12-2H of this code.
Footnote 2: 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3; 625 ILCS 5/4-301.
Footnote 3: 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3; 625 ILCS 5/4-201.
ARTICLE A. IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROVISIONS
9-10A-1: PROCEDURES TO BE OBSERVED:
The police department shall follow the provision of this article whenever a vehicle is towed for being in violation of this chapter. (1965 Code § 10-11-34)
9-10A-2: SEARCH OF VEHICLE; DISPOSITION OF CONTENTS:
All towed vehicles shall first be searched for valuables and the contents inventoried. Said inventory will be kept on file until the vehicle is disposed of. If the
vehicle is not reclaimed, the contents will be sold by the village and the proceeds deposited in the general fund of the village. (1965 Code § 10-11-35)
9-10A-3: REPORTS ON TOWED VEHICLES:
When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed listing the color, year of
manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number, license plate year and number of
registration sticker year and number displayed on the vehicle. The records shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed
to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. (1965 Code § 10-11-36)
9-10A-4: OWNER UNKNOWN:
A. Records Searches: When the police department cannot determine the identity of the registered owner or other legally entitled person, the department
will cause the motor vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by a directed communication to the Illinois secretary of state for the
purpose of obtaining the required ownership information. The department will further cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the state police to be
searched by a directed communication to the state police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. The information determined from this records
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 184/307
search will be used by the department in sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is
held, requesting that disposition be made, and setting forth information concerning the future public sale of the vehicle. (1965 Code § 10-11-37)
B. State Police Notified: When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to possession of a vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files
of the state, or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the police department shall notify the state police for the purpose of identifying
the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to possession of the vehicle. The information obtained shall be used in sending notification by
certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising him where the vehicle is held, requesting that disposition be made and setting forth the
public sale information. (1965 Code § 10-11-38)
9-10A-5: OWNER KNOWN; REMOVAL REQUIRED:
When the registered owner or the person entitled to possession of the vehicle can be ascertained, such person shall remove the vehicle within seven (7)
days after being requested to do so by the police department under the notice provisions of this chapter. The penalty provided in section 9-10-7 of this
chapter shall be in addition to the provisions for removal and reclamation of such vehicle provided in this article. (1965 Code § 10-11-39)
9-10A-6: RECLAMATION OF VEHICLE:
A. Any time before a vehicle is sold at a public sale or disposed of as provided in this article, the owner or person legally entitled to its possession may
reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department proof of ownership or proof of the right of possession to the vehicle. No vehicle shall be
released to the owner or other person under this subsection until all the towing and storage charges have been fully paid for such vehicle. The cost of
redemption shall include the actual cost and expense of said removal, in addition to storage charge of thirty five dollars ($35.00) per day for all
automobiles and trucks under a B class and fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for all trucks over a C class, and said costs and expenses shall be a lien in
favor of the village. (1965 Code § 10-11-40; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Any person claiming to be the owner of any impounded vehicle shall make written application therefor to the police department and shall furnish such
additional proof as may be required to establish said ownership. If he shall present to said department the proof of his ownership of said impounded
vehicle prior to the date of actual sale thereof, then the property itself shall be delivered to said owner under these conditions, but if said property has
been sold, then the department shall endorse its findings of ownership with a copy of the written application, which application and findings shall be
addressed to the village clerk and presented within one year after said sale, then such balance of the proceeds of the sale, after deductions, shall be
paid to said owner. (1965 Code § 10-11-45; amd. 2009 Code)
9-10A-7: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
A. Owner Known: Whenever any abandoned vehicle is seven (7) years of age or newer, and remains unclaimed by the registered owner or other person
legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as provided in this article, the police department shall cause
it to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days
prior to sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the department shall cause a notice of the
time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other persons known by the department to be legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally
entitled person to reclaim the vehicle. In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been returned by the postal authorities to
the department due to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from the registration records of the state, the sending
of a second certified notice shall not be required. (1965 Code § 10-11-41)
B. Owner Unknown:
1. When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed motor vehicle of
seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided in this article, such vehicle may be disposed of in a manner
authorized by this article without notice to the registered owner or other person legally entitled to possession of the vehicle.
2. When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded, as specified in this article, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of
ten (10) days for the purposes of determining ownership, the contacting of the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a
determination of disposition, and an examination of the state police motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of a ten (10)
day period, without the benefit of disposition information being received from the registered owner, the police department will authorize the disposal
of the vehicle as junk. (1965 Code § 10-11-42)
3. An exception to the above is provided for if, in the opinion of the police department, the vehicle has value of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more
and can be restored to safe operating condition. In this event, the police department may authorize its purchase as salvage, and the secretary of
state may issue a salvage certificate if the vehicle is bonded in the manner as provided to certificates of title under the 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/3-100 et seq. A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may, however, be sold to a person desiring to restore it. (1965 Code § 10-11-42; amd. 2009
Code)
9-10A-8: REPORTS AFTER RECLAMATION OR DISPOSAL:
When a vehicle in the custody of the police department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at
public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this article, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the police department for a period of one
year from the date of sale or disposal. (1965 Code § 10-11-43)
9-10A-9: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
When a vehicle located within the village limits is authorized to be towed away by the police department or its agent, and disposed of as set forth in this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 185/307
article, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition, after deduction of towing, storing and processing charges, shall be deposited with the village
treasurer and shall be kept in a separate fund for a period of one year from the date of receipt, and if, at the end of said year, the former owner of said
property has not made satisfactory proof of claim, then the balance of said proceeds of sale shall be credited to the corporate fund of the village. (1965
Code § 10-11-44)
9-10A-10: NONLIABILITY OF POLICE AND TOWING SERVICE:
No police officer or towing service owner, operator or employee shall be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner or his legal representative, or any person legally entitled to possession of the motor vehicle or other vehicle when the
vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided in this article. (1965 Code § 10-11-46)
Title 10
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 3 of this code for alarm system regulations.
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
10-1-1: BENCHES:
As of the effective date hereof and with the exception of bus stops, advertising benches are prohibited on public ways and property in the village1. This
limitation shall not apply to decorative benches placed by the village. No decorative bench shall be installed or maintained without a permit obtained from
the village clerk. The permit application shall include the location of the proposed bench or benches and such other information as required by the village.
(1965 Code §§ 5-7-1, 5-7-2, 5-7-3; amd. 2009 Code)
Footnote 1: See also subsection 12-11-13A2 of this code.
Chapter 2
DES PLAINES RIVER
10-2-1: FISHING HOURS IN VILLAGE:
Fishing hours in the village are established as being permitted only from dawn to dusk. (1965 Code § 9-1-55)
10-2-2: VILLAGE RIVERWALK:
A. Definition: The area known as the "Lyons riverwalk" shall be generally defined as that geographic area adjacent to the Des Plaines River on the north,
Riverwalk Drive on the south, the Riverwalk Condominiums on the west and Joliet Avenue. The definition of the "Lyons riverwalk" shall include all
landscaped and grassy areas, service walks, improved areas, sea walls, pathways, parking areas and the Hofmann Tower, located within the defined
geographic area.
B. Regulations: The following regulations pertain to the Lyons riverwalk:
1. Fishing and camping shall be prohibited. Tents shall be prohibited except as permitted by the village for special events.
2. Open containers of alcohol or the consumption of alcohol shall be prohibited.
3. Physical entry into the fountain or placement into the fountain of any animals, litter, debris, human or animal waste, or any other material or
substance shall be prohibited.
4. Animals shall be prohibited except for those trained and assigned for assistance to the disabled, or domesticated canines kept on a leash at all
times. Animals that are otherwise brought lawfully onto the premises shall not be unlicensed, unvaccinated or constitute a nuisance or threat to
patrons of the riverwalk or to the property therein.
5. State statutes, county laws and regulations and village ordinances attendant upon illegal acts shall be enforceable at the Lyons riverwalk. (1965
Code § 9-1-60)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 186/307
Chapter 3
PARADES AND OUTDOOR EVENTS
10-3-1: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
No parade or procession shall be allowed on any public way, nor shall any open air meetings be held in or upon any public way or upon any ground
abutting upon any public way, until approval is first obtained from the president and board of trustees. In its approval, the president and board of trustees
shall consider if such parade, procession or open air meeting shall be held for any unlawful purpose, tend to be a breach of the peace or interfere with the
peace and quiet of the residents of the village and/or create the need for expenditure of village resources. As part of the approval process, the village
board may require reasonable conditions to be met, including whether the applicant shall provide a bond or insurance certificate, in an amount determined
by the board, for the purpose of naming the village as an additional insured or bonded party to protect the village from liability and indemnify the village for
liability arising from the event. Such insurance and/or bonding shall also serve as a guarantee against the failure of the applicant to reimburse the village
for personnel, cleanup, equipment and damage costs incurred by the village in association with the parade, procession or open air meeting. (1965 Code
§ 9-11-1)
10-3-2: APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL:
Application to conduct a parade or procession or open air meeting shall be made in writing to the village manager at least thirty (30) days prior to the event
and shall include the following:
A. Name of person and group in control and/or responsible for the event.
B. Purpose. (1965 Code § 9-11-2)
C. Route, provided on a map, detailing where the parade or procession is to proceed and/or identifying the location of the open air meeting. (1965 Code
§ 9-11-2; amd. 2009 Code)
D. Starting time and duration of the event.
E. Total amount of participants. (1965 Code § 9-11-2)
10-3-3: NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS:
No parade, procession or open air meeting shall be conducted with more than one hundred fifty (150) participants unless expressly waived by the
president and board of trustees. (1965 Code § 9-11-3)
10-3-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Funeral processions conducted by a licensed funeral director are exempted from the regulations contained within this chapter; however, funeral
directors requiring assistance from the village for traffic control shall be responsible for preplanning the event with the police department. All overtime
expenses associated with the provision of such service shall be reimbursed to the village by the funeral director.
B. The thirty (30) day submission rule may be waived by the village manager if, in his opinion, less than thirty (30) days are required for all preplanning and
presentation to the village board.
C. All parades, processions and open air meetings conducted or sponsored by the village are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
D. When, in the opinion of the village attorney, the provisions of this chapter conflict with constitutionally guaranteed freedom of speech, such provisions
shall not apply. (1965 Code § 9-11-4)
10-3-5: REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS TO VILLAGE:
The applicant, individual and/or group shall be required to reimburse the village for all personnel, cleanup, equipment and damage costs associated with
the parade, procession or open air meeting. A deposit may be required by the village board to offset such anticipated costs, which may be forfeited in the
event such costs are not directly reimbursed to the village. (1965 Code § 9-11-5)
10-3-6: PENALTIES:
A. Civil Penalty: Any person in violation of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Such violations shall be adjudicated by a code hearing officer or court of competent jurisdiction. (1965 Code § 9-11-6)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 187/307
B. Criminal Penalty: Any person failing to heed the order of the police department through its duly appointed representatives to cease, discontinue or
disburse a parade, procession or open air meeting in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided by Illinois state statutes1.
(1965 Code § 9-11-7)
Footnote 1: See subsection 1-4-1B of this code.
Chapter 4
CURB CUTS AND DRIVEWAYS
10-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this chapter, shall be construed as hereinafter defined:
DRIVEWAY: A bituminous, concrete or similarly surfaced area on a zoning lot upon which vehicles may be driven or parked and which may provide access
to parking spaces.
DRIVEWAY APRON: A hard surface area from a street pavement to a zoning lot which provides vehicular access to a driveway.
GARAGE: A detached accessory building or portion of a principal building used or occupied for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles, travel
trailers and/or boats of the occupants of the premises. (Ord. 04-21-15-O2, 4-21-2015)
10-4-2: EXISTING CURB CUTS AND DRIVEWAYS:
No person shall be allowed to maintain a curb cut or driveway apron in an R-1, R-1A or R-2 zoning district unless the driveway apron provides access to a
driveway and a garage. (Ord. 04-21-15-O2, 4-21-2015)
10-4-3: CURB CUTS AND DRIVEWAY PERMITS:
No person shall be allowed to construct a curb cut or driveway apron in an R-1, R-1A or R-2 zoning district without first obtaining a permit from the village.
A permit shall not be issued unless the purpose of the curb cut and driveway apron is to provide access to a driveway and a garage. (Ord. 04-21-15-O2, 4-
21-2015)
10-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day
that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 04-21-15-O2, 4-21-2015)
Title 11
WATER AND SEWER
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 3 of this code for alarm system regulations.
Chapter 1
MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICE
11-1-1: DESIGNATION:
The service of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village to its inhabitants shall be known as the "municipal utility service of the village
of Lyons". (1965 Code § 5-1-1)
11-1-2: RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Schedule Of Charges: The charges for the use of the municipal utility service of the village are hereby established as follows:
1. Monthly service charge for the municipal utility service of the village to single-family residential customers with meter sizes up to two inches (2") shall
be seventeen dollars fifty cents ($17.50). Included in the monthly charge are the first two thousand (2,000) gallons used per single-family residential
account, per month.
2. Monthly service charge for the municipal utility service of the village to multi-family residential (residential dwellings with 2 to 3 family units)
customers with meter sizes up to two inches (2") shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). Included in the monthly charge are the first two thousand
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 188/307
(2,000) gallons used per multi-family residential account, per month.
3. Monthly service charge for the municipal utility service of the village to commercial and large multi-family customers with meter sizes up to four
inches (4") shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). Included in the monthly charge are the first two thousand (2,000) gallons used per commercial and large
multi-family accounts, per month.
4. Monthly service charge for the municipal utility service of the village to commercial and large multi-family customers with meter sizes between four
(4) and six inches (6") shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). Included in the monthly charge are the first two thousand (2,000) gallons used per
commercial and large multi-family accounts, per month.
5. Monthly service charge for the municipal utility service of the village to fire line service shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00). Included in the monthly
charge are the first two thousand (2,000) gallons used per fire line meter, per month.
B. Water Rates: There are hereby established rates and charges for the use and consumption of water services supplied by the municipal utility service to
each and every consumer, based on the amount of water consumed or supplied, as shown by the consumer's water meter or meters as follows:
1. Residential Users:
a. First Four Thousand Gallons:
(1) Effective August 1, 2014, the first four thousand (4,000) gallons of water shall be included in each bimonthly residential billing period, and said
charge shall be charged to the account of such consumer. Each bimonthly billing period shall include two (2) consecutive monthly charges for a
total of four thousand (4,000) gallons.
b. Excess Of Four Thousand Gallons:
(1) Effective August 1, 2014, for all water in excess of four thousand (4,000) gallons used during each bimonthly residential billing period as
indicated by each meter, there shall be a charge of ten dollars fifty cents ($10.50) for each one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of said four
thousand (4,000) gallons.
2. Commercial And Large Multi-Family Users:
a. First Four Thousand Gallons:
(1) Effective August 1, 2014, the first four thousand (4,000) gallons of water shall be included in each bimonthly commercial and large multi-family
billing period, and said charge shall be charged to the account of such consumer. Each bimonthly billing period shall include two (2) consecutive
monthly charges for a total of four thousand (4,000) gallons. (Ord. 07-02-14-O1, 7-2-2014)
b. Excess Of Four Thousand Gallons:
(1) Effective August 1, 2014, for water in excess of four thousand (4,000) gallons up to one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons used during each
bimonthly commercial and large multi-family billing period as indicated by each meter, there shall be a charge of fourteen dollars ($14.00) for
each one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of said four thousand (4,000) gallons.
(2) Effective August 1, 2014, for water in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons up to one million (1,000,000) gallons used during
each bimonthly commercial and large multi-family billing period as indicated by each meter, there shall be a charge of nine dollars ($9.00) for
each one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of said one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons. This rate for each one thousand (1,000) gallons
of water used in excess of said one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons up to one million (1,000,000) gallons shall be increased to the following
schedule:
August 1, 2015 $ 9.50
August 1, 2016 10.00
August 1, 2017 10.50
August 1, 2018 11.00
(3) Effective August 1, 2014, for water in excess of one million (1,000,000) gallons used during each bimonthly commercial and large multi-family
billing period as indicated by each meter, there shall be a charge of twelve dollars ($12.00) for each one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of
said one million (1,000,000) gallons. (Ord. 11-19-14-O1, 11-19-2014)
C. Sewer Rates: There are hereby established rates and charges for the use of sewer services supplied by the municipal utility service to each consumer.
Each customer shall be billed fifty cents ($0.50) per one thousand (1,000) gallons billed in each bimonthly billing period.
D. Water Meter Fees: Village customers must pay all associated costs for new water meter installation as determined at the time the connection permit
application is submitted and which are separate from connection fees referenced below. These costs shall include the material cost of the meter and
necessary accessories, plus labor for installation and inspection. This water meter fee must be paid before the water service is turned on. For
customers who are not village residents, the cost shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of all associated costs for new water meter installation as
determined at the time the connection permit application is submitted, as referenced above. The water meter shall be the property of the village but the
user shall be responsible for maintenance of the meter and replacement of the meter for any reason, including, but not limited to, wilful or malicious
damage, negligence or damage sustained by freezing or caused by hot water backing through the same, except for the normal scheduled replacement
of the water meter by the village after the meter's normal life expectancy which is generally fourteen (14) to twenty (20) years.
E. Water And Sewer Connection Fees: There is hereby established the following water and sewer connection fees for each new user connecting to the
village's water and sewer systems:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 189/307
Single-family $4,000.00
2 and 3 unit residential 5,000.00
Nonresidential and residential in excess of 3 units:
1 inch service $ 6,000.00
2 inch service 15,000.00
3 inch service 35,000.00
4 inch service 50,000.00
6 inch service 75,000.00
(Ord. 07-02-14-O1, 7-2-2014)
11-1-3: BILLS FOR SERVICE; PAYMENT; DELINQUENCIES:
A. Clerk To Render Bills And Collect Charges: It is hereby made the duty of the village clerk to render bills for the municipal utility service and all other
charges in connection therewith, and to collect all monies due thereon. (1965 Code § 5-1-8; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Due Date; Late Charge: Bills for charges for municipal utility service shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days from the date the bill is rendered.
An additional charge equal to ten percent (10%) of the bill or twenty five dollars ($25.00), whichever is higher, shall be added to all bills not paid within
fifteen (15) days from the date the bill is mailed. (Ord. 07-02-14-O1, 7-2-2014)
C. Payments:
1. Combined Bill; Payment In Full Required: Charges for municipal utility service, if itemized separately on one bill, shall be considered as for one
combined service, and no partial payment of the bill will be accepted as in payment of any separate item of the bill. (1965 Code § 5-1-7)
2. Payment By Check; Insufficient Funds:
a. The village clerk is authorized to accept checks, money orders or other drafts in payment of utility bills. (1965 Code § 5-1-13; amd. 2009 Code)
b. Any checks, money orders or other drafts that are not accepted by the bank for whatever reason will be deemed to be nonpayment of the bill, and
the provisions of subsections D and E of this section will be followed. For any checks, money orders or other drafts that are not accepted by the
bank and are returned to the village, the following penalties will apply:
(1) First occurrence: Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
(2) All subsequent occurrences within one year: Fifty dollars ($50.00). (1965 Code § 5-1-13)
c. The village clerk is authorized to request payment in cash if two (2) or more checks, money orders or other drafts have been returned by the bank
within one year. (1965 Code § 5-1-13; amd. 2009 Code)
D. Delinquent Charges A Lien: In the event charges for the municipal utility service are not paid within thirty (30) days after the rendition of the bill for such
service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter, such delinquency charges shall constitute a lien upon
the real estate occupied by the user to whom the service is supplied, and the clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a sworn statement showing
such delinquency in the office of the county recorder of deeds, and the filing of such statement shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges
for such service. (1965 Code § 5-1-5)
E. Discontinuance Of Service For Unpaid Charges:
1. If the charges for the municipal utility service are not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for such service, such service shall be
discontinued as provided by state law. (1965 Code § 5-1-6)
2. If the village shuts off or terminates water service for any reason, including for delinquent or unpaid charges, the user whose service is terminated
shall pay to the village a shutoff fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). If service to any user has been terminated for whatever reason, the user shall pay a fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00) to reestablish service. Service will not be reestablished to any user that has a delinquent bill. The village manager shall have
discretion to waive any applicable service termination or reestablishment fees as provided herein. (Ord. 09-21-2011-O2, 9-21-2011)
11-1-4: REVENUES:
A. Separate And Apart; Delivery To Treasurer: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the municipal utility service shall be held by the
collector separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the village, and all of such sum, without any
deductions whatsoever, shall be delivered to the treasurer not more than ten (10) days after the receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals
as may from time to time be directed by the board of trustees. (1965 Code § 5-1-9)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 190/307
B. Waterworks And Sewerage Fund: The treasurer shall receive revenues from the municipal utility service and all other funds and monies incident to the
operation of such service, as the same may be delivered to him, and deposit the same in a separate fund, designated as the "waterworks and
sewerage fund", and the treasurer shall administer the fund in every respect in the manner provided by state law.
C. Accounts And Records; Annual Audit: The treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in
which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the municipal utility service, and at regular annual intervals, he shall
cause to be made an audit, by an independent auditing concern, of his books to show the receipts and disbursements of the municipal utility service.
(1965 Code § 5-1-10)
11-1-5: LIABILITY FOR SERVICE:
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the municipal utility service shall be jointly and severally liable for payment for the service
on such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, the occupant thereof
and the user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village. (1965 Code § 5-1-3)
Chapter 2
WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS1
11-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meanings indicated in this section:
SERVICE PIPE: Any pipe which is installed for the purpose of connecting the water mains of the village to the individual premises where water conveyed
there is to be consumed.
SEWER CONNECTION: That part of the sewerage system extending from the sewer main into the premises served.
SEWER MAIN: That part of the sewerage system intended to serve more than one sewer connection.
WATER MAIN: All that part of that water distribution system consisting of pipes and fittings used for the purpose of or in connection with the transmission
of water from the source thereof to the service pipes of the water users of the system. (1965 Code § 5-2-1)
11-2-2: CONNECTIONS, INSTALLATION AND REPAIR:
A. Water Mains And Service Pipes:
1. The village inspector(s) will inspect all connections made to any water main.
2. The service pipe shall be of copper and shall be a minimum of one inch (1") diameter.
3. All demolition projects or other discontinuation of water service lines shall require such service to be terminated and capped at the water main in a
manner approved by the village engineer.
4. All new construction shall require a new water service line in compliance with this chapter and the village plumbing code.
5. Existing lead based service lines or other water service lines not in conformance with this section and the village plumbing code may be ordered by
the building director or his designee to be replaced with conforming material as part of major rehabilitation or construction projects.
6. The installation, termination, replacement and service of underground water service shall be inspected and approved by the building director or his
designee prior to covering same. (1965 Code § 5-2-2)
7. A separate stop and waste cock shall be placed on the service pipe just inside the building wall on the influent side of the water meter. Such stops
shall be equal in quality to the service cock. (1965 Code § 5-2-3)
8. The service pipe from the service cock to the building and the stop and waste cock shall be of copper and shall be installed and properly maintained
by the owner. The owner shall keep the stop box free from dirt, stones or other substances that may or could prevent access to the service cock. The
buffalo box, shutoff or B box shall be located in the parkway or on village property. (1965 Code § 5-2-4)
B. Sewer Mains And Service Pipes:
1. The village inspector(s) will inspect all connections made to any sewer main.
2. The service line shall be SDR 26, cast iron or Amvet Nobell tile.
3. All demolition projects or other discontinuation of sewer connections shall require such connections to be capped at the main or in the parkway, as
required by the village engineer.
4. All new construction shall require a new sewer connection to the main in compliance with this chapter and the village plumbing code.
5. The installation, termination, replacement and service of sewer lines shall be inspected and approved by the building director or his designee prior to
covering same.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 191/307
C. Line Repairs: All repairs on service pipes from the service of shutoff boxes (which should be located between the curb line and sidewalk line or located
on village property) and plumbing systems of buildings shall be made at the expense of the owners of the premises served. Repairs to the service
pipes between the service and the shutoff box and the meter must be completed within ten (10) days of notification of the need for such repairs. The
village, through its village manager, village president, or by an employee directed to do so by the village manager or village president, is authorized to
disconnect water service to any building when the owner or occupant thereof refuses or fails to complete repairs within the time prescribed. The village
may, in case of emergency, repair any service pipe, and if this is done, the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the village by the owner of the
premises served. Failure to repay said cost will result in a lien being placed against the property. (1965 Code § 5-2-2)
11-2-3: TURNING WATER ON AND OFF:
A. No licensed plumber or other person shall interfere in any way with service pipes installed by the water department, and no such person shall be
permitted to turn water on or off at the service cock, except for the purpose of testing his work, in which case, the service cock shall be left in the same
condition and position as he found it. Any plumber called upon to shut off water and drain pipes in any premises shall do so inside the building only.
B. Where the water for any reason has been turned off by the village, no person except authorized representatives of the village may turn it on again.
Whenever this rule is violated, the village may shut off the water at the buffalo box at the main, and the owner shall pay the entire expense incurred by
the village for doing this work before the water may be turned on again. (1965 Code § 5-2-5)
11-2-4: METERS2:
A. Metered Water Required; Location: A proper connection shall be provided upon each property supplied with water in an accessible location at least
three feet (3') above the floor and in a manner satisfactory to the director of public works or authorized representative. Every water customer shall have
a water meter, approved by the director of public works, attached to his water supply pipes at his own expense. On premises where there is no
basement or cellar, the meter shall be installed in the utility room or outside in a meter pit, the location of which shall be approved by the director of
public works. Where it is necessary to set the meter in a pit, such pit shall be built at the owner's expense, as directed by the director of public works,
and to his satisfaction. (1965 Code § 5-2-6)
B. Damage To, Interfering With Meter Prohibited: No person, except an authorized employee of the village, shall break or injure any water meter seal or
change the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any meter. (1965 Code § 5-2-7)
C. Responsibility For Care And Protection From Damage: The owner or occupant of the premises where a meter is installed shall be held responsible for
its care and protection from freezing and from injury or interference by any person. In case of injury or damage to the meter, or in case of its stoppage
or imperfect operation, the owner or occupant of the premises shall give immediate notice to the village manager.
D. Bypassing Meter Prohibited: All water furnished by the village and used on any premises must pass through the meter, and the owner or occupant shall
not permit any bypass or connection around the meter to be constructed or maintained.
E. Inoperable Meter; Estimate Of Charges: If any meter becomes out of order or fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the average quarterly
consumption rate as shown by the meter over the period of the preceding four (4) quarters when the meter was accurately registering. (1965 Code § 5-
2-8)
F. Testing Meters:
1. Water meters one and one-half inches (11/2") or larger will be tested for accuracy by the Village in 1993 and every five (5) years thereafter. Fifty
percent (50%) of the cost of testing the meter will be paid by the property owner and the other fifty percent (50%) by the Village. In the event that the
meter is found to be reading more than two percent (2%) less water than actually passes through it, the cost of repair and retest of the meter will be
paid by the property owner. If the meter is found to read more than two percent (2%) more water than actually passes through it, then the cost of
repair and retest will be paid by the Village. (1965 Code § 5-2-9)
2. The fee for testing meters at the request of the owner for meters one and one-half inches (11/2") to six inches (6") shall be two hundred twenty
dollars ($220.00) for testing and four hundred dollars ($400.00), plus parts, for testing and repair. (1965 Code § 5-2-9; amd. 2009 Code)
3. The fee to test or repair any other size meter shall be determined by the Director of Public Works and approved by the Village Board.
4. If, after testing, the meter is found to register greater than five percent (5%) more water than actually passes through it, then said meter shall be
replaced by the Village, and the fee advanced will be refunded to the owner. (1965 Code § 5-2-9)
G. Remote Read Meters:
1. Effective May 1, 2018 every water customer shall allow the Village to attach a remote read water meter, approved by the Director of Public Works, to
the customer's supply pipes at the Village's expense. Any customer who fails to allow the Village to attach a remote read meter by May 1, 2018 shall
pay fifty dollars ($50.00) per month in addition to all other charges for water assessed by the Village and shall also pay a one time fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the installation of the remote read water meter.
2. Effective May 1, 2021 every water customer shall allow the Village to attach a remote read water meter, approved by the Director of Public Works, to
the customer's supply pipes at the Village's expense. Any customer who fails to allow the Village to attach a remote read meter by May 1, 2021 shall
pay two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month in addition to all other charges for water assessed by the Village and shall also pay a one time fee of
nine hundred sixty five dollars ($965.00) for the installation of the remote read water meter. (Ord. 01-16-18-O1, 1-16-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 192/307
11-2-5: STEAM BOILERS:
No steam boiler shall be directly connected to the service pipe, and before water may be supplied to any such installation, the owner shall make such
provisions thereof as may be required by the Director of Public Works. (1965 Code § 5-2-11)
11-2-6: FIRE PROTECTION:
A. Where pipes are provided for fire protection on any premises or where hose connections for fire apparatus are provided, each such connection or
opening of the service pipes shall have not less than twenty five feet (25') of fire hose constantly attached thereto, and no water shall be taken through
such opening or hose for any purpose other than for extinguishing fires, except for the purpose of testing such fire equipment. No such test of fire
equipment may be conducted unless a special permit is first secured from the Fire Chief.
B. Fire hydrants may be opened and used only by the Village or by such persons as may be specifically authorized by the Village.
C. No person shall, in any manner, obstruct or prevent free access to any fire hydrant by placing or storing, temporarily or otherwise, any object or
materials of any kind within twenty feet (20') of the same. (1965 Code § 5-2-13)
11-2-7: MISREPRESENTATION; IMPROPER USE OF WATER; WATER LEAKS:
A. The water supply may be cut off from any premises if such water service was obtained through misrepresentation or if any unauthorized use or wilful
waste of water is found.
B. No deductions shall be made nor rebates allowed to any consumer of water due to any leakage in any water pipe, tank, or device. The amount of water
registered by any meter measuring water supplied to any building, structure or premises shall be charged and paid for in full, irrespective of whether
such water was lost by leakage, accident or otherwise. (1965 Code § 5-2-10)
11-2-8: OUTSIDE WATER USE RESTRICTIONS:
The President and Board of Trustees recognize that it is not necessary for established lawns to be sprinkled every day from May 15 through September 15
of each calendar year, and further, under certain specified circumstances, other nonessential outside water uses must be curtailed as follows:
A. Hours: Lawn sprinkling and watering is permitted from one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and from six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. until twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sunday, Wednesday and Friday of each week from May 14 through September 15, unless a total
ban is ordered by the village president as authorized herein.
B. Outside Use Prohibited: The village president is authorized to order the temporary cessation of lawn sprinkling, vehicle washing and other nonessential
outside water uses when the water supply or water pressure of the village is at a level inconsistent with the continuation of such uses and poses a
serious hazard to the public health, safety and welfare and endangers the ability to supply sufficient water for firefighting and other essential purposes.
(1965 Code § 5-2-12)
C. Penalty: Any person who refuses to cease or curtail using water for unauthorized purposes or who uses water for sprinkling or watering on times and
days other than those authorized shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1965 Code § 5-1-12;
amd. 2009 Code)
11-2-9: USE OF NONPOTABLE WATER PERMITTED3:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of nonpotable water for gardening, irrigation and similar uses. (1965 Code § 5-2-19)
11-2-10: IMPROPER USE, DAMAGE TO SYSTEMS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE:
A. No person shall put any substance which is or may become explosive or any other improper substance into a sewer or any connection leading to a
sewer that will tend to clog or stop free passage of substances usually conveyed through or in sewers or drains. (1965 Code § 5-2-14)
B. Any person who shall wilfully or carelessly break, damage, deface or destroy any sewer, cesspool, culvert, catch basin, manhole, water pipe or hydrant
laid or placed in, upon or under any thoroughfare or public place within the village shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1965 Code § 3-8-1)
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected any drain carrying or to carry any toilet, sink basement drain, septic tank,
cesspool, industrial waste or any fixture or device discharging polluting substance to any stormwater drain or sewer. (1965 Code § 3-8-2)
D. Whenever a connection has been made to the sewer system of the village, it shall be the responsibility and expense of the owner of the property served
by such connection to maintain said service from the property to the village sewer system. (1965 Code § 5-2-15)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 193/307
11-2-11: EXCAVATIONS:
Whenever it shall be necessary to open the street for the purpose of inspection or repair of any sewer line or connection, or for the purpose of inspection
or repair of any water line or connection, such opening shall be made, and the village inspector(s) will inspect for proper connection and repair prior to
backfill and street restoration. Said work shall be paid for by the property owner. (1965 Code § 5-2-16)
11-2-12: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
A. Inspections: The director of public works, or any of his authorized agents, shall have free access at all reasonable hours to inspect any premises
supplied with water, and the fact that the owner or occupant of such premises accepts and uses water supplied by the village shall constitute a consent
to the making of such inspection. No person shall refuse to admit said authorized representatives to any premises for such purpose. In case any
authorized representative is refused admittance, or is in any way hindered in making the necessary inspection or examination, the water may be turned
off from such premises after giving twenty four (24) hours' written notice served either personally or by first class mail upon the owner or occupant
thereof. If the village discontinues water service for failure of the water consumer to respond to a request to enter the premises, the property owner
shall remain responsible for the established turnon fee. (Ord. 08-19-08-02, 8-19-2008)
B. Installation And Maintenance Of Electronic Registering Meters: The director of public works, and any of his authorized agents, including contractors
authorized by the village, shall further have free access at all reasonable hours for the purpose of installing and maintaining thereafter new electronic
registering water meters on all premises in the village, and the fact that the owner or occupant of such premises accepts and uses water supplied by
the village shall constitute a consent to such installation and maintenance. No person shall refuse to admit said authorized representatives to any
premises for such purpose. In case any authorized representative is refused admittance or is in any way hindered in making the necessary installation
or maintenance, the water may be turned off from such premises after giving twenty four (24) hours' written notice, served either personally or by first
class mail, upon the owner or occupant thereof. (1965 Code § 5-2-12)
11-2-13: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Pursuant to subsection 11-2-7A of this chapter, the water supply may be cut off from any premises if such water service was obtained through
misrepresentation or if any unauthorized use or wilful waste of water is found.
Should it be determined that water service has been disconnected without authorization from the village for the purpose of misrepresentation,
unauthorized use or waste, and should the village cut the water supply of the premises where such violation has occurred, the village may execute the
following actions:
1. Charge the customer for the cost of a new replacement meter.
2. Charge the customer for all labor costs for the replacement of a new meter.
3. Charge a punitive fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) (appealable to the village adjudicator).
4. Charge the reconnection fee as established in this chapter.
5. Charge for all administrative costs.
B. Any violation of this chapter by any individual, company, partnership or other entity shall be punishable by a maximum seven hundred fifty dollar
($750.00) fine per occurrence. The village shall also have the right, upon proper notice to the responsible owner or occupant and failure of any such
entity to correct a violation of this chapter, to correct such violation(s) at cost to the property owner if the violation in question presents an immediate
threat to the life, safety and/or welfare of any individual. The village shall further have the right to shut off the affected utility service in the event that a
violation of this chapter is an immediate threat to the life, safety and/or welfare of any individual and/or such disconnection is necessary to preclude
water loss. (Ord. 08-19-08-02, 8-19-2008)
Footnote 1: See subsection 12-2-16C of this code for tap fees and permit fees.
Footnote 2: See subsection 12-2-16C of this code for meter costs.
Footnote 3: See chapter 3 of this title for cross connection control; see section 12-6-4 of this code for prohibited use of groundwater as a potable water
supply.
Chapter 3
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
11-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following definitions:
AWWA: The American Water Works Association.
AWWA STANDARDS: The standards described in AWWA C506-78 (R83) and any related provisions.
APPROVED CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE: A device that is approved by the Illinois plumbing code for connecting a private water system to
a public water system to prevent possible infiltration from a private water system to a public water system.
APPROVED INSPECTOR: A person certified and approved by the IEPA as a cross connection control device inspector.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 194/307
APPROVED WATER METER: A water meter issued by the village of Lyons for purposes of connecting a private water system to a public water system.
CODE: The Illinois plumbing code and the administrative regulations authorized and promulgated pursuant to the Illinois plumbing code.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The person designated and approved by the Lyons corporate authorities as the village of Lyons code enforcement
officer or equivalent office and his/her designee.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any connection of a private water system to a public water system in the village of Lyons.
IEPA: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: All mains, pipes and structures and appurtenances that are designed and intended to receive for private use water distributed
from a public water system and which is not part of the public water system.
PROPERTY: Any separate parcel, zoning lot, building or unit of a building that is served by a separate connection to a public water main.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A public supply of potable water for distribution to the public including all mains, pipes and structures and appurtenances
owned and/or maintained by the village through which water is obtained and distributed to the public including, but not limited to, intakes and cribs,
reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing potable water to the
public. (Ord. 07-15-08-02, 7-15-2008)
11-3-2: CROSS CONNECTIONS RESTRICTED:
A. No person shall connect, maintain a connection or allow a connection of a private water system to the public water system in the village without the
knowledge and approval of the code enforcement officer, and all such connections shall be subject to inspection pursuant to the Illinois plumbing code
at the time that a connection is made and thereafter as provided in this chapter.
B. No connection to the public water system shall be allowed in the village unless:
1. An approved water meter is installed;
2. The connection is made at the point of the installed water meter;
3. The connection is made with an approved cross connection control device installed at the water meter connection; and
4. The connection is otherwise established and maintained in compliance with the Illinois plumbing code.
C. No water from a private water system shall be allowed to enter a public water system regardless of the connection used. (Ord. 07-15-08-02, 7-15-2008)
11-3-3: NEW CROSS CONNECTIONS:
A. New cross connections shall be made only as follows:
1. Cross connection shall be made only at the water meter;
2. Only approved cross connection control devices shall be used;
3. The approved cross connection control devices shall be installed only by a licensed plumber;
4. The approved cross connection control devices shall be installed only in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the code and all other
applicable IEPA or other regulations; and shall be inspected and tested by an approved inspector on the date of installation, and the test results shall
be reported to the code enforcement officer within ten (10) days from the date of testing; and
5. All new cross connection devices shall be inspected at the time of installation.
B. If the inspection reveals the cross connection control device is not working properly, the device shall be serviced as follows:
1. For fixed air gap separation devices, any corrections to eliminate improperly bypassed air gaps and other service required for proper functioning of
the device shall be made within forty eight (48) hours after the test indicating the need for service.
2. For dual check assemblies, any service required for proper functioning of the device shall be performed within fifteen (15) days after the test
indicating the need for service.
3. For reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices, any service required for proper functioning of the device shall be performed within five
(5) days after the test indicating the need for service. (Ord. 07-15-08-02, 7-15-2008)
11-3-4: EXISTING CROSS CONNECTIONS:
A. Improved Commercial And Industrial Property Or Residential Property:
1. Every owner and occupant of improved commercial and industrial property or of residential property which includes one or more of the following: an
underground lawn irrigation system, an automatic fire suppression system, a water heater which exceeds one hundred fifty thousand (150,000)
BTUs, shall have an affirmative obligation to arrange an initial inspection and testing of that property's cross connection by an approved inspector in
accordance with this chapter and the code, and such inspections and testing shall be completed prior to January 1, 2009, in order to determine:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 195/307
a. Whether the cross connection was made only at the water meter;
b. Whether an approved water meter was used;
c. Whether an approved cross connection control device was used;
d. Whether the approved cross connection control device, if any, was installed in compliance with the code and all applicable IEPA and AWWA
standards and is working properly; and
e. Whether any danger of infiltration exists from the private water system to the public water system.
2. Every owner and occupant of improved commercial and industrial property or of residential property as described in subsection A1 of this section
shall have an affirmative duty to submit or cause to be submitted an inspection report and testing results generated by an approved inspector to the
code enforcement officer office by January 1, 2009, and by January 1 of every year thereafter.
B. Other Properties:
1. The code enforcement officer is hereby given the authority to identify properties, other than commercial and industrial properties and residential
properties on which an underground sprinkler system is installed, to be inspected and tested for the purposes identified in subsection A1 of this
section.
2. Within sixty (60) days from the mailing of a written notice, put in the regular mail to the address of the property, from the code enforcement officer
that the property has been identified for cross connection inspection and testing, the owner and/or occupant of such property shall have the
affirmative duty to schedule and complete an inspection of the property with an approved inspector for the same purposes described in subsection
A1 of this section.
3. The owner and/or occupant whose property has been identified for cross connection inspection and testing shall submit or cause to be submitted an
inspection report and testing results to the office of the code enforcement officer within ten (10) days after the date of initial inspection and testing or
within seventy (70) days from the notice mailing date, whichever is sooner.
4. The code enforcement officer shall have the additional authority to investigate and test commercial, industrial and other properties served by the
public water system for the same purposes identified in subsection A1 of this section and to survey the results of all investigations and testing.
5. If any cross connection is discovered that is not in compliance with this chapter, the property owner/occupant shall bring the property into compliance
with this chapter by removing any connection and/or cross connection control device and/or water meter that is noncompliant and/or by installing an
approved water meter and/or an approved cross connection control device within sixty (60) days of mailing of a written notice of the noncompliance,
at his/her own expense. All newly installed approved cross connection control devices shall be installed, inspected and tested as provided in
subsection A1 of this section. (Ord. 07-15-08-02, 7-15-2008)
11-3-5: INSPECTIONS AND TESTING:
A. Annual Testing Required: Owners and/or occupants of all commercial and industrial property, or residential property as described in subsection 11-3-4A
of this chapter, having a cross connection shall have an affirmative obligation to retain an approved inspector to conduct an inspection and testing of
the cross connection annually prior to January 1 of each year, and the inspection report and test results shall be reported to the office of the code
enforcement officer annually by February 1 of each year. Inspection and testing of an approved cross connection control device shall occur more
frequently than annually if suggested by the manufacturer of the device.
B. Reports And Records:
1. The code enforcement officer shall maintain original records of the inspection and testing reports and make them available for inspection by IEPA
personnel in accordance with state statute, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4(e).
2. Each cross connection control device installed on property in the village shall have a tag attached listing the date of the most recent inspection and
testing, the name of inspector, and type and date of repairs.
3. As a part of the inspection and testing reports, a maintenance log for each cross connection control device installed in the village shall be maintained
by the owner and/or occupant of each property that contains a cross connection, and the log shall, at a minimum, include:
a. Date of each test.
b. Name and approval number of persons performing the inspection or test.
c. Test results/inspection.
d. Repairs or servicing required.
e. Services performed and date completed.
4. All inspection and testing records shall be filed with the office of the code enforcement officer after an initial inspection and testing and on an annual
basis in order for the owner and/or occupant of each property that contains a cross connection to remain compliant with this chapter. (Ord. 07-15-08-
02, 7-15-2008)
11-3-6: REQUIRED INFORMATION:
All owners and/or occupants of any property in the village served by a connection to the public water system of the village shall furnish to the code
enforcement officer any information requested regarding the cross connection, water meter, private water system or water use on such property within ten
(10) days of a written request for such information. (Ord. 07-15-08-02, 7-15-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 196/307
11-3-7: THREAT OF CONTAMINATION; DISCONNECTION FROM SYSTEM:
A. Any illegal or improper cross connection, device or installation that poses a threat of contamination to the public water system, and any violation of this
chapter, the code or the AWWA standards shall be considered a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
B. If the code enforcement officer determines that a property has an illegal or improper cross connection, device or installation in violation this chapter, the
code or the AWWA standards, and the owner and/or occupant has failed or refused to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the code enforcement
officer may give notice in writing to the owner and/or occupant of the violation and that the water service to the property may be discontinued on a date
not less than five (5) days from the date of the notice (hereinafter "5 day notice") if the owner and/or occupant does not take immediate and appropriate
steps to eliminate the violation and proceed diligently to bring the property into compliance with this chapter.
C. The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property on which a known or presumed violation of
this chapter exists, under the following circumstances:
1. At any time following the issuance of a five (5) day notice, if the property owner and/or occupant fails to take immediate and appropriate steps in
compliance with this chapter to eliminate the violation and/or fails to proceed diligently to bring the property into compliance with this chapter;
2. At any time following the issuance of a five (5) day notice if, in the code enforcement officer's determination, discontinuation of water service is
necessary to eliminate a threat of contamination to the public water system that is likely, even if the property owner and/or occupant has taken
immediate and appropriate steps to eliminate the violation and is proceeding diligently to bring the property into compliance with this chapter and to
eliminate the danger of contamination of the public water system;
3. Upon verbal notice, without delay, if the code enforcement officer or IEPA and discontinuation of water service is necessary to eliminate an imminent
hazard to the public health, safety and welfare; or
4. Without notice to any party, if the code enforcement officer or IEPA determines that contamination of the public water system is immediate and
discontinuation of water service is necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to the public health, safety and welfare.
D. If water service is discontinued without written notice, the code enforcement officer shall provide written notice as soon as practicable following the
discontinuation of water service identifying the reason for discontinuation and of the steps that are necessary to restore the water service.
E. Water service that is discontinued shall not be restored until all illegal and improper cross connections, devices or installations and any dangers to the
public health, safety and welfare have been eliminated, any violations of this chapter have been remedied, and a reconnection fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) is paid to the village.
F. Neither the village nor any employee or agent of the village, including the code enforcement officer, shall be liable to any person for injury, damages or
lost revenues that may result from discontinuation of the public water supply to a property in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 07-15-08-
02, 7-15-2008)
11-3-8: PRESUMPTION OF ILLEGAL OR IMPROPER CROSS CONNECTION:
If any property owner and/or occupant fails or refuses to schedule and allow an inspection, to submit the inspection and testing results or to provide other
information that is requested as provided in this chapter, the property shall be presumed to have an illegal or otherwise improper connection to the public
water system as defined by applicable IEPA and AWWA standards and regulations. (Ord. 07-15-08-02, 7-15-2008)
11-3-9: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS:
If any contamination of the public water system occurs as a result of an illegal or otherwise improper cross connection, cross connection device or
installation as defined by applicable IEPA and AWWA standards, the owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of property from which the contamination occurred shall
be jointly and severally liable for the costs to eliminate the contamination and to clean up and purify the public water system and all other costs associated
with and resulting from such contamination including, but not limited to, the initial and follow up testing of the system as deemed necessary and
appropriate by the code enforcement officer and/or the IEPA. (Ord. 07-15-08-02, 7-15-2008)
11-3-10: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
The village hereby establishes an annual administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all industrial, commercial, and residential properties as
described in subsection 11-3-4A of this chapter for the recordation and administration of this chapter and other services provided by the village in
compliance with the Illinois plumbing code, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/35, and the Illinois administrative code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
(Ord. 07-15-08-02, 7-15-2008)
11-3-11: VIOLATIONS; FINES AND OTHER REMEDIES:
A. Violations: In addition to the failure to comply with the terms of this chapter as noted herein, the following actions shall also be considered violations of
this chapter:
1. The making of any statement, representation, or certification that a person knows or should have known to be false in response to any request for
information or in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter;
2. The interference or tampering in any way with any inspection or test performed pursuant to this chapter; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 197/307
3. The interference or tampering with any properly installed approved cross connection control device.
B. Fines: Any person who is found to have violated any provision of this chapter may be fined in amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. A fine or fines may be imposed separately from and in addition to the discontinuation of water service.
C. Other Remedies: In addition to a fine or fines and/or discontinuation of water service, the village may seek an injunction or other remedies available as
deemed necessary and appropriate by the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 07-15-08-02, 7-15-2008)
Title 12
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 3 of this code for alarm system regulations.
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT1
12-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING DIRECTOR: An individual or department designated by the village manager.
MINOR VIOLATIONS: Violations that are primarily cosmetic or aesthetic in nature that cannot be cured at the time of inspection due to weather or other
just cause. (1965 Code § 7-16-1)
12-1-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. All persons, partnerships, corporations and other entities shall comply with the provisions enumerated in this title including, but not limited to, all
referenced codes. (1965 Code § 7-1-4)
B. Any individual, partnership, company, corporation or other entity acting in a licensed professional capacity with regard to the sale or occupancy of
property shall be responsible for ascertaining the requirements of this chapter and not be party to a circumvention of same. (1965 Code § 7-16-9)
12-1-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY2:
A. Certificate Required: A certificate of occupancy is required prior to each new occupancy by commercial, industrial or similar uses in all nonresidential
zoning districts within the village and/or occupancies requiring a village business license. A new occupancy shall include a change in business
ownership, change in use and/or change in occupancy. (1965 Code § 7-16-2)
B. Compliance Required: A standard condition for all certificates of occupancy shall require all premises and buildings to be maintained in compliance with
village building, zoning and fire codes, as well as the latest version of the village property maintenance code. (1965 Code § 7-16-6)
C. Inspections:
1. An inspection shall be performed by the building director prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Such inspection shall verify that the
property is in compliance with all building, fire, property maintenance and zoning regulations of the village. A certificate of occupancy shall not be
issued without such verification. An exception to this requirement is that a conditional certificate may be issued if there are minor violations, and the
new owner or occupant provides a signed affidavit accepting responsibility for correcting such violations within a specified period time as determined
by the building director, not to exceed six (6) months.
2. The primary standard for occupancy inspections shall be the latest version of the ICC international property maintenance code, the village zoning
ordinance, the village sign ordinance and the latest version of the NFPA life safety code. Applicable sections of the village building, electrical,
plumbing and mechanical codes may also be applied. (1965 Code § 7-16-2)
D. Suspension Of Certificate: A certificate of occupancy shall be suspended in the event that an owner or occupant of the building or premises for which
the certificate has been issued is convicted or found responsible by a court or code hearing department of competent jurisdiction of being in violation of
one or more of the codes enumerated in subsection B of this section. The subject property shall thereafter not be occupied and not operate in any
manner until such time as the attendant violations have been cured and the corrections verified by the building director. (1965 Code § 7-16-7)
12-1-4: INSPECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 198/307
A. Real Estate Sale Inspections:
1. Certificate Required: All owners of real estate shall be required to obtain a certificate of sale inspection prior to selling, changing or transferring
ownership to another entity.
2. Failure To Obtain Certificate: In the event that a seller fails to obtain the requisite inspection certificate, he or she shall be in violation of this chapter
and shall be subject to the penalties contained herein, and in the event that a seller fails to obtain the requisite inspection certificate, the purchaser or
transferee shall become responsible for obtaining all inspections and compliances required by this chapter.
3. One- And Two-Family Uses: A certificate of sale inspection shall only be issued for one- and two-family uses upon verification by the building director
that the real property and all improvements are in substantial compliance with the latest version of the ICC international property maintenance code
and current village zoning ordinance.
4. Multi-Family, Commercial, Industrial And Similar Uses: A certificate of sale inspection shall only be issued for multi-family, commercial, industrial and
similar types of uses upon verification by the building director that the real property and all improvements are in substantial compliance with the latest
version of the ICC international property maintenance code, village zoning ordinance and currently adopted building, electrical, plumbing, sign and
mechanical codes.
5. Conditional Certificate: A conditional certificate may be issued if there are only minor violations, and the new owner provides a signed affidavit
accepting responsibility for correcting such violations within a specified period time as determined by the building director, not to exceed six (6)
months. (1965 Code § 7-16-3)
B. Rental Inspections:
1. The building code official is authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises located within the village, not otherwise occupied, or to be occupied, by the owner in order that the building code official may perform his or
her duty of safeguarding the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants of any such dwellings and of the general public, preserve property values,
and enhance property tax revenues. All inspections made under this subsection will be performed in strict compliance with the guidelines established
in this subsection.
2. The building code official is authorized to enter, examine and survey the interior of the dwelling unit under the following circumstances:
a. Upon a vacancy or change of occupancy at the property;
b. Upon owner or tenant request or complaint; or
c. When there is probable cause to believe a code violation may exist. Probable cause may exist, but is not limited to, observation of the exterior of
the property which leads the building official or his authorized representative to conclude that code violations may exist on the interior of the
property, or upon request of the fire or police departments, who, after entering the interior of the property, have reason to believe that building code
violations may exist.
Under subsections B2a and B2b of this section, the building code official or his authorized representative will strictly limit the inspection to the
specific dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit that is changing or has changed occupancy or for which the owner or tenant has identified in his or
her complaint for determining whether or not there is compliance with all relevant provisions of this title. Under subsection B2c of this section, the
building code official or his authorized representative may examine and survey all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and the premises of the
reported property, for the purpose of determining whether or not there is compliance with all relevant provisions of this title.
3. No inspection will be made under this subsection unless and until the building code official has provided the owner of the dwelling, dwelling unit, or
rooming unit and, if occupied, the tenant of the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit with at least three (3) business days' written notice of an
inspection. The notice must be either personally delivered or mailed, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner and to the
address of the property to be inspected. The notice, at a minimum, must:
a. Identify the property to be inspected and date and general time frame of the scheduled inspection, set no more than within a three (3) hour block
and in no event any earlier than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or later than four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M., Monday through Friday,
b. Provide the basis for the inspection, with specific reference to the relevant basis set forth in subsection B2 of this section,
c. Explain the scope of the inspection, with specific reference to all relevant building and life safety codes establishing the code requirements, and
d. Provide the name and contact information of the building code official or his authorized representative, with an invitation to contact the official or
representative with any questions, concerns, or requests to reschedule the inspection date and time.
4. The owner or the owner's authorized agent and the occupant, if occupied on the date of inspection, of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit
will give the building code official or his authorized representative access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises upon
presentation of proper identification and a written schedule of the specific areas and facilities to be inspected, examined and surveyed on a form
prepared and signed by the building code official. If any owner or the owner's authorized agent, or the occupant, if occupied as of the date of the
inspection, refuses to permit access or entry into such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit or any part thereof with respect to a scheduled
inspection authorized by this section, the building code official will file a petition setting forth the basis for the inspection with and obtain a warrant to
inspect or an order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the building code official or his authorized representative entry into the property
for the purposes of conducting the scheduled inspection.
5. Owners of nonowner occupied dwellings, dwelling units, or rooming units must contact the building code official after a dwelling, dwelling unit, or
rooming unit has been vacated or upon change in occupancy to schedule an inspection as required under subsection B2a of this section. Failure of
an owner to comply with the provisions of this subsection B5 may result in a suspension or revocation of the owner's certificate of occupancy for the
building and imposition of a fine as established in this chapter.
6. The building code official or his authorized representative will deliver within ten (10) business days after an inspection a written inspection report
either personally or by mail, return receipt requested, to the addresses where the inspection notification was sent. The report will, at a minimum,
provide:
a. Date and time of the inspection,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 199/307
b. Name and contact information of the person who conducted the inspection,
c. Basis for the inspection, as provided in the notice,
d. Areas of the property inspected,
e. Findings of the inspection, with specific references to specific code violations, if any,
f. Required repairs, alterations, or other corrective actions with a date upon which all repairs, alterations, or other corrective actions must be
completed,
g. Date and general time frame of a follow up inspection, set no more than within a three (3) hour block and in no event any earlier than nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. or later than four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M., Monday through Friday, and
h. Provide the name and contact information of the building code official or his authorized representative, with an invitation to contact the official or
representative with any questions, concerns, or requests to reschedule the inspection date and time.
7. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit will give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such dwelling,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs, alterations, or other corrective actions as
are necessary to bring the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit into compliance with this title or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or order
issued pursuant to this title.
8. The owner of the dwelling, dwelling units, rooming units and premises shall be charged a fee in the amount of the same as a residential sale
inspection to defray the cost of any inspection under this subsection B. (Ord. 04-21-09-01, 4-21-2009)
C. Commercial, Industrial And/Or Business Use Inspections: The building director is authorized to establish an annual or biennial inspection program for
those commercial, industrial and/or business uses that are determined by the director to have a higher degree of risk for poor maintenance, nuisance,
fire or health/safety hazards. Such inspection programs may be established by risk factor, use group, zoning district or geographic location. Such uses
shall be charged an annual inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) as part of their business license renewal. The standard for such inspections shall be
the same as for a new occupancy inspection for the same classification. (1965 Code § 7-16-5; amd. 2009 Code)
D. Refusal To Allow Or Provide For Inspections: A refusal to comply with a lawful inspection notice will not be deemed a violation of this chapter, unless
such refusal is made after the building code official has obtained a court issued warrant or order authorizing such inspection. (Ord. 04-21-09-01, 4-21-
2009)
12-1-5: PENALTIES:
A. Any person, partnership, company or other entity who shall violate a provision of this title or who fails to comply with any of the requirements or
referenced codes hereof or who shall violate direction issued under the rule making authority of the code enforcement officer, or who shall violate the
conditions of a permit, plan or certificate of occupancy, shall be guilty of one or more of the following: (1965 Code § 7-1-4)
1. A misdemeanor, punishable by a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and/or
imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months. (1965 Code § 7-1-4; amd. 2009 Code)
2. A civil infraction, punishable by the following fine schedule:
First offense: Minimum $50.00/maximum $350.00.
Second offense: Minimum $350.00/maximum $750.00.
B. Civil infractions may be prosecuted in a court of competent jurisdiction or pursuant to an adjudication system as promulgated by the village in
accordance with Illinois state statutes3.
C. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. A court or adjudicator of competent jurisdiction shall have the authority to impose an order providing for daily fines, within the fine schedule promulgated
by this chapter, until such time as the violation is abated and verified as such by the code enforcement officer. Such order may be entered as a lien
against the property in accordance with Illinois state statutes and may accumulate interest as provided by law. Upon verifying abatement, the code
enforcement officer shall cause, where a lien has been recorded, a certificate of compliance to be issued.
E. Failure to obtain inspections and inspection approvals as required by this title and under the rule making authority of the code enforcement officer,
including, but not limited to, preconstruction inspections, rough inspections, progress inspections, compliance and final inspections, sale and rental
inspections, is a violation of this title. (1965 Code § 7-1-4)
Chapter 2
PERMITS, FEES AND BONDS1
12-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the erection, construction, alteration, addition, repair, upgrade, removal, demolition or excavation of any building or
structure or to make any change in plumbing, mechanical or electrical systems or appurtenances, open a street, parkway or sidewalk, pour concrete or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 200/307
asphalt, or occupy a portion of a street or alley before the proper permits for such work or occupancy have been obtained from the building department.
(1965 Code § 7-2-1)
12-2-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. Application for a permit shall be made on a form furnished by the building department and must be accompanied by the following documents:
1. Plans as defined and directed by the building code and as required by the building director to define scope of work and compliance with the
appropriate code. Such plans may include building elevations, floor plans, construction and engineering details and specifications, material lists, site
plan, gradient and utility plans, computations and plan views.
2. Plat of survey.
3. Certificates and estimates of costs.
4. Listing of all contractor names, addresses and telephone numbers. Such contractors shall be licensed by the village prior to issuance of a permit.
B. All building permit applications are to be signed by the property owner or his authorized agent.
C. Four (4) sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted with the permit application, as required by the building director. One set will be left on file
with the building department. One other, after being approved and properly stamped by the code enforcement officer, shall be kept on the job and
available to the inspector while the work is in progress and during the active period of the permit. Such plans shall be prepared, stamped and signed by
a state of Illinois licensed design professional for the type of work indicated. (1965 Code § 7-2-7)
12-2-3: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT; BOND MAY BE REQUIRED:
When the application and the required documents have been approved and accepted by the code enforcement officer and the permit fee paid, the code
enforcement officer will cause the permit to be issued. A building permit shall not be issued wherein the code enforcement officer has made a
determination, for cause, that the applicant or his contractors do not possess the necessary licenses, insurance, bond, skills or experience to perform the
work in question. Commercial, industrial and multi-family projects, other than those that are minor in scope, shall only be permitted wherein licensed
contractors will be performing said work and are listed on the permit application. Owners of single-family dwellings may pull permits for projects not
involving licensed contractors, provided such owners are occupants of the subject property, and wherein the issuance of such permits is not otherwise
contrary to any other provision of this code. The code enforcement officer may, for purposes of liability and public safety, require single-family owners to
post a bond and insurance for major construction projects as may be required for contractors. (1965 Code § 7-2-8)
12-2-4: PARTIAL PERMIT:
A partial permit may be granted for reasonable cause, such as weather, time of year, etc., to begin the foundation or other preliminary work before the
complete plans are approved. Such a partial permit shall be used at the permit holder's risk with no assurance of getting a full permit. (1965 Code § 7-2-9)
12-2-5: TIME TO BEGIN AND COMPLETE WORK; EXTENSIONS:
A. Construction of a new structure, additions or major alterations shall start within thirty (30) days after permit issuance and shall be completed within one
year of permit issuance. If the construction or work identified in the permit does not start within the requisite thirty (30) days, or if significant progress
lapses, the building director may, upon notice, suspend such permit. Failure to reinstate a permit within thirty (30) days after notification of suspension
shall void same and cause bond forfeiture to the village. A reinstatement shall not extend the permit past its original expiration date. (1965 Code § 7-2-
3)
B. A permit may be extended past its expiration date, provided the property owner or his agent makes application for such extension prior to the expiration
date. The code enforcement officer may require a completion timetable and other such documents and information as a condition of extension in order
to provide reasonable assurances that the project will continue to make progress and be completed within the extended period of time. A permit may
be extended by the code enforcement officer for a period of time not to exceed one year. (1965 Code § 7-2-4)
12-2-6: POSTING PERMIT:
A permit placard shall be furnished to the applicant as the permit. It must be conspicuously posted on the premises when construction begins. The placard
shall remain conspicuously posted on the premises during the entire course of the work. If no structure exists on the property, the owner shall cause the
installation of a device to occur wherein such permit may be displayed in a weatherproof, easily visible container. (1965 Code § 7-2-10)
12-2-7: ACCEPTANCE OF PERMIT CONDITIONS:
Upon application for and issuance of a permit, the property owner and/or his agent is deemed to have consented to all code and inspection requirements
of the codes and provisions adopted under this title and those promulgated by the code enforcement officer in conjunction with his rule making authority.
Such language shall be included on all permit applications. The acceptance of a building permit shall also constitute permission for village inspectors to
enter the subject property to inspect open structures under construction in conjunction with the permit, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In
the event an owner or his agent refuses to allow or fails to obtain such inspections, such refusal or failure shall be a violation of this title. A refusal or failure
to obtain a required inspection shall not grant the code enforcement officer the right to enter a premises without permission, but, in addition to being a
violation of this chapter, shall be probable cause to obtain an administrative search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. Each day an inspection
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 201/307
is refused or not obtained after notice from the village to obtain such inspection shall be a separate violation of this title and subject to its penalties. (1965
Code § 7-2-2)
12-2-8: ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS TO PLANS:
It shall be unlawful to alter any lines or figures shown on the stamped permit plans. If, during the progress of work, the permit holder or his agents desire to
deviate in any manner from the permit plans, the permit holder shall submit plans in duplicate of such changes and secure written approval from the
building director before proceeding with the work. (1965 Code § 7-2-11)
12-2-9: PERMIT DOES NOT ALLOW VIOLATIONS:
The issuance of a permit does not allow violation of any of the requirements or provisions of the building code or zoning regulations, even if shown by
plans or other documents but not corrected by the building department when application was made for the permit, nor does the village, its building
department, or officers assume any responsibility for the expense involved to make such building or structure comply with the building code or zoning
regulations. (1965 Code § 7-2-6)
12-2-10: SUSPENSION OR LIMITATIONS; REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. The building director shall have the authority to suspend or limit permit privileges for all contractors and property owners who are in violation of village
building or property maintenance code or zoning regulations until time as such violations are cured. (1965 Code § 7-2-20)
B. Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter may be revoked at any time for reasonable cause by the building director. (1965 Code § 7-2-5)
12-2-11: WORKMANSHIP:
All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are performed pursuant to a license or permit issued under this code shall be executed and
installed in a workmanlike manner. (1965 Code § 7-2-17)
12-2-12: PERMIT FEE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY:
A. Cost Of Construction Determined:
1. Definition: Where certain fees are calculated upon a percentage of the cost of construction, such term shall have the following meaning: The "cost of
construction" shall be the fair market value of the sum of the cost of the labor and materials associated with the job.
2. Determination: The cost of construction shall be determined by the building director, utilizing the ICC cost of construction factor for the state of
Illinois, where applicable.
3. Appeals: Appeals from the building director's determination of cost shall be made to the village building board of appeals. (1965 Code § 7-2-19)
B. Minimum Fee: The minimum fee for all permits is fifty dollars ($50.00). All permit fee computations shall be rounded to the nearest dollar. (1965 Code
§ 7-2-20)
C. Payment Of Fee: All permit fees are to be paid at the time the permits are issued. Should it be necessary to issue temporary permits, fees will be
estimated and adjustments made at the time the final permit is issued. The permit fees to be paid shall be the total of the fees charged for building,
plumbing, electrical, heating and all other permit fees to be charged. (1965 Code § 7-2-16)
D. Inspections: The permit fees indicated in this title constitute payment for a rough and final inspection relative to each permitted item. Repeat inspections
beyond the scope of the original permit fee due to missed appointments, violations, poor workmanship and similar circumstances shall require an
additional payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) per inspection. (1965 Code § 7-2-20)
E. Working Without Permit; Fees Double: In instances where work is begun without obtaining a required permit, the permit fee shall be double the amount
indicated in this chapter. The building director may require the exposure of any covered work for the purpose of inspection approval. (1965 Code § 7-2-
21)
12-2-13: GENERAL BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
All fees shall be rounded, and the following fees do not include building systems such as electrical, plumbing, HVAC, water and sewer taps, etc. Such fees
are further listed in this title.
One- to two-family residence $ 0 .20 per square foot per floor, including basement
Multi-family residential 0 .35 per square foot per floor, including basement
Commercial structures 0 .55 per square foot per floor, including basement
Industrial structures 0 .55 per square foot per floor, including basement
All other 0 .0125 x cost of construction, minimum fee applicable
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 202/307
Fences 50 .00
Garages 125 .00
Miscellaneous structures 50 .00
Sheds 50 .00
Aboveground pool 50 .00
Belowground pool 100 .00
Concrete or asphalt work 0 .0125 x cost of construction, minimum fee applies
(1965 Code § 7-2-18)
12-2-14: ELECTRICAL PERMITS:
A. Permit Required; Contractor Qualifications: No electrical installation or alteration shall be made without a permit first being obtained from the building
department. Permits shall be issued only to such firms or persons who are properly licensed to engage in the occupation of electrical contractor in the
village. If application for permit is made by a general contractor in connection with a general building permit, evidence of proper licensing must be
furnished to the building department as hereinbefore stated. (1965 Code § 7-2-22)
B. Permit Fees: The fees to be charged for electrical installations shall be as follows:
Electrical Services: 2-, 3- Or 4-Wire
Up to 100 amp $ 50 .00
101 to 300 amp 70 .00
301 amp to 2,000
amp
100 .00
2,000 amp and
above
200 .00, plus $10.00 per 100 amp over 2,000
Circuits: 15 And 20 Amp
1 to 3 20 .00
4 to 6 30 .00
7 to 9 40 .00
10 to 12 50 .00
>12 50 .00, plus $5.00 for each additional circuit
Circuits Larger Than 20 Amp
30 amp circuit Double the fee of a 15 amp circuit
50 amp circuit 3 times the fee of 15 amp circuit
60 amp circuit 100 .00
Fixture, Switch And Receptacles
1 to 15 10 .00
16 to 20 20 .00
21 to 25 35 .00
26 to 30 40 .00
31 to 200 80 .00
201 to 300 150 .00
>300 150 .00, plus $3.00 per fixture
Other Electrical 50 .00 minimum fee, plus fees as necessary to cover the cost of administration and
inspection
Note: Each panel on the premises is counted as a separate item in apartment dwellings and industrial and commercial buildings.
(1965 Code § 7-2-23)
C. Inspections: The building director or his agent shall inspect all wiring systems before they are concealed. Additional inspections shall be made as
deemed necessary by the building director. (1965 Code § 7-2-22)
12-2-15: HEATING, VENTILATING, AIR CONDITIONING AND EXHAUST SYSTEM PERMITS:
A. Permit Required; Contractor Qualifications: No heating, ventilating, air conditioning or exhaust system installation or alteration shall be made without a
permit first being obtained from the building department. Permits shall be issued only to such firms or persons who are properly licensed to engage in
the occupation of heating, ventilation air conditioning or exhaust system contractor in the village. If application for permit is made by a general
contractor in connection with a general building permit, evidence of proper licensing must be furnished to the building department as hereinbefore
stated. (1965 Code § 7-2-26; amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 203/307
B. Permit Fees: The fees to be charged for heating, ventilating, air conditioning or exhaust system installation shall be as follows:
Minimum permit $50.00
Furnace 50.00
Electrical heating units 50.00
Central air conditioning 50.00
Ventilation and exhaust 50.00
Other HVAC installations 50.00
(1965 Code § 7-2-27)
C. Inspections: The building director or his agent shall inspect all heating, ventilating, air conditioning and exhaust systems before they are concealed.
Additional inspections shall be made as deemed necessary by the building director. (1965 Code § 7-2-26)
12-2-16: PLUMBING AND SEWERAGE PERMITS:
A. Permit Required; Contractor Qualifications: No plumbing or sewerage installation or alteration shall be made without a permit first being obtained from
the building department. Permits shall be issued only to such firms or persons who are properly licensed to engage in the occupation of plumbing or
drain laying in the village. If application for permit is made by a general contractor in connection with a general building permit, evidence of proper
licensing must be furnished to the building department as hereinbefore stated. (1965 Code § 7-2-31)
B. Waiver Of Permit: A permit shall not be required for the repair of existing plumbing or sewerage systems not involving alteration of the existing system.
(1965 Code § 7-2-32)
C. Permit Fees: The fees to be charged for plumbing and sewerage installations shall be as follows:
Water main tap $ 600 .00
Sewer main tap 850 .00
Plumbing fixture (first) 50 .00
Additional plumbing
fixtures
20 .00
Water meter Meters shall be purchased through the village. The fee for meters shall be added to the permit fee. Meter fees shall be
raised in proportion to any cost increase from the supplier.
5/8 inch with readomatic
240 .00
3/4 inch with readomatic
265 .00
1 inch with readomatic 325 .00
11/2 inch with
readomatic
500 .00
2 inch with readomatic 620 .00
2 inch compound with
readomatic
1,600 .00
3 inch compound with
readomatic
3,100 .00
Water used during
construction
Residential 40 .00
Other construction 120 .00
Highway construction 50 .00, plus $10.00 each 1,000 gallons
Fire suppression
systems
2 .00 per sprinkler head, plus $1,400.00 for each standpipe
(1965 Code § 7-2-33)
D. Inspections: The building director or his agents shall inspect all plumbing or sewerage systems before they are concealed. Additional inspections shall
be made as deemed necessary by the building director. (1965 Code § 7-2-31)
12-2-17: EXCAVATION PERMITS:
A. Permit Required; Contractor Qualifications: No excavation shall be made in any village street, alley, sidewalk or parkway without a permit first being
obtained from the building department. Permits shall be issued only to such firms or persons who are properly licensed to perform such work in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 204/307
village. (1965 Code § 7-2-36)
B. Permit Fees: The fees to be charged for street, alley, sidewalk, or parkway openings (including curb and gutter work) shall be as follows:
Minor opening (less than 25 square feet) $100 .00
Major opening (25 square feet or more) 100 .00, plus $4.00 per square foot
(1965 Code § 7-2-37)
C. Inspections: The building director or his agent shall inspect the excavation before it is backfilled. Additional inspections shall be made as deemed
necessary by the building director. (1965 Code § 7-2-36)
12-2-18: ELEVATOR, ESCALATOR, CONVEYANCE SYSTEM, DOCKLIFT AND CARNIVAL RIDE FEES:
Fees to be charged for the installation or alteration of elevators, conveyance systems, docklifts and carnival rides and for the annual inspection thereof are
as follows: (1965 Code § 7-2-45; amd. 2009 Code)
Existing lifts of all types $ 50 .00 per unit
New lifts of all types 100 .00 per unit
Violation inspection Per inspection and administrative cost to village; minimum $50.00 per inspection
Carnival rides Per inspection and administrative cost to village
(1965 Code § 7-2-45)
12-2-19: BUILDING MOVING PERMITS:
A. Permit Required; Contractor Qualifications: No building shall be moved from one location to another within the village, or from a location outside the
village to within the village, or from a location within the village to a location outside the village without a permit first being obtained to do so from the
building department. Permits shall be issued only to firms or persons who are properly licensed to engage in the occupation of building moving in the
village. (1965 Code § 7-2-54)
B. Permit Fees: The permit fee to move a building shall be as follows:
Single- or two-family dwelling $ 500.00
Multiple-family dwelling 800.00
Commercial building 1,000.00
Industrial building 1,500.00
Any smaller building 50.00
(1965 Code § 7-2-55)
12-2-20: BUILDING DEMOLITION OR WRECKING PERMITS:
A. Permit Required; Contractor Qualifications: No building or structure shall be demolished or wrecked without a permit first being obtained from the
building department. Permits shall be issued only to firms or persons who are properly licensed to engage in the occupation of building demolition or
wrecking in the village. (1965 Code § 7-2-57)
B. Permit Fees: The permit fee to demolish or wreck a building or structure shall be as follows:
Single- or two-family dwelling $200.00
Multiple-family < 6 units 300.00
Multiple-family > 6 units 500.00
Commercial building 600.00
Industrial building 800.00
Minimum fee for any smaller building 50.00
(1965 Code § 7-2-58)
12-2-21: FEES FOR BARRICADE LIGHTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 205/307
The fee for the placement or relighting of street barricades that have not been properly placed or become extinguished and must, for safety reasons, be
placed or relit by the village shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each barricade light. (1965 Code § 7-2-62)
12-2-22: GAS AND ELECTRIC METER PERMITS:
Prior to the installation of any gas or electric meter in a residential building, other than the initial gas or electric meter for a new building or replacement gas
or electric meter for an existing building, the owner of the residential building is required to obtain from the village a gas/electric meter permit. The
gas/electric meter permit fee shall be five dollars ($5.00). (1965 Code § 7-20-1)
12-2-23: PLAN REVIEW FEES:
The fees charged for review of construction plans shall be as follows:
Single- or two-family dwelling $ 300 .00 (includes building and building systems)
Multi-family dwelling 400 .00 (includes building and building systems)
Commercial building 800 .00 (includes building and building systems)
Industrial building 1,000 .00 (includes building and building systems)
Commercial tenant finish 500 .00 (includes all phases of project)
Gradient plan 100 .00
Electrical, plumbing, HVAC 150 .00 per trade
Note: All of the above are "in house" review fees. In the event that a plan review is conducted by an outside agency, the fee shall be the agency review
price, plus $100.00 administration fee.
(1965 Code § 7-2-60; amd. 2009 Code)
12-2-24: BONDS:
A. General Building Bond Required: In addition to any permit fees required by this chapter, no firm or persons shall be issued a building permit to perform
any construction or alteration of a building or structure within the village if the cost of such work is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more until such
firm or person shall deposit with the building department a cash bond as determined by the building director to be sufficient to construct or repair
damages to public property and sufficient to guarantee completion of the project in accordance with village codes and ordinances. A bond shall also be
required for any street, alley, sidewalk and/or parkway opening, as well as any demolition, excavation, blasting, building moving or other work that
poses a nuisance or threat to the health, safety or welfare of individuals or the general public. (1965 Code § 7-2-66)
B. Minimum Bond Amounts: The following are the minimum bond amounts required for the work specified:
New one- and two-family dwelling $1,500 .00
New multi-family dwelling
3 to 12 units 2,000 .00
>12 units 4,000 .00
New commercial or industrial building 5,000 .00
Demolition
Garage 100 .00
One- and two-family dwelling 200 .00
Multi-family dwelling 400 .00
Commercial and industrial buildings 1,000 .00
Project costing in excess of $5,000.00 1,000 .00
Moving structure 1,000 .00
Opening public road, parkway 100 .00
Opening sidewalk 400 .00
(1965 Code § 7-2-69)
C. Forfeiture Of Bond: Bonds shall be forfeited in the event the village has to perform work to correct any violations or required work not performed by the
permittee, or in the event a final inspection approval is not obtained prior to the voiding or expiration of the permit. (1965 Code § 7-2-67)
D. Refund Of Bond: A bond shall be refunded to the permittee upon his completion of work and issuance of final village inspection approval, minus any
outstanding inspection or other village fees that may be owed. (1965 Code § 7-2-68)
Footnote 1: See section 2-5-3 of this code for appeals fee; see chapter 11, article A of this title for permit requirements for billboards and signboards;
see section 12-12-3 of this title for private swimming pool permit requirements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 206/307
Chapter 3
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
12-3-1: ELEVATORS, CONVEYANCE SYSTEMS, DOCKLIFTS AND CARNIVAL RIDES:
All design, construction and installation of elevators, escalators, conveyance systems, docklifts and carnival rides placed in or attached to any building or
structure within the village shall be in conformity with the village building code and any of its referenced standards. (1965 Code § 7-11-1; amd. 2009 Code)
12-3-2: ADULT USE VIEWING BOOTHS1:
No person shall occupy any commercial building, structure, premises, or portion or part thereof, which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
ADULT USES: "Adult bookstores", "adult motion picture theaters", "adult entertainment cabarets" and other similar uses as those terms are defined in
the Lyons zoning ordinance2.
BOOTHS, STALLS, PARTITIONED PORTIONS OF A ROOM OR INDIVIDUAL ROOMS: 1. Such enclosures as are specifically offered to the public
or members of that establishment for hire or for a fee as part of a business operated on the premises which offers as part of its business the
entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure, which shall include, without limitation, such enclosures wherein the entertainment is dispensed for a
fee, but a fee is not charged for mere access to the enclosure.
2. Said terms do not mean such enclosures that are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed on the premises for
attending to the tasks of their employment, which enclosures are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or
for the purpose of viewing entertainment for a fee, and are not open to any persons other than employees.
DOORS, CURTAINS OR PORTAL PARTITIONS: Closure devices through which one cannot see or view the activity taking place within the enclosure.
OPEN TO AN ADJACENT ILLUMINATED PUBLIC ROOM SO THAT THE AREA INSIDE IS VISIBLE TO PERSONS IN THE ADJACENT PUBLIC
ROOM: Either the absence of any door, curtain or portal partition or a door or other device which is made of clear, transparent material such as
glass, Plexiglas or other such material meeting building code and safety standards, extending from the floor to the top of the doorframe, exclusive of
the door or device framing itself, so that the activity inside the enclosure may be viewed or seen by persons outside the enclosure.
B. Partition Restrictions: No partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a building, structure or premises may have an aperture which is
designed or otherwise constructed to encourage sexual activity between persons on either side of the partition.
C. Illumination: No booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room, or individual rooms, used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of
entertainment shall have doors, curtains or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, or individual rooms so used shall
have one side open to an adjacent illuminated public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room or main aisle. All
such described areas shall be lighted in such a manner that the persons in the area used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment
are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the motion pictures or other
offered entertainment. (1965 Code § 7-1-3)
Footnote 1: See title 13, chapter 5 of this code for adult uses.
Footnote 2: See section 13-5-1 of this code.
Chapter 4
BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES
12-4-1: ADOPTION OF CODES:
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the Office of the Village Code Enforcement Officer, being marked and designated as the ICC
International Building Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Village for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, except as also herein provided for residential structures; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 12-4-2 of this chapter. Pursuant to section 116.4 of the referenced code, as amended and
promulgated by section 12-2-7 of this title, the Village further adopts the ICC International Residential Code, 2006 edition, as its Building Code for Oneand
Two-Family Dwellings. (1965 Code § 7-1-1; amd. 2009 Code)
12-4-2: AMENDMENTS TO BUILDING CODE:
The following sections of the International Building Code adopted in section 12-4-1 of this chapter are hereby revised as follows: (1965 Code § 7-1-2; amd.
2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 207/307
Section 101.1: Insert: village of Lyons.
Section 105.2: Delete "permits shall not be required for the following" and all listed items successive to that sentence.
Section 105.5: Delete existing language. Refer to title 12, chapter 2 of the village code for permit regulations.
Section 107.3: Replace "ICC electrical code" with "current village of Lyons electrical code".
Section 109.5: Add: In the event a property owner, permit holder, or his authorized agent, upon proper notice by the village, fails to comply with an
inspection request as noticed, or fails to obtain required or final inspection approvals, the property owner, permit holder or his authorized agent shall be in
violation of this code and subject to the penalties therein.
Section 110.4: Add: The building director is also authorized to suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion in the event that conditions of
the certificate are violated.
Section 112.3: Shall be deleted and the following substitute language inserted: "Qualifications. The building board of appeals shall consist of five (5)
individuals, one from each of the following professions or disciplines:
1. A registered architect or engineer.
2. An electrical engineer or licensed electrical contractor.
3. A plumbing engineer or licensed plumbing contractor.
4. An HVAC engineer or licensed HVAC contractor.
5. A licensed general contractor or municipal building inspector.
6. A current building or trade inspector for another Illinois jurisdiction.
Each of the above members shall have no less than three years' experience in their respective disciplines. No member shall be a current inspector
for the village of Lyons. If a member of one or more of the above disciplines is not available for appointment to the board, members may be
appointed from the other listed disciplines."
Section 115.4: Amend (c) to read: "By regular mail;"
Add: "For purposes of this code, notice to the owner shall also be deemed effective upon notification to the taxpayer of record, as enumerated in the
records of the Cook County assessor's office, or, the Lyons Township assessor's office."
Section 115.6: Add new section 115.6: "The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants of an
unsafe building or structure to vacate same as may be required by the code enforcement officer. When prohibiting occupancy, the code enforcement
officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such buildings or structures a notice reading substantially as follows: "This structure is Unsafe and its
Occupancy has been Prohibited by the Code enforcement officer". It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except as authorized by the
code enforcement officer, who may promulgate rules regarding the entry of such structures for the purposes of abating the violations"1.
Section 116: Add new section 116, entitled "Other Amendments". The section shall be worded as follows:
116.1 Multi-family dwellings in the village of Lyons shall be of a decorative brick or masonry type construction. All multi-family buildings containing
more than three units shall be fully sprinkled in compliance with the technical requirements of this code and that of the NFPA life safety code, 2000
edition, or its successor as adopted by the village of Lyons.
116.2 New structures, regardless of their use and in excess of 5,000 square feet of floor area (cumulative, including basement and all stories), or in
excess of 5,000 square feet of building area, shall have a fire sprinkler, smoke detection and alarm system in compliance with the technical
requirements of this code and that of the 2000 NFPA life safety code, or its successor as adopted by the village of Lyons.
116.3 Where provisions of this code conflict with any other adopted code of the village of Lyons, the stricter standard shall apply.
(1965 Code § 7-1-2)
116.4 Add new subsection 102.7. The primary building code for the construction, modification and alterations of one and two-family dwellings shall
be chapters 2 through 43 of the 2006 international residential code. The administrative section of the 2006 international building code shall be the
administrative section for the 2006 international residential code.
(1965 Code § 7-1-2; amd. 2009 Code)
116.5 In addition to providing legal representation for all village of Lyons officials in conjunction with claims made in regard to the adoption and/or
enforcement of this code, the village shall indemnify such official for liabilities incurred hereunder.
Section 1612.3: Insert: village of Lyons;
Insert: February 17, 2003.
Section 3410.2: Insert: February 17, 2003.
(1965 Code § 7-1-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 208/307
12-4-3: FACE BRICK REQUIRED:
In all residential districts as established in title 13 of this Code, face brick is required on that portion of any building that faces a public street. Face brick
(solid masonry units made from clay or shale) shall conform to ASTM C-216 specification. Face brick may be used with a minimum amount of decorator
stone (natural stone) or other stone as approved by the Building Director. Nothing herein, however, shall prohibit the use of concrete masonry walls
meeting the proper load bearing specifications and containing enough architectural terra-cotta so as to give the same appearance as face brick. (Ord. 03-
06-18-O1, 3-6-2018)
Chapter 5
ELECTRICAL CODE AND REGULATIONS
12-5-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
All electrical wiring, installation of electrical fixtures, apparatus or electrical appliances for furnishing light, heat, power or other electrical work introduced
into or placed in or upon, or in any way connected on any building or structure within the limits of the village shall be in conformity with the provisions set
forth in the Chicago electrical code 2000, as amended, which is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the village, and a copy of which is on file in the
village offices. (1965 Code § 7-3-1; amd. 2009 Code)
12-5-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
A. Administrative Amendments: Wherein, certain portions of the Chicago electrical code conflict with or are not applicable to the administration or
enforcement of the electrical code within the village. The following amendments are made to the Chicago electrical code:
1. Wherever the term "city of Chicago" and similar terms are referenced in the code, the "village of Lyons" shall be substituted therefor.
2. All references to the "city council" shall be substituted with "village board of trustees". All references to the "mayor" shall be substituted with the
"village president".
3. All references to the "electrical bureau" shall be substituted with the "building department".
4. Article XIII, "Signs, Billboards, Signboards And Related Structures", is deleted due to conflicting regulations with those provided by the village sign
regulations, as promulgated in chapter 11 of this title. All technical provisions of the Chicago electrical code 2000, article 600, relating to signs shall
remain in force. (1965 Code § 7-3-2)
5. The electrical code for the construction, alteration or repair of one- and two-family dwellings shall be the ICC 2006 international residential code, or
its successor, as adopted and amended by the village; however, all amendments enumerated in this chapter shall remain in full force and effect
unless a stricter standard is provided by said code.
6. The electrical code for the maintenance of existing buildings shall be the ICC 2006 international property maintenance code, or its successor, as
adopted and amended by the village; however, all amendments enumerated in this chapter shall remain in full force and effect unless a stricter
standard is provided by said code. (1965 Code § 7-3-2; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Technical Amendments:
1. All electrical grounding in new buildings and remodeling shall be attached to the street side of the water meter. If this is not possible, the system shall
be grounded as directed by the electrical inspector. A bonding jumper shall be provided across the meter.
2. An automatic smoke detection system, wired into the building electrical system, with battery backup, shall be installed in all new buildings and major
remodeling work. The technical sections of the Chicago electrical code 2000 and NFPA life safety code 101 shall apply with regard to the type and
installation of same.
3. All electrical conductors for new or upgraded systems must be copper wire.
4. A meter shall not be provided to a new electrical service unless same is approved and reported to the electrical utility company by the building
director or his designee.
5. A minimum one hundred (100) amp service with a minimum twenty (20) circuit positions is required for a new dwelling service. Dwellings in excess
of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, excluding basements, must be equipped with a two hundred (200) amp service with a minimum
thirty (30) circuit positions.
6. Approved telecommunications and fire alarm wire shall not be required to be installed in pipe. Such installations shall otherwise be safely and
securely mounted in a workmanlike condition. Unprotected fire alarm wire shall be rated in accordance with the assembly provided. (1965 Code § 7-
3-6)
12-5-3: PERMITS TO CONTRACTORS AND PROPERTY OWNERS:
An electrical permit may only be obtained by an individual or individuals licensed by the village to perform such work. A property owner may obtain an
electrical permit, provided it is for work to be done at a single-family dwelling owned and occupied by the permit applicant as his or her primary residence.
The building director shall have the authority to deny or revoke a homeowner permit if it is determined that the owner lacks the requisite knowledge or
ability to perform the work in question, the owner is utilizing unlicensed contractors to perform such work, work is concealed prior to inspection approval,
final inspection approval is not obtained or violations are not corrected as required. The building director shall also have the authority to require a bond and
insurance from a homeowner permit applicant for all service upgrades, new dwellings and additions thereto in an amount not to exceed that which is
required by ordinance for electrical contractors1. (1965 Code § 7-3-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 209/307
12-5-4: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS:
A. License Required: All persons, companies or other entities performing electrical work in the village, other than an owner/occupant of a single-family
dwelling, must be licensed by the village prior to performing such work, in accordance with section 4-1-3 of this code.
B. Qualifications Of Licensee: A person, company or other entity who is licensed in good standing as an electrical contractor or supervising electrician by
an approved testing municipality shall qualify for licensure in the village, provided a copy of the other jurisdiction's license and village application form
shall be provided to the building department. The limitations and standards of the testing jurisdiction license shall apply. The building director shall have
the authority to investigate and, for reasonable cause, decline to accept a license from another jurisdiction.
C. Bond And Insurance Required: All licensees must also be bonded and insured as provided for in section 4-1-3 of this code.
D. Restrictions On Use Of License; Licensee To Be Present On Work Site: A licensee shall not in any manner allow his license to be utilized to obtain
permits or cover work to be done by others. All work shall be done under the operational supervision of the licensee. The licensee shall be present on
the job site for all required inspections.
E. Suspension Of License: A license may be suspended by the building director pending a suspension or revocation hearing by the village president or
revoked for offenses including, but not limited to:
1. Fraudulent or misleading information with regard to license documents or applications.
2. Suspension or revocation of a license from the testing jurisdiction.
3. Violations of this chapter.
4. Failure to pay fees or correct violations as required.
5. Failure to obtain a required inspection.
6. Failure to comply with state law regarding consumer fraud and/or home repairs.
7. Failure to have the required bond or insurance.
8. Performing work in such a manner so as to cause a significant threat to the health, safety and welfare of others.
9. For other just cause. (1965 Code § 7-3-4)
12-5-5: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING DWELLINGS:
In addition to other requirements as may be promulgated by the ICC 2006 international property maintenance code, as adopted and amended by the
village, and the international 2006 residential code, as adopted and amended by the village, the following regulations shall, in addition to minimum
requirements proscribed by said codes, be minimum electrical requirements for existing dwelling units: (1965 Code § 7-3-4; amd. 2009 Code)
A. Minimum one hundred (100) amp service.
B. All bathroom electrical receptacles shall be GFCI protected.
C. All electrical receptacles within six feet (6') of a water source shall be GFCI protected.
D. All garage and outdoor receptacles shall be GFCI protected.
E. All habitable rooms and stairways shall have an easily accessible, wall mounted switch at an entry point on each level, which shall control at least one
electrical receptacle or light fixture within the room.
F. All electrical receptacles shall be three (3) prong, grounded type.
G. All knob and tube wiring shall be replaced or terminated, unless, in the opinion of the building director, such wiring is in safe and proper operating
condition and has not been altered, modified or nonmaintained from its required and allowed installation.
H. All fuses shall be type S.
I. All circuits shall be labeled within the service panel.
J. All bedrooms shall have a minimum of two (2) duplex electrical receptacles, equally spaced within the room.
K. All other living and dining rooms shall have a minimum of one duplex electrical receptacle per wall.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 210/307
L. All bathrooms shall have a minimum of one duplex receptacle.
M. All electrical boxes, outlets, switches and panels shall have proper cover plates.
N. All electrical wiring shall be in approved pipe. BX armored cable that was properly installed prior to the effective date hereof is adequately secured and
does not pose a threat to health, safety or welfare shall be allowed to remain.
O. Extension cords shall not be utilized other than for short term, temporary use. (1965 Code § 7-3-4)
Footnote 1: See section 4-1-3 of this code.
Chapter 6
PLUMBING CODE AND REGULATIONS
12-6-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the village code enforcement officer, being marked and designated as Illinois plumbing code
(current edition), as published by the state of Illinois department of public health, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the village for the control of
plumbing as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said Illinois plumbing code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part of hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as prescribed in other sections of
this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-4-1; amd. 2009 Code)
12-6-2: PLUMBING STANDARDS:
A. Existing Buildings: The standard for existing buildings shall be the ICC 2006 international property maintenance code and the state plumbing code,
current version. (1965 Code § 7-4-3; amd. 2009 Code)
B. New Construction: The plumbing standard for the construction of one- and two-family dwellings shall be the ICC 2006 international residential code,
except where a stricter standard is provided by the state plumbing code. (1965 Code § 7-4-5; amd. 2009 Code)
12-6-3: PLUMBING MATERIALS:
The village building director, upon recommendation by the plumbing inspector, may approve or deny the use of certain plumbing materials, provided such
standard is stricter than any standard established by the state of Illinois, and such standard is based upon reasonable cause. (1965 Code § 7-4-3)
12-6-4: GROUND WATER AS POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED1:
A. Definitions:
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes or preparing foods.
B. Prohibition: The use or attempt to use as a potable water supply ground water from within the corporate limits of the village by the installation or drilling
of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, including withdrawal by the village. (1965 Code § 7-4-2)
12-6-5: INSPECTIONS:
Except where prohibited by the state, the building director may authorize members of the village public works department to inspect sewer installations
and connections six feet (6') or more beyond the structure to which the waste line is connected. (1965 Code § 7-4-6)
Footnote 1: See section 11-2-9 of this code for permitted uses of nonpotable water.
Chapter 7
MECHANICAL CODE
12-7-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 211/307
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the village building director, being marked and designated as the international mechanical
code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted as the mechanical code of the village for the control of heating,
ventilation and air conditioning of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, and conditions and terms of
said ICC code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes as outlined in section 12-7-2 of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-19-1; amd. 2009 Code)
12-7-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Section 101.1: Insert "The village of Lyons, Illinois".
Section 103.1: Shall be amended to read as follows: "The building director shall be the executive official in charge of the regulation and enforcement of this
code and shall be known as the code enforcement officer."
Section 106.1: Shall be amended to read as follows: "Prior to the erection, installation, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, conversion or replacement
of a mechanical system, as regulated by this code, a permit must be obtained from the code enforcement officer."
Section 106.3: Shall be amended to read as follows: "A mechanical permit may only be issued to a homeowner for work to be conducted within the
homeowner's single-family dwelling, or a licensed mechanical contractor or engineer acting as the building owner's agent. The code enforcement officer is
authorized to review the qualifications of permit applicants and to deny permits for just cause."
Section 106.4.4: Delete section.
Section 106.5.2: Insert: "See fee schedule as provided for in subsection 12-2-15B of the Lyons village code."
Section 106.5.3: Delete in its entirety and insert following: "The code enforcement officer shall authorize the refunding of permit fees, upon written request
for same, as follows:
(1) The full amount of any fee erroneously collected.
(2) No more than fifty percent (50%) of a fee collected for which work was not started."
Section 108.4: Delete and substitute with following language: "Penalties shall be as established in section 12-1-5 of the village code."
Section 109.1: Shall be amended to change the number of days from twenty (20) to five (5) business days.
Section 109.2: Shall be deleted and the following substitute language inserted: "Section 109.2 Qualifications. The building board of appeals shall consist of
six (6) individuals, one from each of the following professions or disciplines:
(1) A registered architect or engineer.
(2) An electrical engineer or licensed electrical contractor.
(3) A plumbing engineer or licensed plumbing contractor.
(4) An HVAC engineer or licensed HVAC contractor.
(5) A licensed general contractor or municipal building inspector.
(6) A current building or trade inspector for another Illinois jurisdiction.
Each of the above members shall have no less than three (3) years' experience in their respective disciplines. No member shall be a current inspector for
the village of Lyons. If a member of one or more of the above disciplines is not available for appointment to the board, members may be appointed from
the other listed disciplines."
Section 109.3: Shall be amended to read as follows: "The board shall meet upon notice from the code enforcement officer, within five (5) business days of
the filing of the appeal or at stated periodic meetings."
(1965 Code § 7-19-2; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 8
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
12-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the environment and the public health, safety and welfare and to prevent and control blight by establishing
regulations and enforcement procedures to the end that buildings and real estate within the village are maintained in a safe and sanitary condition, free of
health, fire and safety hazards. (1965 Code § 7-7-1)
12-8-2: SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 212/307
A. Except where otherwise specified hereinafter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings and real estate located within the village and shall
apply in addition to all other village ordinances. (1965 Code § 7-7-2)
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of real estate or any other owner or operator of a building to fail, refuse or neglect to maintain such real estate or
building in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-7-4)
12-8-3: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The ICC 2006 international property maintenance code is hereby adopted, as amended, as the maintenance standard for all existing structures within the
village, except where superseded by a stricter maintenance standard adopted by the village. The requirements of the code shall not allow a structure to be
maintained at less than the standard required by the construction codes for the construction of the structure and/or its systems. (1965 Code § 7-7-3; amd.
2009 Code)
12-8-4: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
All references to the international existing building code shall be amended to designate the building codes as amended and adopted by the village, and as
may apply.
All references to the international zoning code shall be amended to designate the village zoning ordinance.
101.1: Insert "The village of Lyons" where the name of jurisdiction is required.
Section 102.7: The last sentence shall be amended to provide that "...the stricter standard shall apply".
Section 103.1: Shall be amended to provide that the building department for the village shall be the department of property maintenance inspection for
purposes of this code.
Section 103.5: Insert: "Fee schedule contained in title 12 of the Lyons village code."
Section 104.3: Shall be amended to strike the word "shall" and substitute the word "may".
Section 105.1: Shall be amended to add the following sentence: "Modifications shall only be granted where there is a significant and documented hardship
that is not solely financial in nature."
Section 106.3: Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 107.3: Shall have the following sentence added: "For purposes of service, notice may be mailed to the taxpayer of record, as contained in the
records of the Cook County or Lyons Township assessor."
Section 107.5: Shall be deleted and the following language added: "The code enforcement officer may allow the transfer of property with minor violations
of this code, provided, such transfer shall be with the written acceptance of the purchaser, and, shall be accompanied by such performance bond and
reasonable conditions and deadlines as determined reasonable by the code enforcement officer."
Section 108.3: Shall be amended to add the following sentence: "In instances where the code enforcement officer is denied permission to access the
property or equipment, the requirement for posting is hereby waived."
Section 109.1: Shall be amended to add the following sentence: "The code enforcement officer may make such rules as he determines reasonable for
access to the structure while it is in imminent danger as depicted in this section, including but not limited to, hours of permitted access, persons or entities
permitted to access the structure, and, exclusion of activities."
Section 111.1: Shall be deleted in its entirety and the following sentence added: "Due Process. Any person or entity charged with a violation of this code
may, upon conviction by a court or code hearing officer of competent jurisdiction, appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. Such appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by
law following receipt of notice of violation."
(1965 Code § 7-7-6)
Sections 111.2 through 111.6: Shall be deleted.
Section 201.3: Shall be amended to substitute "the village of Lyons zoning ordinance" for the "international zoning code, substitute "the state of Illinois
plumbing code", for the "international plumbing code", substitute the "2000 Chicago electrical code and the "2006 ICC international residential code" for
the "ICC electrical code" and delete the "international existing building code".
(1965 Code § 7-7-6; amd. 2009 Code)
Section 302.1: Shall have the following sentences added: "Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the
jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon vacant property in violation to remove junk, rubbish, debris, organic and
inorganic material and outdoor accumulations of salvageable or nonsalvageable items so as to eliminate blighting, nuisance and/or hazardous conditions.
The cost of such removal shall be invoiced to the property owner, and, all unpaid invoices shall be placed as a lien against the property."
Section 302.1: Shall further be amended to add the following sentence: "In addition to the general requirements of this section, no owner or occupant of a
building or real estate shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, plastic or any other materials or goods in such a
manner that such accumulation or storage thereof may provide a blighting influence, rat harborage or fire hazard."
Section 302.2: Shall have the following language added to the end of the last sentence, "..., or, drainage to any other property that creates flooding or
other nuisance or hazardous conditions."
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 213/307
Section 302.4: Insert "8 inches in height" where code requires insertion.
Section 302.8: Shall be amended to substitute following language for "Exception": "A vehicle is permitted to undergo repairs, as permitted by the Lyons
zoning ordinance, provided such repairs and the storage of such vehicle is conducted in an approved, enclosed accessory structure designed, permitted
and constructed for such purposes."
Section 304.3: Shall have the following sentence added: "Such address numbers shall also be posted on the wall of any garage facing an open alley, and,
such number shall be plainly visible."
Section 501.3: Add new section stating: "The absence of hot and cold running water shall be prima facie cause for declaring a structure unsafe for human
habitation."
Sections 602.3 and 602.5: Insert dates "from September 30 to May 1" and add following sentence to both sections: "Such minimum heat shall also be
provided whenever the outside temperature, as recorded by the code enforcment officer utilizing a thermometer in the immediate vicinity of the subject
structure, falls below sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F)."
Section 604: Replace all references to the international electrical code with: "The Chicago electrical code and the international residential code, as
amended and adopted by the village of Lyons."
Section 604.2: Substitute "60 amperes" with "100 amperes".
Section 701.3: Amend section 701.3 substituting the "international fire code" with the "NFPA life safety code and fire prevention code, as amended and
adopted by the village of Lyons".
(1965 Code § 7-7-6)
12-8-5: GENERAL MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
In addition to the specific standards contained within the ICC international property maintenance code, the following general standards shall apply:
A. All buildings and real estate shall be maintained in good repair, and each part of a building shall perform the function for which such part was designed
or intended to be used.
B. Facilities, utilities and equipment, including, but not limited to, chimneys and heating and ventilating equipment and facilities, which are part of or used in
or on a building and the real estate on which such building is located shall be maintained in good repair and working order so that they function safely
and effectively without threat to health and safety. (1965 Code § 7-7-5)
12-8-6: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OPERATORS OF HOTELS AND MOTELS:
A. General Responsibilities: Every owner or operator of a hotel shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Additional Responsibilities: The owner or operator of every hotel or motel shall be responsible for the following:
1. The sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and for the maintenance of a sanitary condition in every part of the hotel and motel.
2. The extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests wherever found in the hotel or motel.
3. The sanitary maintenance and extermination of the premises and any and all accessory structures, swimming pools, signs and similar items.
4. The disposal of all garbage and rubbish by supplying each rooming unit with facilities for storage and disposal of garbage and rubbish and by
providing for the general garbage and rubbish storage, disposal and collection needs of the hotel or motel in accordance with the requirements of this
code relating to garbage disposal1. (1965 Code § 7-7-7)
12-8-7: NUMBERING BUILDINGS:
It is the duty of all homeowners and business owners or their agent to number their buildings on the front and the back. Numerals placed on buildings,
including garages and accessory structures, shall be at least two inches (2") high, in contrasting color with the structure and placed so they can be easily
read from the sidewalk in front of the building and the alley in the rear of the building. (1965 Code § 7-7-17)
12-8-8: NONCOMPLIANCE; PENALTIES:
If any alleged violation of which notice has been given is not corrected or eliminated within the time specified in such notice, then:
A. The responsible owner, operator or occupant shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each day such violation exists after expiration of the time specified for correction in the notice given; and (1965 Code § 7-7-23)
B. The building or portion thereof where the violation was found shall be subject to designation as unfit for the use intended in accordance with the
procedures set forth in chapter 9 of this title. (1965 Code § 7-7-23; amd. 2009 Code)
Footnote 1: See title 5, chapter 5 of this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 214/307
Chapter 9
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
12-9-1: DEFINITION:
The term "dangerous building", as used in this chapter, is hereby defined to mean and include:
A. Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which is dangerous to the public health because of its construction or condition or which may
cause or aid in the spread of disease or cause injury to the health of the occupants of it or of neighboring structures.
B. Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which, because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is especially
liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
C. Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which, by reason of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is liable to
cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of such a structure.
D. Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of its condition or because of lack of doors or windows, is available to and
frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of such structure. (1965 Code § 7-5-1)
12-9-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any "dangerous building", as defined in section 12-9-1 of this chapter, in the village is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful to maintain or
permit the existence of any dangerous building in the village, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in custody of any dangerous
building to permit the same to remain in a dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied while it is or remains in a dangerous
condition. (1965 Code § 7-5-2)
12-9-3: NOTICE AND ABATEMENT1:
A. Owner Known: If the person receiving a notice has not complied therewith within fifteen (15) days from the time when the notice is served upon such
person by personal service or by registered mail, the village may, upon order of the village manager, proceed to remedy the condition by filing a
demolition action in the circuit court. (1965 Code § 7-5-3)
B. Owner Unknown: If the owner of the premises concerned is unknown, or if his address is unknown, service of any notice provided for in this chapter
may be made by posting a copy thereof on the premises and by publishing, one time, a copy thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village. (1965 Code § 7-5-5; amd. 2009 Code)
12-9-4: REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS IN FIRE LIMITS:
Any building or structure within the fire limits of the village which has or may be damaged by fire, decay or other cause to the extent of fifty percent (50%)
of its value shall be torn down and removed. (1965 Code § 7-5-4; amd. 2009 Code)
12-9-5: ALTERNATIVE ACTION:
In addition to the actions authorized by other sections of this chapter, the chief of the fire department or any other municipal official whose duty it is to
investigate fires may make the investigations authorized by Illinois Compiled Statutes. If such officer shall find that any building or structure is so occupied
or situated as to endanger persons or property, or by reasons of faulty construction, age, lack of repair or for any other cause, is especially liable to fire, or
is liable to cause injury by collapsing or otherwise, he shall order the dangerous condition removed or remedied, and shall so notify the owner or occupant
of the premises. Service of such notice may be in person or by registered mail, and any person so notified may appeal from the decision of such officer in
the manner provided by law. (1965 Code § 7-5-6; amd. 2009 Code)
12-9-6: COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTES:
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all state statutes shall be complied with in regard to the abatement of dangerous buildings. (1965 Code § 7-
5-7)
Footnote 1: See also section 12-4-2 of this title, amendment to section 115.6.
Chapter 10
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 215/307
12-10-1: BOND; HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT:
A. Bond Requirements2: Bonds shall comply with the laws of the state of Illinois. If the demolition is not completed in accordance with village ordinances,
the village shall give notice to the applicant stating the action(s) required to comply with village ordinances, and if the applicant fails to take the action
stated, the village shall have the right to utilize said bond, or any portion thereof, to satisfactorily complete the demolition. (1965 Code § 7-13-4; amd.
2009 Code)
B. Hold Harmless Agreement: Each applicant for a building or wrecking permit shall, before receiving a permit, file with the building department a hold
harmless agreement. (1965 Code § 7-13-6)
C. Refund Of Deposits: The deposits made pursuant to subsections A and B of this section shall be refunded to the permittee upon return of the cash
deposit receipt and when compliance with the village codes and ordinances is complete and all streets, alleys, sidewalks or parkways have been
restored to their original condition to the satisfaction of the building director. If the contractor fails to finish any cleanup of the village, after due notice,
the village shall take such action as is necessary to complete necessary repairs and/or cleanup. The refund shall be reduced by the amount of final
repairs to the street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, trees or other village property. (1965 Code § 7-13-5)
12-10-2: UTILITY SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
Prior to a permit being issued for the demolition of structures, the permit applicant shall cause the electrical and gas utility companies to perform a service
disconnect and provide written proof of same from the utility company that connection has been safely and properly retired. Such documentation shall be
submitted to the building department with the permit application. Further, the permit applicant shall cause a final water reading and payment of same to
occur; after which, the village water department shall provide a water service disconnect and remove the water meter. Proof of final water payment and
water service disconnect shall also accompany the permit application. Upon demolition of the building, all sewer connections to the property must be
vacated and plugged at the water main in a manner acceptable to the village building department, and all work shall be inspected prior to backfill. The
street, sidewalk and parkway must be restored and opening fees paid where applicable. (1965 Code § 7-13-1)
12-10-3: NOTICE TO ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS:
Only when written notice by certified mail has been given by the applicant to the owners of adjoining lots and to the owners of wired or other facilities, of
which the temporary removal is necessitated by the proposed work, shall a permit be granted for the removal of a building or structure. (1965 Code § 7-13-
2)
12-10-4: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
A. The contractor shall exercise proper precaution at all times for the protection of persons and property and shall be responsible for all damages to
persons or property, either on or off the site, which occur as a result of his prosecution of the work.
B. Public sidewalks shall be kept passable for pedestrian traffic at all times. If it is necessary to partially block the street, barricades shall be placed and
warning lights shall be activated at night, and the director of public works shall be notified. Approved fencing shall be used to screen and secure the
construction site, at the discretion of the building department and/or public works department.
C. The contractor shall adhere to all applicable regulations of all federal, state and local environmental agencies having jurisdiction in the village. Care
shall be taken to prevent the spread of dust or flying particles. After work is started on any building, the work on the building shall be continued to
completion promptly and expeditiously. (1965 Code § 7-13-9)
12-10-5: RESTORATION OF DEMOLITION SITE:
A. All foundation walls, footings, concrete floors, and other concrete in areas below grade must be removed. All demolition debris, including, but not limited
to, bricks, concrete, wood and metal shall be removed, and all voids resulting from the above removal shall be filled immediately to at least the existing
grade with organic material or granular materials in accordance with the "State Of Illinois Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
The area must then be graded for proper drain off. The land must be restored as close as possible to its original stage. The final top layer of fill shall
contain adequate topsoil to sustain grass and be seeded in a professional manner. (1965 Code § 7-13-3)
B. The contractor, his representative or employees shall not burn or cause to be burned, within the site of the work, any paper, wood or other combustible
refuse, waste or other material resulting from wrecking or other operations, or bury or cause to have buried any such items. (1965 Code § 7-13-10)
Footnote 1: See section 12-2-20 of this title for permit requirements.
Footnote 2: See subsection 12-2-24B of this title for bond amounts.
Chapter 11
SIGNS
12-11-1: PURPOSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 216/307
The purposes of this chapter are:
A. To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the village;
B. To maintain and enhance the aesthetics of development and the village ability to attract sources of economic development and growth;
C. To improve pedestrian and traffic safety;
D. To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and
E. To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-9-1)
12-11-2: APPLICATION, EFFECT AND INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted created or maintained in the village only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemption
and other requirements of this chapter.
B. The effect of this chapter, as more specifically set forth herein, is:
1. To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones and a limited variety of signs in residential zones,
subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this chapter;
2. To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the
substantive requirements of this chapter, but without the requirements for a permit;
3. To provide for small temporary signs without commercial messages in limited circumstances in the public right of way;
4. To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter;
5. To establish a reasonable fee; and
6. To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-9-2)
C. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other village ordinances or
state laws, the highest and most restrictive standard shall apply. (1965 Code § 7-9-33)
12-11-3: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in
other ordinances of the village, shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinances. Principles for computing sign heights are contained in section 12-
11-14 of this chapter. All other words and phases shall be given their common, ordinary meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Chapter
and section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this chapter. For the purposes of this
chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a pole or a building at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal
flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered "banners".
BEACON: A stationary or revolving light which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multicolored, in any manner which is intended to attract or
divert attention; except, however, this term is not intended to include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under the safety regulations
described by the federal aviation administration or similar agencies.
BUILDING DIRECTOR: An agent of the village authorized to permit, inspect, approve or deny construction within the city and the authorized government
representative on sign issues.
BUILDING MARKER: Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a
masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
BUILDING SIGN: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign.
BULLETIN BOARD: Any sign erected by a charitable, educational or religious institution or a public body, which is erected upon the same property as said
institution, for the purposes of announcing events which are held on the premises, and contains no commercial message.
CANOPY SIGN: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a "canopy".
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN/READER BOARD: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without
altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight (8) times per day shall be considered an animated sign
and not a "changeable copy sign" for purposes of this chapter. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 217/307
or temperature shall be considered a time and temperature portion of a sign and not a "changeable copy sign" for purposes of this chapter.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any sign wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service, sale or sales event or other commercial activity.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign of noncommercial nature which directs the reader to the location of public or educational institutions, or to the location of
historical structures or areas, or to the location of public parks or buildings.
DISPLAY SURFACE AREA: The net geometric area enclosed by the display surface of the sign including the outer extremities of all letters, characters and
delineations; provided, however, "display surface area" shall not include the structural supports for freestanding signs.
DISTRICT OR ZONING DISTRICT: A section or sections of the incorporated area of the village which the then effective zoning ordinance governing the
use of buildings and land are uniform for each class of use permitted therein.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and shall also include the painting of wall signs.
FESTOON LIGHTING: A group of two (2) or more incandescent lightbulbs hung or strung overhead, not on a building or structure, which are exposed to
persons on a public right of way, or which are not shaded or hooded to prevent the direct rays of light from being visible from the property line.
FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols.
FLASHING SIGN: An illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when
in use.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign which is attached to or a part of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or
below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure, whether portable or stationary.
GARAGE/YARD SALE SIGN: The sign for a private sale of personal property used to dispose of personal household possessions and not for the use of
any commercial venture.
IDENTIFICATION AND INFORMATIONAL SIGN: Signs of an identification or of an informational nature bearing no advertising.
ILLUMINATED, DIRECT: Illumination which is so arranged that the light is directed into the eyes of the viewer from the light source.
ILLUMINATED, INDIRECT: Illumination so arranged that the light is reflected from the sign to the eyes of the viewer.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tube, as long as light and
tubes are located within the interior of the sign, as part of the sign proper.
INCIDENTAL SIGN: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "No Parking",
"Entrance", "Loading Only", "Telephone", and similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the sign is
located shall be considered incidental.
JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign which serves as common or collective identification for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same
zone lot (e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.). Such sign may name the persons or businesses included but carry no other advertising matter.
LEASE: An agreement by which a property owner conveys, usually for a specified rent, to other persons, permission to erect and maintain an advertising
sign upon his property.
LOT: Any piece or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record, that is recognized and intended as a
unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership.
MALL: Any concentration of retail stores and/or service establishments which share customer parking areas and are located within an enclosure having
public walkways whereby a customer in one store or establishment may walk to another store or establishment without leaving the enclosure.
MANSARD ROOF: Any roof that has an angle greater than forty five degrees (45°) and which derives part of its support from the building wall and is
attached to (but not necessarily a part of) a low slope roof and which extends along the full length of the front wall. For purposes of this chapter, a "low
slope roof" shall mean any roof with a pitch of less than three inches (3") rise per twelve inches (12") horizontal.
MARQUEE: Any permanent roof like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally
designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign existing at the effective date hereof which could not be built under the terms of this chapter.
OFF SITE SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than
upon the same lot where such sign is displayed. The term "off site sign" shall include an outdoor advertising sign (billboard) on which space is leased or
rented by the owner thereof to others for the purpose of conveying a commercial or noncommercial message.
ON SITE SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered or existing on the same lot
where such sign is displayed, provided an "on site sign" may also display a noncommercial message.
OUTDOOR MENU BOARD: An outdoor sign, associated with restaurants with drive-through windows, which gives a detailed list of foods served that are
available at the restaurant.
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PERSON: Shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization, singular or plural, of any kind.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 218/307
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported including, but not
limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as
signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right of way, unless said vehicle is
used in the normal day to day operations of the business.
PORTABLE SWINGER SIGN AND A-FRAME OR SANDWICH SIGN: An advertising device which is ordinarily in the shape of an "A" or some variation
thereof, located on the ground, easily movable, not permanently attached thereto and which is usually two (2) sided.
PORTABLE TEMPORARY ATTRACTION SIGNBOARD: A single or double surface painted or poster panel type sign or some variation thereof, which is
temporary in nature, usually mounted on wheels, easily movable, not permanently attached thereto.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the zone lot on which it is located. Zone lots with multiple principal uses
may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered "principal buildings".
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign that shall be affixed at an angle or perpendicular to the wall of any building in such a manner to read perpendicular to or at
an angle to the wall on which it is mounted.
PUBLIC EVENT: Any event that is authorized by the village, whether funded in part, total or not at all.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of said property.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or
services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering such service at such location conforms with all requirements of the village.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above
the highest portion of the roof.
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL: Any sign erected and constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no
part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of
more than six inches (6").
SETBACK: The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicular to the property
line.
SHOPPING CENTER: Two (2) or more retail stores and/or service establishments, or one retail store and one service establishment, sharing customer
parking areas, regardless of whether said stores and/or establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownership.
SIGN: Means and includes every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, logo, stroke, stripe, trademark, or reading
matter which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public; in
addition, any of the above which is not placed out of doors, but which is illuminated with artificial or reflected light; also, the above when near the inside
surface of a window in such a way as to be in view of the general public and used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information to
motorists.
SPOTLIGHT ILLUMINATION: Illumination which comes from lamps, lenses or devices designed to focus or concentrate the light rays of the source.
STREET FRONTAGE: The distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant
lot line intersecting the same street.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS: Strips of land or accessways subject to vehicular traffic and/or pedestrian traffic that provide direct or indirect access to
property, including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives, highways, lanes, places, roads, sidewalks, terraces, trails, or other
thoroughfares.
SUSPENDED SIGN: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted.
WALL SIGN: Any sign that shall be affixed parallel to the wall or printed on the wall of any building in such a manner as to read parallel to the wall on
which it is mounted; provided, however, said "wall sign" shall not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building. For the purpose of this
chapter, any sign display surface that is affixed flat against the sloping surface of a mansard roof shall be considered a "wall sign".
WINDOW PROMOTIONAL SIGN: Any sign painted on, affixed to or placed against any window, or which is placed in a display case for view from the
outdoors through a window when such sign is visible from any public right of way and which is displayed for the specific purpose of attracting the attention
of the passersby to a sale, or to promotional items, or to other products or services.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event,
sale or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window.
ZONE LOT: A parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that can
provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning regulations. (1965 Code §§ 7-9-3, 7-9-4; amd. 2009 Code)
12-11-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The village building director is charged with issuance of permits and enforcement of this chapter. His/her interpretation will be valid in areas of
interpretation, vagueness, etc. Areas of conflict may be addressed to the village board for ultimate resolution. (1965 Code § 7-9-5)
12-11-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 219/307
A. If a sign requiring a permit under the provision of this chapter is to be placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a zone lot, the owner of the lot shall
secure a sign permit prior to the construction, placement, or modification of such a sign. No signs shall be constructed in the public rights of way except
in accordance with this chapter. The following procedures shall govern the application for, and issuance of all sign permits under this chapter:
1. Applications: All applications for sign permits of any kind shall be submitted to the building director on an application form or in accordance with the
application specifications with the following minimum information:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
b. Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected.
c. Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including dimensional data.
d. Two (2) blueprints or ink drawings of the plans with color designation, specifications, method of construction and attachment to the building or in
the ground.
e. Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the structure.
f. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the sign or structure is to be erected.
g. If any electrical permit is required and issued for said sign, then an application requesting an electrical permit for the proposed sign must
accompany the sign permit application.
Note: Only the information in subsections A1a and A1b of this section is necessary for banners. (1965 Code § 7-9-26)
2. Fees: Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the applicable fees. The fees for sign permits and plans shall be as follows: (1965
Code § 7-9-26; amd. 2009 Code)
Sign permit, initial,
including inspection
$50.00, plus $0.50 per square foot
Revised sign permit 20.00, plus $0.25 per square foot
3. Action: Upon review of the submission of a complete application for a sign permit, the building director shall either:
a. Issue the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application conforms in every respect with the requirements of this chapter.
b. Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this chapter. In case of
a rejection, the building director shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of this chapter with which the sign is inconsistent. (1965 Code
§ 7-9-25)
B. Signs shall be erected, installed, or created only in accordance with a duly issued and valid sign construction permit from the building director. Such
permit shall be issued only in accordance with the following requirements and procedures:
1. An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by information
detailed in subsection A of this section. One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same zone lot.
2. If the sign construction is not substantially complete within six (6) months of the issuance of a permit, the permit shall lapse and become void. If the
sign construction is complete and in full compliance with this chapter and with the building and electrical codes, the building director shall issue an
inspection approval. If the sign construction is substantially complete but not in full compliance with this chapter and applicable codes, the building
director shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional thirty (30) days from the date of inspection for the
deficiencies to be corrected. In addition, a reinspection fee will be charged. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse.
(1965 Code § 7-9-26)
C. All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this chapter are mere licenses, revocable at any time by the village board, and all such permits
shall contain this provision. (1965 Code § 7-9-29)
12-11-6: EXEMPT SIGNS; COMMERCIAL MESSAGES PROHIBITED:
A. The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter: (2009 Code)
1. Flags; provided, that such a flag shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area in any residential zone or sixty (60) square feet in area in any
commercial or industrial zone and shall not be flown from a pole, the top of which is more than twenty five feet (25') in height in any residential zone
or forty feet (40') in height in any commercial or industrial zone.
2. House or building identification, such as an address and any building marker, having no more than four (4) square feet and attached to the
referenced building.
3. Personal messages, such as the announcing of births, anniversaries, birthdays, etc., not to exceed twenty (20) square feet and for a duration no
longer than fourteen (14) days.
B. No commercial messages are allowed on any of the signs not requiring a permit. (1965 Code § 7-9-9)
12-11-7: SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 220/307
A. Directional And Information Signs: No signs, other than signs approved by the village board or its authorized representative, shall be erected on any
public property, provided directional signs may be erected upon village streets under the following conditions, once approval has been obtained:
1. The signs direct the reader to a public facility attended principally by out of town patrons, to a facility operated by a nonprofit entity and attended
principally by out of town patrons, to a facility relating to the public health, safety or welfare, to scenic or historic points of interest, or to general
business or commercial districts.
2. The signs are fabricated, erected and maintained by the entity requesting the sign.
3. The entire cost of the signs is borne by the entities requesting the signs.
4. The signs are installed at locations where they would not constitute a traffic hazard.
5. The maximum number of directional signs permitted under this subsection shall be five (5) for each entity, provided the limitation provided hereby
shall not apply to signs directing the reader to historic sites or designating historic places. (1965 Code § 7-9-8)
B. Forfeited Signs: Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, shall be forfeited to the
public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the village shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing
such sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign. (1965 Code § 7-9-11)
12-11-8: PROHIBITED SIGNS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Attraction Devices: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect additional attraction devices or signs, or to continue in operation attraction devices or
signs which flash, blink, or are animated. Illumination of attraction devices or signs located in the village that fluctuate in light intensity shall be
prohibited. (1965 Code § 7-9-10)
B. Wind Activated Devices: All wind activated devices designed to attract attention to a sign are prohibited. (1965 Code § 7-9-22)
C. Revolving, Rotating, Moving Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect additional attraction devices or signs or to continue in operation an
attraction device or sign which revolves, rotates, or otherwise moves. (1965 Code § 7-9-16)
D. Spotlights And Beacons: It shall be unlawful for any person to continue in operation or erect any attraction device or sign which contains a beacon of
any type and/or contains a spotlight providing direct illumination to the public. (1965 Code § 7-9-17)
E. Painting, Placement On Trees And Rocks: No signs shall be placed or painted on any tree or rock. (1965 Code § 7-9-19)
F. Placement On Poles Or Stop Signs: No signs shall be placed on any utility pole, light pole, telephone pole, stop sign, etc., except for utility identification
or similar purposes. (1965 Code § 7-9-20)
G. Signs Creating Traffic Hazards: No sign or other advertising structure, as regulated by this chapter, shall be erected or continued to be displayed at the
intersection of any street or any public right of way in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the
position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which makes use
of the words, "STOP", "LOOK", "DANGER", or any other word, phrase, symbol or character, in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse
traffic. (1965 Code § 7-9-18; amd. 2009 Code)
12-11-9: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Signs On Rights Of Way: No signs shall be allowed in the public right of way, except for permanent signs, including signs erected by a government
agency, a public utility company, not for profit civic organizations sanctioned by the village, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the
public right of way. (1965 Code § 7-9-14)
B. Construction Signs: All construction signs shall comply with regulations as established in subsection 12-11-12A of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-9-7)
C. Pennants: Pennants may be used to designate an open house on the day of such event only; and provided, that such event lasts only one day, and the
pennants are immediately removed. Also, pennants can be used to control ingress and egress to special events and areas under construction or repair,
access to which is restricted for purposes of public safety. Otherwise, pennants may not be used. (1965 Code § 7-9-13)
D. Vehicle Used As Sign: It shall be unlawful to use a vehicle or trailer as a sign in circumvention of this chapter except in the following manner:
1. That magnetic signs only may be allowed on the roof or the side of vehicles as long as no other structural support is added to the vehicle.
2. The primary purpose of such vehicle or equipment is not the display of signs.
3. The signs are painted upon or applied directly to an integral part of the vehicle or equipment.
4. The vehicle/equipment is in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets, when applicable, and actively used in
the daily function of the business to which such signs relate. (1965 Code § 7-9-21)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 221/307
5. The vehicle/equipment is not used primarily as a static display advertising a product or service; that is, the display is advertising only one product, is
on both sides of the vehicle, and which vehicle is not utilized as a storage, shelter or distribution point for commercial products or services for the
general public. (1965 Code § 7-9-21; amd. 2009 Code)
6. During a period of inactivity exceeding five (5) working days, such vehicle/equipment is not so parked or placed that the signs thereon are displayed
to the public. Vehicles and equipment engaged in active construction projects and the on premises storage of equipment and vehicles offered to the
general public for rent or cars shall not be subject to this condition. (1965 Code § 7-9-21)
12-11-10: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. On Site Nonconforming Signs: All on site nonconforming signs not otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this chapter shall be removed or shall be
altered to conform to the provisions of this chapter: 1) when the use conducted on the premises changes, and the sign is changed or modified either in
shape, size, or legend; or 2) when the name of the business changes, and the sign is changed or modified either in shape, size or legend.
B. Off Site Nonconforming Signs: Off site nonconforming signs shall be removed or shall be altered so as to conform with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Enlargement Or Alteration: A nonconforming sign may not be enlarged or altered in a way which would increase its nonconformity.
D. Damaged Signs: Should any nonconforming sign be damaged by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the
time of damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-9-12; amd. 2009 Code)
12-11-11: ABANDONED BUSINESSES; REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this section, the word "remove" shall mean:
1. The sign face, along with posts, columns, or supports of freestanding signs, shall be taken down and removed from the property. If a freestanding
sign is in good condition and is conforming, the sign may remain, provided the sign face panels are replaced with attractive, neutral panels that are
properly affixed to the sign structure as intended by the manufacturer.
2. The sign face and supporting structures of projecting, roof or wall signs shall be taken down and removed from the property.
3. The sign face of painted wall signs shall be removed by painting over the wall sign in such a manner as to completely cover up and hide from sight
the sign in question.
4. All window signs shall be cleaned from the glass.
B. Removal Required; Exemption: In the event a business ceases operation for a period of time in excess of ninety (90) days, the sign owner or lessee, or
the property owner, shall immediately remove any sign identifying or advertising said business or any product sold thereby; provided, however, this
requirement shall not apply where, under the provisions of this chapter, an existing conforming sign may be altered to advertise a new business or
product sold thereby, and there is evidence that a new business will be in operation on the premises within ninety (90) days.
C. Notice To Remove: Upon failure of the sign owner or lessee, or property owner, to comply with this section, the building director shall issue a written
notice to the sign owner and any lessee and to the property owner, which notice shall state that such sign shall be removed within ten (10) days.
D. Removal By Village; Costs: If the sign owner or lessee, or property owner, fails to comply with such written notice to remove, the building director is
hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incidental to such removal shall be charged to the owner of the property upon
which the sign is located and shall constitute a lien upon the property. (1965 Code § 7-9-15)
12-11-12: SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
No signage is allowed in residential zones except as follows and, for those services, only if properly allowed or legally offered on the premises. Exceptions
shall not be construed as relieving the owner of such signs from the responsibility of complying with certain applicable provisions of this chapter. The
exemptions shall apply to the requirement for sign permit only, and no sign permit shall be required for the erection of the following signs, unless otherwise
required:
A. Construction Signs: On site building construction signs shall have a total, combined maximum display surface area not to exceed sixteen (16) square
feet for residential lots and thirty two (32) square feet for commercial lots. These signs shall be attached to a single or double post or as a single
freestanding sign, as long as they are collectively grouped together. Only necessary signage and signage required by state, county or village law will be
allowed. This signage must be erected in an orderly manner. Lettering for street address shall be approximately three and one-half inches (31/2") tall.
All lettering on signs shall be neat and legible. Before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the builder/contractor shall be responsible for
removing all signs, except the builder sign, as indicated on the construction permit, but said sign shall be required to be removed upon closing of the
sale of the property.
B. Home Improvement Signs: On site home improvement signs may be placed in the yard where said improvements are being made. No sign shall be
placed on any tree or rock. Home improvement signs shall be freestanding signs not exceeding six (6) nonilluminated square feet and may be placed
during construction, but must be removed no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after construction is complete.
C. Banners: Banners shall be prohibited except when used in conjunction with public and private events as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 222/307
1. Election Campaigns: Election campaign banners, on private property only, when said banners are not placed more than thirty (30) days prior to and
removed within forty eight (48) hours following the election to which it applies.
2. Private Sales Or Parties: Sale or party banners shall be removed within forty eight (48) hours following the event to which the banner applied. Sale
banners can only have a duration of seven (7) days in any one calendar month. Party banners can only have a duration of fourteen (14) days in any
one calendar month.
3. Public Events: Public event banners shall be placed no earlier than thirty (30) days prior to and removed within forty eight (48) hours following the
event to which the banner applied. (1965 Code § 7-9-23; amd. 2009 Code)
D. Election Signs: Political signs are permitted to be placed on private property. Political signs may not be erected or placed on public property nor on
rocks, trees, public fences, signposts, light poles and utility poles. (Ord. 09-21-10-01, 9-21-2010)
E. Garage/Yard Sale Signs: The following regulations shall regulate and control garage/yard sale signs:
1. Frequency Of Sales: No individual lot shall be allowed more than two (2) 2-day garage/yard sales in a single calendar year.
2. Location Of Sign: Only one sign per sale may be placed in any intersection under the following conditions:
a. No garage/yard sale sign shall be placed, affixed, stapled, glued, or taped to any utility pole, street sign, tree, stop sign or fence.
b. No garage/yard sale sign shall be placed in any public right of way in a manner as to interfere with traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, or
interfere with any residential, commercial or industrial property.
3. Size And Type: All signs shall be no larger than eight (8) square feet, placed on a single or double stake or other freestanding manner.
4. Time For Placement And Removal: No garage/yard sale signs shall be placed on public property any earlier than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. the night
before and must be picked up by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the day following the garage/yard sale.
5. Estate Sales Or Court Ordered Sales: Signs for estate sales or court ordered sales shall be regulated as set out in this subsection. (Ord. 08-19-08-
01, 8-19-2008)
F. Illuminated Signs: No sign in a residential zone shall be illuminated except for address numbers.
G. Real Estate Signs: On a lot, there may be placed one unanimated real estate sign, provided such signs shall be limited to wall and freestanding signs
whose permitted illumination and maximum display surface is as follows:
1. Nonresidential: Thirty two (32) nonilluminated square feet.
2. Residential: Eight (8) nonilluminated square feet.
3. Sold signs: Such signs of a size not greater than twenty five percent (25%) of the sign on which it is placed may be placed at a rate of one per lot. All
real estate signs shall be removed from said lot within thirty (30) days of said sale or within thirty (30) days after the sold sign has been placed.
4. Temporary open house signs: Such signs, of a size not greater than six (6) nonilluminated square feet, may be placed at a rate of one per company
per intersection, for a period from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on the day of the open house only; provided, that there shall
be only one route designated by signs to a particular open house. No more than four (4) directional open house signs may be placed within the
village limits for any one open house on any one day. Failure to remove signs within the prescribed time period will cause a fine to be levied at a rate
of fifty dollars ($50.00) per sign left remaining.
H. Exempt Signs: The following signs are exempt from regulation under this section:
1. Accessory Signs On Vehicles And Trailers: Signs affixed to vehicles and trailers where the sign is incidental and accessory to the primary use of the
vehicle or trailer.
2. Art: Works of art that do not include a commercial message.
3. Awning, Canopy And Marquee Signs: Signs, not exceeding an aggregate gross surface display area of four (4) square feet, indicating only the name
of the activity conducted on the premises on which the sign is to be located and/or a brief generic description of the business being conducted by the
activity. Advertising material of any kind is strictly prohibited. Awnings and marquees shall have a headroom of not less than eight feet (8').
4. Holiday Lights, Signs And Decorations: Holiday lights, signs and decorations temporarily displayed on traditionally accepted civic, patriotic or
religious holidays with no commercial message.
5. Inside Signs: Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is not legible from a distance of more than three feet (3') beyond the
lot line on which such sign is located.
6. Memorial Signs: Memorial plaques or tablets, grave markers, statuary or other remembrances of persons or events that are noncommercial in
nature.
7. Name And Address Plates: Signs, not exceeding two (2) square feet in gross surface display area for each exposed face nor exceeding an
aggregate gross surface area of four (4) square feet, indicating the name of the occupant, the address of the premises, and identification of any legal
business or operation which may exist on the premises.
8. No Trespassing, No Dumping, No Parking, Towing, Etc., Signs: No trespassing, no dumping, no parking, towing and other similar signs (as set forth
by the current regulations of the Illinois commerce commission), not exceeding two (2) square feet in gross surface display area for each exposed
face, nor exceeding an aggregate gross surface display area of four (4) square feet, and not exceeding two (2) in number per zoning lot in residential
areas and not exceeding four (4) square feet in gross surface display area for each exposed face, nor exceeding an aggregate gross surface display
area of eight (8) square feet, and not exceeding four (4) in number per zone lot in nonresidential areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 223/307
9. Public Notice Or Warning Signs: Public notice or warning signs required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or
ordinance.
10. Symbols Or Insignia: Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of recognized historical agencies, or identification emblems of religious orders or
historical agencies, not exceeding two (2) square feet in gross surface display area for each exposed face, not exceeding four (4) square feet in
gross surface display area.
11. Traffic Control Signs On Private Property: Traffic control signs on private property such as stop, yield, and similar signs, the face of which meets
department of transportation standards and which signs contain no commercial message of any sort.
12. Vending Machine Signs: Permanent, nonflashing signs on vending machines, ice or milk containers or other similar machines indicating only the
contents of such devices, the pricing of the contents contained within, directional or instructional information as to use, and other similar information,
not exceeding four (4) square feet in gross surface display area for each exposed face, nor exceeding an aggregate gross surface display area of
eight (8) square feet.
13. Warning Signs: Signs warning the public of the existence of danger, but containing no advertising material, to be removed within three (3) days
upon the subsidence of danger. Such warning signs may be of any type, number, area, height, location, or illumination as deemed necessary to warn
the public of the existence of danger. (1965 Code § 7-9-23; amd. 2009 Code)
12-11-13: SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL ZONES1:
No signage is allowed in commercially zoned areas except as follows and which are for those services only if properly allowed and legally offered on the
premises. However, a permit is required as explained in section 12-11-5 of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-9-24)
A. Prohibited Signs:
1. Advertising Benches2: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, locate or maintain any bench or seat used in whole or in part for the purpose
of advertising or for the use as a commercial signboard or billboard (hereinafter collectively referred to as "advertising benches") located in or on any
public sidewalk or other public land or property owned by the village. Bus stops, as authorized by the village, shall be exempt from this provision.
2. Signs Advertising Products: Permanently affixed signs or painted wall signs for the sole purpose of advertising a product are prohibited.
3. Billboards: All billboards (outdoor advertising poster panels) are prohibited3.
4. Projecting Signs: It shall be unlawful to erect any projecting sign that extends from the wall of a building upon which it is erected.
5. Roof Signs: Roof signs shall not be permitted. (1965 Code § 7-9-24; amd. Ord. 07-21-09-01, 7-21-2009)
B. Awning Or Canopy Signs:
1. An "awning or canopy sign" is any sign painted on or applied to the surface of an awning or canopy.
2. The maximum height from the bottom of the sign to the top will be five (5) linear feet.
3. The maximum surface display area of the sign will be one hundred (100) square feet.
4. There shall be established a minimum of eight feet (8') of clearance from ground level to the lowest element of the awning or canopy.
5. Neither the body of the awning or canopy nor its supports shall be allowed to project more than five feet (5') from the wall of any building; however, in
no case shall such projection be permitted to infringe on any adjacent lot, parcel or tract.
6. Lettering, characters, symbols, numbers, trademarks and the like appearing on the body or apron of an awning or canopy shall not exceed eighteen
inches (18") in height.
7. The top of any awning or canopy, including its structural elements, shall be no higher than the height of the building or fifteen feet (15') above grade,
whichever is lower.
C. Barber Poles: Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit or restrict on premises barber poles. (1965 Code § 7-9-24)
D. Building Markers: Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze
or other incombustible materials shall be permitted. Signs less than four (4) square feet require no permit. Maximum size allowed is eight (8) square
feet. (1965 Code § 7-9-24; amd. 2009 Code)
E. Bulletin Boards; Freestanding Signs: A freestanding bulletin board shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the street right of way. No
freestanding bulletin board shall exceed twenty (20) square feet in display surface area. (1965 Code § 7-9-24)
F. Collection Boxes For Charitable Or Nonprofit Organizations: Collection boxes for charitable or nonprofit organizations containing no commercial
advertising and located on private nonresidential property shall be permitted. However, collection boxes must be maintained in a safe, healthy and
reasonable manner. These are allowed without a permit.
G. Directional, Identification And Informational Signs: Directional, identification and information signs shall be permitted, provided such signs shall be
limited to wall or freestanding signs with a maximum of six (6) square feet of display surface area. One informational sign shall be permitted at each
entrance or exit on a lot or parcel to identify said entrance or exit, provided such sign does not constitute a traffic hazard. (1965 Code § 7-9-24; amd.
2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 224/307
H. Festoon Lighting: Festoon lighting is prohibited in all zoning districts except for the following:
1. Permitted for special community and civic events as well as special anniversary, birthday, etc., or other parties held by a business or resident.
2. For special sales promotions outside, such as pumpkin or Christmas tree sales.
I. Freestanding Signs: It shall be unlawful to erect any freestanding sign which total height is greater than twenty feet (20') above the level of the street
upon which the sign faces. Freestanding signs shall be permitted to be erected in the city, subject to the following:
1. Off site freestanding signs are prohibited.
2. On site freestanding signs are subject to the following:
a. Only one on site freestanding sign shall be permitted on a lot, except when the business, multiple use building or shopping center has more than
four hundred (400) linear feet of frontage, then two (2) freestanding signs may be used.
b. Permitted sign display surface shall be computed as follows:
(1) Seventy five percent (75%) (3/4) of a square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage, with a minimum surface display area on the sign of twenty
(20) square feet and not to exceed the maximum surface display area of one hundred (100) square feet.
(2) Sign shall be permitted in front yards only. No freestanding business sign may be erected on, over, or within five feet (5') of any public right of
way. A freestanding sign may, however, be located to a point equal to the boundary line between the property and a public sidewalk, provided
such placement is not a nuisance or a hazard.
(3) The street address of the place of business advertised must be placed somewhere on the sign with letters approximately three and one-half
inches (31/2") in height that can easily be seen by a motorist.
(4) The lowest part of the sign shall be twelve feet (12') from the surface of the sidewalk or public way.
(5) The total height of the sign shall not exceed twenty feet (20').
J. Fuel Price Informational Signs: In a properly zoned district, signs advertising the price of motor vehicle fuel sold from a fuel pump located on the
premises shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
1. Only one fuel price informational sign shall be permitted per fuel pump.
2. Fuel price informational signs shall be limited in size to an area of two hundred sixteen (216) square inches.
3. Each fuel price informational sign shall be affixed directly and firmly to a fuel pump and shall be stationary.
4. One freestanding sign to include a changeable copy sign/reader board is allowed. The size of the freestanding sign shall be determined by using
eight (8) square feet per pump with a total of forty eight (48) square feet maximum allowed. The maximum size sign is to include company name,
logo, price information, etc., if applicable.
5. Two (2) tire racks for the purpose of displaying new tire casings shall be permitted for each gasoline or service station. Such racks shall only
advertise the product(s) contained thereon. Such racks must be enclosed after the closing of business.
6. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of other signs meeting the requirements of this chapter.
K. Marquee Signs: A marquee sign is one that has changeable or movable letters. It is usually a freestanding sign, but can be a wall mounted box sign.
The following provisions will apply:
1. The size of the sign shall be computed by allowing seventy five percent (75%) of a square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage, with a minimum
surface display area on the sign of twenty (20) square feet and not to exceed the maximum surface display area of one hundred (100) square feet.
2. The sign will be no more than twenty feet (20') in overall height from the level street grade.
3. The sign will be no more than five (5) linear feet from the bottom of the sign surface area to the top.
L. Outdoor Menu Boards: Outdoor menu boards are only allowed on zone lots which have previously been approved for restaurants with drive-through
windows and under the following conditions:
1. Only one outdoor menu board shall be permitted, per order window, on a lot.
2. Display surface area shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
3. Stacking lane (drive-through lane) shall be a minimum of eighty feet (80') from the menu board.
4. If the sign is lighted, it may be lighted by an illuminated sign only.
5. The outdoor menu board lettering may not be legible from any distance off the zoned lot for which it is approved.
M. Wall, Box Or Individual Letter Signs:
1. Box type wall signs shall not project more than eighteen inches (18") from the surface upon which they are mounted, provided the upper edge of the
wall sign which is mounted on a mansard roof may project more than eighteen inches (18") so long as the sign is perpendicular to the ground.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 225/307
2. Where a building houses more than one business, wall signs shall be limited to one wall sign per business on each wall, with a limit of two (2) wall
signs per business per building.
3. Permitted box sign surface display area will be computed as follows:
a. One and one-half (11/2) square feet allowed for each linear foot of building frontage.
b. Maximum size of surface display area of a box sign will be one hundred (100) square feet.
c. Maximum height of sign will be twenty feet (20').
4. Individual letter sign shall be computed as follows:
a. Two (2) square feet allowed for each linear foot of building frontage.
b. Maximum size of area, measuring from the four (4) corners in a square or rectangle from the edges and from the highest characters, will be one
hundred twenty five (125) square feet.
5. All illuminated signs must be equipped with an outside electrical disconnect.
6. Painted wall signs shall not exceed one hundred sixty (160) square feet.
N. Window Signs:
1. Signs painted on or affixed to glass surfaces of windows or doors are permitted in commercial districts if they pertain to the lawful business
conducted therein. These signs are allowed without a permit.
2. Nonilluminated temporary sale signs shall be permitted, and these signs are allowed without a permit.
3. The total of all window identification and window promotional signs shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the windows in which they
are located. A series of windows which are separated by frames and supporting material less than six inches (6") in width shall be considered as a
single window for the purposes of computation.
O. Banners: Sale or party banners shall be removed within forty eight (48) hours following the event to which the banner applies. Sale banners can only
have a duration of fourteen (14) days in any one calendar month. Party banners can only have a duration of thirty (30) days in any one calendar month.
(1965 Code § 7-9-24)
P. Temporary Commercial Signs: An A-frame, portable swinger, sandwich, or mobile attraction signboard containing a commercial message may be placed
temporarily on site to promote a grand opening, special event, or special service on the premises where the sign is located. Such a temporary
commercial sign shall require a permit from the village in accordance with section 12-11-5 of this chapter.
1. No temporary commercial sign shall be located off site.
2. No temporary commercial sign shall be attached to fences, trees, utility poles, or the like and shall not be placed so as to obstruct or impair vision or
traffic or in any manner to create a hazard to pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
3. Temporary commercial signs shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from any curb or edge of pavement.
4. Temporary commercial signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and shall have a height no greater than six feet (6') above the ground
surface.
5. No temporary sign shall be illuminated.
6. A temporary commercial sign may be displayed only for the duration of the grand opening, special event, or special service that the sign is
promoting, but in no case shall a temporary commercial sign be displayed longer than thirty (30) consecutive days.
7. No more than one such temporary commercial sign shall be permitted for the grand opening, special event, or special service that the sign is
promoting for each seventy five feet (75') of frontage. (Ord. 07-21-09-01, 7-21-2009)
12-11-14: COMPUTATION OF SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT:
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height:
A. Area:
1. Individual Signs: The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only 1 face) shall be computed by means of the
smallest square, circle, rectangle, or combination thereof, that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, color, or
other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the
backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or
wall otherwise meets the regulations of this chapter or other ordinances or regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
2. Multifaced Signs: The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any
one point. When two (2) identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any one point at the same time, and
when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than forty two inches (42") apart, the sign area shall be computed by the
measurement of one of the faces.
3. Maximum Total Area: The permitted sum of the area of all individual signs on a zone lot shall be computed by applying the formula in the appropriate
section of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 226/307
B. Height: The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component
of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: 1) existing grade prior to construction; or 2) the newly established grade after
construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade
cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is
equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on
the zone lot, whichever is lower. (1965 Code § 7-9-6)
12-11-15: CONSTRUCTION, DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards:
A. Compliance With Provisions: All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the building code and the electrical code of the village. The building
director may require the permittee to supply any and all information necessary to ensure that the sign is being built, or is to be built, erected,
constructed or modified in a safe and lasting manner.
B. Construction Requirements: Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs conforming in all respects with requirements of this chapter,
all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct
attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure. (1965 Code § 7-9-27)
C. Maintenance Requirements:
1. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this chapter,
at all times.
2. All freestanding signs and the premises surrounding the same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary, and inoffensive
condition, and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
3. Signs where the paint has peeled or the lettering has become unreadable due to the rigors of the environment must be renewed or removed.
Unsightly signs will be considered a blight condition and will be cited by the village code enforcement officer.
4. a. If the building director shall find that any sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, is a menace to the public, is
abandoned or maintained in a dilapidated condition, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, he shall give written notice to the permittee and property owner thereof. If the permittee and/or property owner fails to remove or alter the
sign or advertising structure, it may be removed or altered to comply by the building director. Any expense incidental to such removal or alteration
shall be charged to the owner of the property upon which the sign is located and shall constitute a lien upon the property.
b. The building director may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is in immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily
without notice. Such signs or other advertising structures are hereby declared a public nuisance. When any sign is removed summarily without
notice, the owner or lessee thereof shall have the right to a postseizure administrative hearing before the village board to determine whether there
was a probable cause to remove the sign. (1965 Code § 7-9-28)
12-11-16: VARIATIONS:
When the applicant for a sign permit can show that a provision of this chapter would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where a
departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the board of trustees may approve a variance and impose such conditions
thereon as they may deem necessary for the protection of the public interest that will not result in harm to the public health, safety and welfare. Such
variance shall first be subject to a hearing and recommendation as prescribed in the village zoning ordinance. The fee for sign variance zoning hearings
shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (1965 Code § 7-9-32)
12-11-17: VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT; REMEDIES:
A. Violations: Any of the following shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this
chapter, by the zoning ordinance, by the building code and by state law:
1. To install, create, erect or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on which the
sign is located.
2. To install, create, erect or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a permit.
3. To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter, or for which the sign permit has lapsed, or to
continue any such violation.
4. To post or display any advertisement of an obscene or immoral character, or an advertisement tending to promote or cause a riot, or breach of the
peace, or any advertisement of any unlawful gathering or advertisements of unlawful sales.
B. Separate Offense: Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying
the penalty portions of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-9-30)
C. Enforcement And Remedies:
1. Any violation or attempted violation of this chapter or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected or
abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this chapter shall be considered a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 227/307
violation of the zoning ordinance of the village. The remedies of the village shall include the following:
a. Issuing a stop work order for any and all work on any signs on the same zone lot.
b. Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the removal of the sign(s) or the correction of the nonconformity. (1965
Code § 7-9-31)
c. Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the village under the zoning ordinance; seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that
can be imposed by such a court under the zoning ordinance; seeking a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per each offense.
(1965 Code § 7-9-31; amd. 2009 Code)
d. In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the village under the
applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance, this chapter and the building code for such circumstances.
2. The village shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time to time be provided for or allowed by state law for the violation of the zoning
ordinance. All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative to the extent that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth
herein for a certain violation or a part thereof. Such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. (1965
Code § 7-9-31)
ARTICLE A. BILLBOARDS AND SIGNBOARDS
12-11A-1: CONDITIONS PERMITTING BILLBOARDS AND SIGNBOARDS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect or maintain any billboard or signboard, or to attach the same to any structure unless such person
be the owner of the building or premises or the same be under lease to him; and provided further, that the signboard or billboard is to advertise the
business conducted in or upon said building or premises by the owner or lessee thereof; and provided further, that such signboard or billboard be
constructed in compliance with the provisions of this code. (1965 Code § 9-8-1)
B. No person shall construct, erect, or maintain any billboard or signboard other than expressly provided for in subsection A of this section, being the
express purpose and intent of this article to prohibit the construction, maintenance or erection of signboards or billboards within the corporate limits of
the village1. (1965 Code § 9-8-2)
12-11A-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No person shall erect or maintain a billboard or signboard unless a permit shall first have been secured by the person desiring to erect
or maintain such billboard or signboard, and before a permit is issued by the building director, the applicant shall pay the fee hereinafter fixed. (1965
Code § 9-8-5)
B. Permit Fees:
1. Established: The fee to be charged for a permit to construct billboards and signboards in compliance with subsection 12-11A-1A of this article shall
be ten dollars ($10.00) and, in addition, twenty five cents ($0.25) per linear foot. The annual fee of one dollar ($1.00) per linear foot shall be charged
every person as owner or in possession, charge or control of any billboard or signboard for inspection of such signboard or billboard; and provided
further, if the annual fee for the inspection of any billboard or signboard is not paid by the person as owner or in possession, charge or control of said
billboard or signboard or premises, the same shall be removed by the building director, after giving due notice in writing to the person or persons as
designated in subsection 12-11A-4B of this article. (1965 Code § 9-8-7)
2. Disposition Of Fees: Permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the corporate fund. (1965 Code § 9-8-8; amd. 2009 Code)
12-11A-3: ANCHORING REQUIRED; SIZE LIMITATION:
All billboards or signboards now erected or to be erected shall be securely anchored or fastened in a manner satisfactory to the building director and in
such a way as to be safe and substantial, and no signboard or billboard shall exceed two hundred (200) square feet without special authorization of the
president and board of trustees. (1965 Code § 9-8-4)
12-11A-4: UNSAFE STRUCTURES:
A. Any person who now maintains any billboards, unless the same come within the provisions of subsection 12-11A-1B of this article, shall remove said
signs, not repair or alter the same, when and as such signs become unsafe. (1965 Code § 9-8-3)
B. No material alterations of any existing billboard or signboard now erected shall be made nor shall the same be moved to another location within the
village, and for all billboards and signboards within the village that have been erected in violation hereof, or erected prior to the effective date hereof, or
are in an unsafe condition, or have become unstable or insecure, or in such condition as to be a menace to the safety or health of the public, the
building director shall cause to be issued a notice in writing to the owner or lessee or person in possession of such billboard or signboard, or to the
person in possession or control of said building, business or premises, directing him to make such alterations or repairs, or to remove the same, or to
do such other acts or things as are necessary or advisable to take care of said billboard or signboard, within such reasonable time as shall be stated in
said notice, and if the person so notified shall refuse, fail or neglect to comply with the requirements of said notice within the time fixed therein, said
billboard or signboard shall be torn down by the building director. (1965 Code § 9-8-6)
12-11A-5: LICENSE FEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 228/307
The license fee for the privilege of maintaining an outdoor advertising sign shall be one dollar ($1.00) for each square foot of an outdoor advertising sign.
The license fee for a double facing outdoor sign shall be computed by using the square footage of each side of the sign. The license shall conform to the
general provisions relating to licenses. (1965 Code § 9-8-10; amd. 2009 Code)
12-11A-6: VIOLATION:
Any person owning, operating, maintaining or in charge, possession or control of any billboard or signboard within the village that shall neglect or refuse to
comply with the provisions of this article, or that shall erect, construct or maintain any billboard or signboard that does not comply with said provisions,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1965 Code § 9-8-9)
Footnote 1: See also subsection 12-11-13A4 of this chapter.
Chapter 12
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
12-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL: One that is used by the occupants of the property on which the swimming pool is located and/or their guests.
SWIMMING POOL: A manmade rigid or semirigid receptacle for water, having a depth at any point greater than eighteen inches (18"), used or intended to
be used for swimming, wading, or bathing, and constructed, installed or maintained in or above the ground outside any building. This definition does not
include collapsible plastic pools intended for child use. (1965 Code § 7-10-2)
12-12-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
All owners and operators of "private swimming pools", as defined in section 12-12-1 of this chapter, or owners of properties having same, shall comply with
the provisions of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-10-1)
12-12-3: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Permit Required; Application: No person shall hereafter construct, cause to be constructed, operate or maintain a swimming, wading or bathing pool
without first obtaining a permit from the village. Written application and plans or specifications shall be submitted for such permit as required by the
building director.
B. Inspections: Upon issuance of a permit, the owner shall stake the proposed pool area and have same inspected by the building department. Upon
approval of the proposed area, installation may commence. All underground electrical installations shall be inspected prior to covering same. A final
inspection shall be conducted upon completion of installation of the swimming pool, required enclosure and electrical installations. (1965 Code § 7-10-
5)
C. Permit Fee: The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a swimming pool is fifty dollars ($50.00). Such fee shall adequately cover the cost of
review and inspection of the pool project. (1965 Code § 7-10-7; amd. 2009 Code)
12-12-4: LOCATION:
A. Swimming pools shall be so constructed that there will be at least ten feet (10') between the main building and the swimming pool, and there shall be at
least five feet (5') between a side or rear lot line, and there shall be at least five feet (5') between any garage and the swimming pool. The building
director may allow less than five feet (5') to the garage if the pool cannot be otherwise lawfully situated on the property.
B. No swimming pool shall be built within any front yard.
C. Pumps, filters and pool water disinfecting equipment installation shall be located at a distance not less than eight feet (8') from any side property line.
(1965 Code § 7-10-6)
12-12-5: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS; OPERATION REGULATIONS:
Every person in possession of land on which a swimming, wading, or bathing pool is situated or will be built shall conform with the following regulations:
A. Water Supply: No source of water other than that secured from the village waterworks distribution system shall be used in private swimming pools. The
connection shall be as required by the plumbing code, by means of a permanent, rigid system of piping having an air gap delivery connection located
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 229/307
not less than six inches (6") vertically above the flood rim of the pool. No swimming, wading or bathing pool in excess of two thousand five hundred
(2,500) gallons' capacity shall be installed or operated without a recirculating and filtering system.
B. Outlets:
1. In swimming pools thirty feet (30') in width or less, water circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one outlet at the deepest
point in the pool. If the pool width is more than thirty feet (30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more than thirty feet (30') apart,
closer than four feet (4') to any wall. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of opening not less than four (4) times the
cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removable by bathers and will not injure
bathers' fingers. One outlet shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area.
2. Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool, and the discharge of the pool water to the sewer shall be at a rate not
exceeding two hundred fifty (250) gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be made to the sewer. Water drained from the pool shall not be
discharged to the sewer system during periods of rain or storms.
C. Structural Design: Residential swimming pools shall be designed to withstand water pressure from within and to resist pressure of the earth when the
pool is empty, to a pressure of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. Materials used shall be subject to the approval of the
building director. Grade height of pools constructed hereafter shall not exceed established grade. (1965 Code § 7-10-4)
D. Diving Board Clearance: Where a swimming pool has a diving board or diving apparatus for the purpose of diving into the pool, there shall be a clear
area of not less than an eight foot (8') radius ahead of the furthermost projection of the diving board. (1965 Code § 7-10-9)
E. Walk Areas: Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36") wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. The walk area shall
be constructed of impervious materials, and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of
the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage from entering the pool.
F. Steps Or Ladders: At least one means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all private residential swimming pools. Treads of
steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip materials and be of sturdy construction. Permanent stairways shall further comply with the village
building code.
G. Electrical Requirements:
1. All private swimming pools shall comply with the provisions applicable to swimming pools as promulgated by the village electrical code.
2. All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to private residential swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a result of
contact with broken overhead conductors, or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded.
3. Ground fault breakers shall be installed for all outside electrical receptacles and outlets to be used in conjunction with all private swimming pools.
Receptacles shall be in weatherproof boxes. (1965 Code § 7-10-4)
H. Operation And Maintenance:
1. The operation and use of a private swimming pool shall not produce nuisance conditions, including, but not limited to, damage of private or public
property, or loud or boisterous behavior that causes an unreasonable annoyance to others.
2. A suitable substantial protective cover shall be provided and installed over all private residential swimming pool surfaces during the nonswimming
season or when residents are absent for a period of more than three (3) days.
3. Every pool shall be designed and constructed as to facilitate cleaning and shall be maintained and operated in such manner as to be clean and
sanitary at all times. (1965 Code § 7-10-4; amd. 2009 Code)
12-12-6: FENCES, ENCLOSURES AND DECKS:
A. All swimming pools shall be located in an approved yard that is enclosed by a minimum four foot (4') high perimeter fence sufficient to provide a
significant deterrent to entry into the yard space by small children. The swimming pool shall also be protected by a minimum four foot (4') high
enclosure sufficient to enclose the pool and prevent at will entry by small children.
B. All perimeter fences and enclosures shall include a gate of equal height. All required gates shall be kept closed and latched at all times when the pool is
not occupied.
C. Enclosures shall not have gaps or openings, other than protected access areas, larger than four inches (4") in diameter.
D. Stairways to attached decks or which otherwise lead directly to the pool shall be the fold up type or otherwise protected from child access. Pool ladders
shall either be removed or folded up when the pool is not occupied.
E. All decks shall be protected against entry by a child through the use of guardrails constructed in compliance with the village building code. No portion of
the pool or deck shall have a ladder in effect by which a child could climb and gain access to the swimming pool. (1965 Code § 7-10-3)
12-12-7: NONCONFORMING POOLS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 230/307
Swimming pools installed prior to the effective date hereof that are not in compliance with the setback requirements of this chapter and/or the electrical
conductor clearance requirements of the Chicago electrical code are granted an amortization period of five (5) years, provided:
A. Such pools shall be registered with the village within one hundred twenty (120) days of the effective date hereof. Registration shall be accompanied by
a ten dollar ($10.00) registration fee. The village shall, upon the effective date hereof, make known this requirement to the village through
comprehensive notification to village residents and in any manner required by law.
B. Upon registration, such swimming pools shall thereafter be inspected by the building department. All swimming pools not in compliance with the
required enclosure, sanitary or electrical ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) or other requirements of this chapter, other than setback or electrical
wire clearance, shall be corrected as directed by the building department. The clearance for registered nonconforming pools may, at the discretion of
the code enforcement inspector, be less than the requisite ten feet (10'), provided such reduction in clearance meets with the spirit and intent of this
code, does not create a significant or clear and present hazard, and the owner signs a waiver of liability for such reduction.
C. Owners shall be advised as to the reasons for the electrical conductor clearance rule and acknowledge in writing that they have been informed as to the
safety risk involved in not correcting the violation. Owners shall further hold the village harmless from any damage or injury arising out of such
violations during the amortization period. (1965 Code § 7-10-10)
D. Upon expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) day registration period, all unregistered nonconforming pools are declared illegal and subject to
enforcement of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-10-10; amd. 2009 Code)
E. Upon expiration of the five (5) year amortization period, all registered nonconforming swimming pools shall comply with this chapter or be removed.
F. All registered nonconforming swimming pools shall, regardless of the five (5) year amortization period, come into compliance with this chapter, or be
removed, prior to the sale of the real property upon which such pool is located. Compliance may be assumed by the purchaser, provided the pool is
brought into compliance by same or removed within sixty (60) days of purchase. (1965 Code § 7-10-10)
12-12-8: DANGEROUS POOLS:
If, in the opinion of the building director, a swimming pool constitutes and immediate and obvious danger to the swimming pool occupants or the public
health or safety in general, the village may take such action so as to remove or make safe said swimming pool at the owner's expense. Such action shall
be preceded by advance notice as may be reasonable and practical in consideration of the danger presented. (1965 Code § 7-10-11)
12-12-9: ABANDONED OR UNMAINTAINED POOLS:
Swimming pools which are not utilized for a period of ten (10) months or which fall into a state of disrepair, dilapidation or nonmaintenance, including, but
not limited to, unsanitary water, shall be removed or restored upon direction of the building department. (1965 Code § 7-10-12)
12-12-10: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The building director is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter. For this purpose, he is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises to
investigate the existence of a swimming pool and to determine whether or not any such pool complies with the requirements of this chapter. (1965 Code
§ 7-10-8)
12-12-11: PENALTIES:
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a maximum seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) per day fine for each day the violation exists. This chapter
may be enforced through the adjudication process adopted by the village pursuant to the code hearing provisions of Illinois state statutes1. Violations shall
also be punishable as a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. The village shall not be precluded from seeking other lawful
remedies to violations of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-10-13; amd. 2009 Code)
Footnote 1: See title 1, chapter 5, article A of this code.
Chapter 13
FENCES AND HEDGES
12-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of a fence is to provide privacy, security, weather control, aesthetic appearance, boundary definitions and utility (snow fences) for residential,
commercial, industrial, public and quasi-public land uses within the corporate boundaries of the village. (1965 Code § 7-14-1)
12-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 231/307
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applicable:
DOG RUN: Any fenced area intended to enclose a dog up to a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
FENCE: A tangible barrier constructed or installed of any material, including plant materials, erected for the purpose of providing a boundary or as a
means of protection, or to prevent uncontrolled access, or for decorative purposes (such as ornamental gate(s)), or to screen from view in or on adjoining
properties and streets, materials stored and operations conducted behind it.
FENCE, NATURAL: An enclosing structure or barrier of densely compacted brush, shrubs, low trees, or similar materials planted less than ten feet (10')
apart and exceeding thirty inches (30") in height.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence, including entrance and exit gates, designed and constructed so that the surface area of any segment of such fence contains at
least fifty percent (50%) open space as compared to solid materials.
FENCE, PRIVACY: A structural or decorative (lattice) fence which is designed to screen a patio, deck or swimming pool and which does not extend more
than five feet (5') beyond the perimeter of the patio, deck or pool. The area enclosed by the privacy fence shall be included in the maximum lot coverage
as regulated in the zoning ordinance. An enclosure that permits light and air to pass through more than fifty percent (50%) of its surface, such as lattice or
railings, shall not be considered a "privacy fence".
FENCE, SOLID: A fence, including solid entrance and exit gates, which effectively conceals from view, in or on adjoining properties and streets, materials
stored and operations conducted behind it.
SPAN: The entire length of a fence, generally parallel to a lot line and located within the area of a given front, side or rear yard as established by the village
zoning ordinance, or where a yard requirement is not established, generally parallel to the parcel or zoning lot line.
YARD, FRONT: The open space across the full width of the lot extending from the closest point of the front line of the principal building to the front lot line.
On corner lots, the front yard shall face the street adjacent to the shortest lot line dimension.
YARD, REAR: The open space extending the full width of the lot between the closest point of the principal building and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: The open space between the closest point of the principal building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front line to the rear line
of the building. (1965 Code § 7-14-2; amd. 2009 Code)
12-13-3: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Permit Required; Fee: All work involving the construction, relocation or extension of fences, or the planting of hedges intended as a natural fence, on
any property, shall require the issuance of a fence permit prior to the initiation of such work. The permit fee shall be as set out in section 12-2-13 of this
title. (1965 Code § 7-14-3; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Application For Permit: All permit applications must be accompanied by a plat of survey showing the location of all proposed and existing fences, and a
description of the fence height, design, materials and type of construction. Other documentation may be required by the building director wherein
affected boundary lines or ownership is unclear or disputed. (1965 Code § 7-14-4)
C. Exemptions From Permit:
1. The following shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter: (2009 Code)
a. Temporary fences erected for the sole purpose of protecting residential gardening plots located in the area between the rear of the dwelling and
the rear property line;
b. Fences which are a maximum of twenty four inches (24") in height and eight feet (8') in length and are installed for landscaping or decorative
purposes only and which are not designed or constructed so as to create an enclosed area; and
c. Temporary fences associated with construction, demolition and public projects as approved by the building director.
2. Such fences shall otherwise comply with the height and design standards of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-14-3)
D. Inspections: Property owners and contractors are required to obtain inspection approval for all fence construction occurring under permit as follows:
1. Postholes shall be inspected and found to be of proper depth and construction prior to installation of posts.
2. Construction, repair or alterations of fences shall be inspected upon completion of work and found to be in compliance with this chapter.
3. All violations shall be corrected as required by the inspector within the time period specified. (1965 Code § 7-14-11)
12-13-4: PROHIBITED LOCATIONS:
A. Fences:
1. Front Yard: No fence shall be constructed in a required front yard. In zoning districts where a front or side yard requirement is not established by the
village zoning ordinance, no fence shall be permitted within ten feet (10') of the front property line.
2. Exceptions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 232/307
a. On single-family residential parcels containing two (2) or more contiguous lots of record, a fence otherwise conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be allowed in the required front yard area of those lots not containing a dwelling structure to within one foot (1') of the front property
line. Such fences shall be removed from lots where new dwellings are constructed.
Front Yard Fence Permitted On
Contiguous Lot Without Dwelling
b. On residential corner lots only, a double rail, split rail fence may be placed along the property line at the corner of the lot common to both streets
and which shall not extend longitudinally in excess of eight feet (8') in either direction from the corner of the lot, and the top of the highest rail shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 233/307
not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height nor any support post exceed forty two inches (42") in height.
Split Rail Fence On Corner Lot
c. On residential corner lots only, a chainlink fence, providing an open and unobstructed view through the plane of the fence area, may be erected on
the boundary line contiguous to the side street, beginning at a parallel line equal to the front of the dwelling and continuing to one foot (1') inside
the front property line. Such fences shall begin at a maximum height of four feet (4') at a line parallel to the dwelling and taper to a two foot (2')
height at the termination of the fence inside the front property line. Such fences shall not otherwise be a hazard to traffic or pedestrians or the
cause of a nuisance, as determined by the building director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 234/307
Corner Lot Front Yard
Tapering Fence Permitted
d. In residential zones, where an existing dwelling is nonconforming as to front yard setback, a fence which is otherwise in compliance with this
chapter may be erected on a parallel line extending from the front of the dwelling to the side lot line, and thereafter toward the rear of the property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 235/307
Fences For Nonconforming Dwellings
e. In industrial zones, a fence otherwise conforming to the requirements of this code shall be permitted in the required front yard area, provided it is
located a minimum of one foot (1') off the front property line and, in the opinion of the building director, does not present any hazardous or blighting
conditions and is not out of character with the architecture and conditions of the surrounding neighborhood.
B. Dog Runs: Dog runs shall not be constructed in any front or side yard. Dog runs constructed in a rear yard shall not be within eight feet (8') of any
property line or within twenty five feet (25') of any neighboring dwelling. (1965 Code § 7-14-5)
12-13-5: HEIGHT STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 236/307
A. The maximum height for all fences shall be six feet (6').
B. A maximum height of eight feet (8') shall be permitted where an industrial zone abuts a residential zone or an alley separating such zones.
C. The minimum fence height for perimeter fencing shall be no less than four feet (4'). Perimeter fencing shall constitute all fences erected within five feet
(5') of a property line. (1965 Code § 7-14-6)
12-13-6: MULTIPLE FENCES:
A. Only one perimeter fence shall be permitted.
B. The building director may permit an additional perimeter fence upon his determination that it is appropriate for the purposes of public safety or to abate
a nuisance. Such fences shall be freestanding and provide for an accessible maintenance gap of a minimum of one foot (1') between fences. (1965
Code § 7-14-7)
12-13-7: ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS:
A. Every fence constructed, erected, altered, replaced or enlarged after the effective date hereof shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. All fences shall be of an architectural design that is common to the community.
C. All fences shall be designed and constructed so as to be compatible with its environment and surrounding properties from an architectural and aesthetic
standpoint.
D. No fence shall be of such architectural design or construction that the same is manifestly inferior or is so radically different as to impair marketability or
property values of the existing property in the immediate vicinity.
E. All fences shall be constructed with the finished, smooth or decorative side facing toward adjoining properties.
F. All fences shall be constructed with the posts and supporting beams facing the fence owner's property.
G. Uniform design and type shall be maintained along the entire fence span.
H. All fences shall be constructed of new material.
I. All fences shall be designed and constructed to resist a horizontal wind load of not less than thirty five (35) pounds per square foot (psf) in addition to
any other forces to which it may be subjected.
J. Postholes shall be a minimum of forty two inches (42") below grade. In cases where geological conditions prevent excavation to said depth, the building
director may approve a lesser depth, provided alternative measures are taken, such as underpinning, to properly secure the posts.
K. Posts shall be of substantial material designed to carry the structural and wind loads to which they are subjected. All posts shall be set in concrete.
L. All fences shall have a top rail or beam. Fencing material must be continuous and uniform from top to bottom.
M. No fence shall have spikes, barbs or other pointed or sharp assemblies1. Top links shall be bent downward, and uprights shall be of a design so as to
preclude accidental impalement on same.
N. Barbed or razor wire, or similar devices, shall only be allowed in industrial districts upon receipt of special use approval as outlined in the zoning
ordinance.
O. Electrified fences are prohibited.
P. No fence, wall or shrubbery may be erected or maintained so as to impede natural stormwater runoff, interfere with drainage of contiguous properties or
cause nuisance ponding, flooding or retention.
Q. No fence shall cause a nuisance, hazard or otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. The building director shall determine
whether a particular set of circumstances, design or element constitutes such condition. (1965 Code § 7-14-8)
12-13-8: NONCONFORMING FENCES AND HEDGES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 237/307
All permanent fences and hedges which were lawfully constructed and are in existence at the effective date hereof, but which do not conform to one or
more sections of this chapter, shall be allowed to remain until such time as they are damaged or significantly removed or altered. Such conditions shall
require the nonconforming fence to be removed or otherwise brought into compliance with this chapter. Fences which are of a hazardous design or
construction or which create a nuisance or hazard shall not have a protected nonconforming status and shall be subject to an order by the building director
to remove such fence or otherwise bring same into compliance with this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-14-9)
12-13-9: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
A. All fences shall be maintained in a workmanlike condition and in compliance with this chapter.
B. All structural members shall be maintained free from breaks, deterioration, dilapidation and unsafe, unsightly or unsound conditions.
C. All fences shall be properly surface coated to protect them from the elements. There shall be no rust, peeling paint or deterioration of a surface coating.
D. All fences shall be maintained free from broken, jagged or sharp edges or members.
E. All fences shall be maintained as freestanding on solid supports as required by this chapter and the general building code where applicable.
F. Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner of the land upon which the fence is located. Where ownership of a perimeter fence is not claimed or
documented to the satisfaction of the building director, maintenance responsibility shall be equally assigned to all abutting property owners.
G. Ordinary repairs such as painting, patching and minor parts replacement shall not require a permit, provided such repairs do not change the design,
location, height, uniformity or structural integrity of the fence. (1965 Code § 7-14-10)
12-13-10: HAZARDOUS FENCES AND SHRUBS:
The village may remove any fence, shrub or other barrier which creates an immediate hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the community at cost to
the property owner. The cost of such abatement shall first be invoiced to the responsible party or property owner, after which all unpaid invoices shall be a
lien against the affected property, where applicable, in accordance with state law. (1965 Code § 7-14-13)
12-13-11: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Enforcement Official: This chapter shall be enforced by the village building director or his designees.
B. Notice Of Violation: Upon discovery of a violation of this chapter, the enforcing agent shall provide written notification outlining the violation, required
remedy and compliance due date by one of the following methods:
1. By first class mail to the taxpayer of record, as contained in the records of the Lyons Township or Cook County assessor's office.
2. By posting the notice on the premises.
C. Citation: Upon expiration of a reasonable compliance time, the enforcing agent may issue a citation for the responsible party to appear in a court of
adjudication system of competent jurisdiction.
D. Suspension Of Permit: The building director may cause the permit privileges to be suspended for any property owner or contractor who is in violation of
this chapter until such time as the violations are cured.
E. Penalty: Each offense shall be punishable by a minimum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Compliance shall not abrogate the minimum fine provision of this subsection. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense.
(1965 Code § 7-14-12)
12-13-12: APPEALS:
In the event any person affected by this chapter desires to appeal from the decision or interpretation of the enforcing agent, such person shall have the
right to file an appeal to the village zoning board of appeals/plan commission, provided such appeal is filed by approved form, and fee paid within thirty
(30) days of the date of the enforcing agent's notice of violation. Enforcement of the applicable provision of this chapter shall be stayed until such time as
the village board of trustees decides the matter. The filing fee for said appeal shall be equal to the required fee for a zoning variance2. (1965 Code § 7-14-
14; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 14
ANTENNA STRUCTURES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 238/307
12-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter, they will have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ANTENNA STRUCTURE: Any structure, mast, pole, tripod or tower utilized for the purpose of either transmission or reception purposes.
COMMERCIAL ANTENNA: Any antenna structures used in conjunction with communication facilities for use in commerce or industry.
COMMERCIAL EARTH STATION: Any earth station used in conjunction with communication facilities for use in commerce or industry.
DISH: That part of a satellite signal receiving antenna characteristically shaped like a saucer or dish.
DISH OR DISK TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVING ANTENNAS: The terms, also referred to as "satellite" or "earth station" or "ground station" or
"satellite receiving dishes", shall mean one, or a combination of two (2) or more, of the following:
A. A signal receiving device (antenna, dish antenna or dish type antenna), the purpose of which is to receive communications or other signals from
satellites in earth orbit and other extraterrestrial sources.
B. A low noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of the receiving component and the purpose of which is to magnify, store, transfer
and/or transmit electronic or light signals.
C. A coaxial cable, the purpose of which is to carry or transmit said signals to a receiver.
EARTH STATION: Either flat, concave, or parabolic antennas, greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter, in a commercial or industrial zoned area, or
greater than one meter (1 m) in a residential zoned area, that are designed for reception of television, radio, or microwave signals from satellites or other
sources.
GROUNDING ROD: A metal pole permanently positioned in the earth to serve as an electrical conductor through which electrical current may safely pass
and dissipate.
NONCOMMERCIAL ANTENNA: Any antenna used for private radio and television reception for licensed amateur radio operators' citizens band facilities
and government and nonprofit organizations.
NONCOMMERCIAL EARTH STATION: Any earth station used for private radio and television only.
RECEIVER: A television set or radio receiver. (1965 Code § 7-15-1; amd. 2009 Code)
12-14-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required:
1. No person, firm, partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity shall construct an earth station without a permit, nor shall construction commence
before a permit is issued in accordance with this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-15-2)
2. The owner, or occupant with written permission from the owner, of any lot, premises or parcel of land within the village who desires to construct an
earth station on said lot, premises, or land parcel must first obtain a permit to do so from the building director.
B. Application For Permit:
1. The application must be accompanied by:
a. An accurate plan of the lot, premises or land parcel showing the exact location and dimensions of the proposed earth station.
b. The exact location and dimensions of all buildings or structures.
c. A description of the kind of earth station proposed.
d. Construction plans and specifications showing the elevations of the proposed earth station upon completion.
2. Each application shall specify, among other things, the names and addresses of the owner of the real estate, the applicant and the person to be
permitted to construct the proposed earth station. (1965 Code § 7-15-3)
C. Federal Or State License Or Permit Required: The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any license or permit required by any
federal, state or local agency pertaining to the ownership, construction or operation of an earth station. (1965 Code § 7-15-4)
D. Permit Fee: The applicant shall submit with each application the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) which represents the permit fee. The permit fee shall cover
the costs of reviewing the construction plans and specifications, inspecting the final construction and processing the application. (1965 Code § 7-15-5;
amd. 2009 Code)
E. Issuance Or Denial Of Permit; Appeals:
1. When the application and the required documents have been approved and accepted by the building director and the permit fee paid, the building
director shall cause the permit to be issued. The building director shall accept or reject applications for permits within fifteen (15) days after filing. In
the event of refusing to issue a permit, the building director shall give the applicant the reason for refusal. (1965 Code § 7-15-6)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 239/307
2. The denial of a permit shall entitle the applicant to appeal to the zoning board of appeals/plan commission. The zoning board of appeals/plan
commission shall hold a hearing within fifteen (15) days of receiving notice of appeal. At said hearing, the applicant shall be entitled to be
represented by legal counsel and present witnesses to support his application. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, a finding of facts and a
recommendation shall be issued within ten (10) days to the president and village board. The village board shall retain the authority to make final
decisions on any recommendations of the zoning board of appeals/plan commission. (1965 Code § 7-15-7)
12-14-3: LOCATION:
A. Ground Mounted: The following provisions apply to ground mounted structures: (2009 Code)
1. No earth station shall be constructed in any front or side yard but shall be constructed to the rear of the residence or main structure. On corner lots,
no earth station shall be erected outside of the established building line of both street frontages, and where no building line is established, earth
stations shall have a minimum setback of thirty feet (30') from property lines fronting on any street or highway.
2. No earth station, including its concrete base slab or other substructure, shall be constructed less than eight feet (8') from any property line or
easement.
3. No ground mounted earth station shall be constructed without landscaping with appropriate evergreens, berming, hedging or fencing to reasonably
conceal said earth station from view, as approved by the building director. The earth station shall be of a neutral color so as to render the same
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in appearance and character. The planting and/or screening shall be completed before final approval
by the building director.
4. No more than one such dish shall be installed or located on any lot, parcel or site.
5. No antenna shall protrude in any manner upon the public way or adjoining property. (1965 Code § 7-15-15)
B. Roof/Tower Mounted: No dish shall be located on, mounted, or attached to any portion of any building or structure situated on the property in any area
zoned residential. This restriction applies to nonconforming uses located in residential areas. (1965 Code § 7-15-16)
12-14-4: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Ground Mounted: The following provisions apply to ground mounted structures: (2009 Code)
1. No earth station shall be linked physically or electronically to a receiver which is not located on the same lot, premises or parcel of land as is the
earth station.
2. All antennas must be installed per manufacturer's suggested mounting instructions.
3. Any driving motor shall be limited to one hundred twenty (120) volts maximum power design and be encased in protective guards.
4. An ark station must be bonded to a grounding rod.
5. Wiring between an earth station and a receiver shall be placed at least four inches (4") beneath the surface of the ground within rigid conduit.
6. Antenna structures may be constructed from one of the following materials: aluminum, galvanized steel, or an equally weather resistant steel, or
treated wood, subject to the written approval of the building director. Where two (2) dissimilar materials such as aluminum and concrete or aluminum
and steel are in contact, provisions shall be made to avoid electrolysis.
7. An earth station shall not exceed a grade height of fourteen feet (14') or the roofline established by the principal building, whichever is less.
8. No earth station shall exceed eight feet (8') in diameter. No advertising, logos, or symbols will be permitted on any earth station surfaces. All earth
stations shall be a neutral color.
9. No antenna shall be of a windmill type. A solid dish type construction or design shall not be permitted in a residentially zoned district.
10. All such dishes shall be of the open ribs, rim and wire mesh type construction in residential areas. (1965 Code § 7-15-20)
B. Roof/Tower Mounted: The following provisions apply to roof/tower mounted structures: (2009 Code)
1. Earth stations shall be mounted directly upon the roof of a primary or accessory structure, as defined in the building code, and shall not be mounted
upon appurtenances such as chimneys, towers, trees, poles or spires.
2. An earth station shall not exceed a height of more than three feet (3') above the roof upon which it is mounted.
3. No earth station shall be linked physically or electronically to a receiver which is not located on the same lot, premises, or parcel of land as is the
earth station.
4. All antennas must be installed to manufacturer's suggested mounting instructions.
5. Any driving motor shall be limited to one hundred twenty (120) volts maximum power design and be encased in protective guards.
6. All towers and/or roof mounted structures supporting antennas shall be grounded. The ground conductor shall be a minimum of no. 10 GA copper;
however, in all instances, construction shall follow the manufacturer's requirements for grounding.
7. Antenna structures may be constructed from one of the following materials: aluminum, galvanized steel, or an equally weather resistant steel, or
treated wood, subject to the written approval of the building director. Where two (2) dissimilar materials such as aluminum and concrete or aluminum
and steel are in contact, provisions shall be made to avoid electrolysis.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 240/307
8. An earth station dish shall not exceed three feet (3') in diameter.
9. No advertising, logos, or symbols will be permitted on any earth station surfaces. All earth stations shall be a neutral color.
10. No antenna shall be of a windmill type. A solid dish type construction or design shall not be permitted in a residentially zoned district.
11. All such dishes shall be of the open ribs, rim and wire mesh type construction in residential areas.
12. In residential areas, two (2) antenna structures will be allowed for each roof, one of which may be for radio, and one of which may be for television
purposes. The base structure which supports the mast shall not exceed three feet (3'). No guywires for additional supports shall support the base
structure or antenna mast.
13. In commercial areas, roof mounted antennas may not exceed thirty feet (30') from mounting base. Two (2) earth station antenna structures will be
allowed for each roof.
14. "Radials" used in amateur systems must not support the base structure or antenna or be higher than two feet (2') above the roof. (1965 Code § 7-
15-21)
12-14-5: INOPERABLE EARTH STATIONS:
Any earth station found to be inoperable by the village must either be repaired or removed from the premises within sixty (60) days. (1965 Code § 7-15-8)
Chapter 15
VACANT BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS
12-15-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by enactment of this chapter which:
A. Establishes a program for identification, registration, and regulation of buildings which are or become vacant on and after the effective date of this
chapter.
B. Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings.
C. Provides for administration, enforcement, including abatement of public nuisances, and imposition of penalties.
This chapter shall be construed liberally to effect its purposes. (Ord. 10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-2: OTHER ORDINANCES:
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations which prescribe
standards other than are provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the most restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the context, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings
indicated in this section:
BOARDED BUILDING: A building which has had, in a manner intended to be temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows
or doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings,
from the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or preventing access or damage to the building or its components.
BUILDING: Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The building inspector or his or her designee.
DANGEROUS BUILDING: A building defined as a "dangerous building" in chapter 9 of this title, as it may be amended. Such buildings are public
nuisances.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such
person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, a partnership, or other entity as well as an individual.
PREMISES: A lot, plot, or parcel of land including any structure thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Includes the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 241/307
A. The physical condition, or uses of any building regarded as a public nuisance at common law, under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or under this
code; or
B. Any physical condition, use or occupancy or any building or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or structures; or
C. Any building which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
D. Any building designated by the building inspector as unsafe for human habitation or use; or
E. Any building which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or property; or
F. Any building which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
G. Any building that is dangerous, in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; open or vacant and the doors, windows, or other
openings are boarded up or secured, by any means other than conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or
near the premises; or
H. Any building defined as a "dangerous building" by this section, as it may be amended.
UNOCCUPIED BUILDING: A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises,
including buildings ordered vacated by the building inspector pursuant to authority granted to him by this code.
In determining whether a building is "unoccupied", the building inspector may consider these factors, among others:
A. A building at which substantially all lawful residential or business activity has ceased.
B. The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units shall be
considered.
C. The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition and value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this
determination.
D. The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer, electric, or natural gas.
E. The building is the subject of a foreclosure action.
F. The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual agreement to sell the building, the building lacks "for sale", "for rent", or similar signage.
G. The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
VACANT BUILDING: A building or portion of a building which is:
A. Unoccupied and unsecured; or
B. Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means; or
C. Unoccupied and a dangerous structure; or
D. Unoccupied and condemned by the building inspector pursuant to applicable provisions of this code; or
E. Unoccupied and has multiple code violations; or
F. Unoccupied and the building or its premises has been the site of unlawful activity within the previous six (6) months; or
G. Condemned by the building inspector and unlawfully occupied; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 242/307
H. Unoccupied for over one hundred eighty (180) days and during which time the building inspector has issued an order to correct public nuisance
conditions and same have not been corrected in a code compliant manner; or
I. Unoccupied for over two (2) years;
But not including: Unoccupied buildings which are undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with all applicable
ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which construction, renovation, or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to completion. (Ord.
10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-4: DETERMINATION:
Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this chapter, the building inspector shall evaluate all buildings in the village he believes to be unoccupied
on the effective date of this chapter and make a determination for each as to whether the building is a "vacant building" within the meaning of section 12-
15-3 of this chapter. The building inspector may determine that a building which meets any of the criteria set forth in section 12-15-3 of this chapter is not
to be regulated under this chapter for a stated period, if upon consideration of reliable, substantiated and sufficient evidence, he or she determines that
regulation of the building under this chapter would not serve the public health, welfare, and safety and makes written findings in support of his decision.
The determination shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis for the determination. For buildings the building inspector determines to be "vacant
buildings", he shall, within seven (7) days of making that determination, send notice of his written determination with the factual findings to the last
taxpayer of record listed on the most recent Cook County tax roll. Said notice of determination shall be sent first class United States mail, with proper
postage prepaid. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying with this chapter. The building inspector may personally serve or cause
personal service of the notice of determination. Any person making such service shall execute an affidavit attesting to the facts of service. The building
inspector shall maintain an affidavit of such mailing for each notice of determination sent.
The notice shall specify a date and time on which the owner shall allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building to determine
the extent of compliance with village property, building codes, health, fire, water and sewer codes. The owner shall pay the five hundred dollar ($500.00)
inspection fee to the village within thirty (30) days of the inspection. An unpaid fee shall be a lien upon the premises.
The notice shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, a copy of the registration form the
owner is required to file pursuant to section 12-15-6 of this chapter, and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the building inspector's determination. (Ord.
10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-5: APPEAL OF DETERMINATION:
A. An owner of a building determined by the building inspector to be a vacant building as provided for in this chapter may appeal that determination to the
village manager. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the village manager within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the notice of
determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to register his building as required by this chapter. The appeal shall contain a
complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the building inspector's determination, shall set forth specific facts in support thereof, and shall
include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal. The village manager shall decide the appeal on the basis of facts presented by the
owner in his or her written appeal and the building inspector's written determination.
B. The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to persuade the village manager that had the evidence been known to the building
inspector at the time the building inspector made the determination, the building inspector would more likely than not have determined that the subject
building was not a "vacant building" within the meaning of this chapter.
C. The village manager shall send written notice of its decision to the owner within ten (10) days of receipt of the appeal. The village manager may, but is
not required to, seek additional information from the owner. The village manager may, upon written notice thereof to the owner, take no more than ten
(10) additional days, to decide the appeal if it is determined that such additional time is required for consideration of the appeal.
D. An owner who wishes to challenge applicability of this chapter to his/her building without the building inspector's determination having been made, shall
set forth specific facts to support nonapplicability in a writing to the building inspector. In the event the building inspector determines that the subject
building is a "vacant building", the owner shall have the right to appeal the building inspector's determination to the village manager as provided for
herein. (Ord. 10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-6: OBLIGATION TO REGISTER:
The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances should know, that his or her building is or has become a "vacant building"
within the meaning of this chapter after the effective date of this chapter or the owner of a building, which the building inspector determines at any time to
be a "vacant building", or the owner of a building whose appeal from the building inspector's determination has been denied by the village manager shall
take the actions provided for in this section within fifteen (15) days after either the date of the building inspector's notice of determination or occurrence of
the facts which would cause a reasonable person to believe that the building was a "vacant building", or denial of the appeal, whichever is applicable.
Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, including this chapter, nor does it preclude any of
the actions the village is authorized to take pursuant to this chapter or elsewhere in this code.
A. Registration Requirements:
1. Register the building with the building inspector, on a form provided by the building inspector and pay the two hundred dollar ($200.00) annual
nonprorated vacant building registration fee. The form shall include, as a minimum, the name, street address, and telephone number of the owner;
the case name and number of any litigation pending concerning or affecting the building, including bankruptcy cases; and the name, street address,
and telephone number of all persons with any legal interest in the building or the premises. The form shall require the owner to identify a natural
person twenty one (21) years of age or older who maintains a permanent address in Cook County, Illinois, to accept service on behalf of the owner
with respect to any notices the building inspector sends pursuant to this chapter or service of process in any proceeding commenced to enforce any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 243/307
provision of this chapter, and file with the building inspector on the registration form, the name, address, telephone number, of said person. A street
address is required. A post office box is not an acceptable address.
2. Renew the vacant building registration each year on the anniversary date of the first filing for the time the building remains vacant and pay the
required two hundred dollar ($200.00) annual fee; and
3. File an amended registration within fifteen (15) days of any change in the information contained in the annual registration. A new registration is
required for any change in ownership whatsoever.
B. Notice; Inspection: The registration form will include language that the owner agrees to consent to service of any notice required by this chapter by
posting on the building if the owner fails to: 1) renew the registration or 2) maintain current contact information with the building inspector for the person
designated to accept notice and service of process.
The owner shall allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building and shall pay the five hundred dollar ($500.00) fee therefor
within thirty (30) days of the inspection. Such inspection will determine the extent of compliance with village property, building codes, health, fire, water
and sewer codes. The village shall send the inspection report to the owner within thirty (30) days.
C. Insurance: Obtain liability insurance and maintain such insurance for as long as the building is vacant, and file evidence of such insurance with the
building inspector, as follows: five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for a vacant residential building of one to three (3) units; seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($750,000.00) for a vacant residential building of four (4) to eleven (11) units; one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for a vacant
residential building of twelve (12) to forty eight (48) units; two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for a vacant residential building of more than forty eight
(48) units; and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for a vacant manufacturing, industrial, storage, or nonresidential commercial building.
D. Vacant Building Plan: At the time a building is registered as required herein, the owner shall submit a vacant building plan. The building inspector may
prescribe a form for the plan. If the owner fails to submit the plan as provided for by this chapter, the building inspector may determine the plan. The
plan shall contain the following as a minimum:
1. A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional
methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction or similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings being
secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted for new construction of similar type with boarding
removed. Boarding shall be accomplished with materials and methods approved by the building inspector. The owner shall maintain the building in
an enclosed and secure state until the building is reoccupied or made available for immediate occupancy. If the owner demonstrates that securing of
the building will provide adequate protection to the public, the building inspector may waive the requirement of an enclosure.
2. For buildings and premises thereof which are determined by the building inspector as being or containing public nuisances, as defined in section 12-
15-3 of this chapter, then the vacant building plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy such public nuisance(s).
3. A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance
identified by the building inspector.
4. When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
5. A plan of action to maintain the building and premises thereof in conformance with this chapter.
6. A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The time
schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion of all actions required to achieve habitability. No plan which provides for
compliance with this chapter or, which will not, as determined by the building inspector, achieve such compliance, within six (6) months, in the case
of a vacant boarded building, and two (2) years, in the case of a vacant, unboarded, and code compliant building will be approved.
7. All premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings are located and the exteriors shall at all times be maintained in compliance with this code.
8. Exterior lighting according to standards established by the building inspector and available from the building inspector.
E. Security Guard Service: On written notice of the building inspector, provide bonded, licensed, and insured security guard service at the building between
the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Such service to remain in place until the building inspector gives written notice that
the service is no longer required. Such service shall be required when the building inspector makes a written determination that the vacant building
constitutes a fire hazard, is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, involves illegal or improper use, occupancy, or maintenance, under
such conditions that boarding and securing the building are insufficient to prevent the actual or threatened harm.
F. Signage: Affixed to any building which is boarded, no smaller than two feet by two feet (2' x 2') and compliant with the village's sign regulations
ordinance, chapter 11 of this title, and providing the following information: the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, and in addition, for
buildings which are the subject of a foreclosure action, the name, address, and telephone number of the plaintiff and the plaintiff's attorney, if any, in the
foreclosure action. The sign must be placed so that its message is legible from the public way. (Ord. 10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-7: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
A. Review Building Plan: The building inspector shall review the proposed vacant building plan in accordance with the standards below. The building
inspector shall send notice to the owner of the vacant building of his determination.
B. Standards For Plan Approval: In considering the appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the building inspector shall include the following in his or her
consideration and shall make written findings as to each:
1. The purposes of this chapter and intent of the village board to minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant.
2. The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 244/307
3. The length of time the building has been vacant.
4. The presence of any public nuisances on the property.
5. The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or ameliorate the condition it is designed to address. (Ord. 10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-8: AUTHORITY TO MODIFY PLAN:
The building inspector shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner, have the right to modify the vacant building plan by modifying the dates of
performance, the proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional requirements consistent with this chapter he or she deems necessary to protect
the public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-9: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH PLAN:
Failure to have an approved plan within thirty (30) days of filing the registration form or failure to comply with the approved plan shall constitute a violation
of this chapter subjecting the owner of the building to penalties as provided in this chapter and to any remedies the village may avail itself of as provided
for herein and elsewhere in this code, including, but not limited to, an action to compel correction of property maintenance violations. (Ord. 10-21-08-01,
10-21-2008)
12-15-10: OTHER ENFORCEMENT:
The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the village to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to other
provisions of this section, this code, or other applicable legislation. (Ord. 10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-11: CERTIFICATION:
A certificate of code compliance for vacant buildings issued by the village and payment in full of all fees imposed pursuant to this chapter are required prior
to any occupancy of a vacant building. (Ord. 10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-12: BOARDING OF BUILDINGS:
It is the policy of the village that boarding is a temporary solution to prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded buildings are a
public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than six (6) months unless an extension of that time is part of a plan approved by the
building inspector.
A vacant building which is unboarded and code compliant and for which boarding is determined by the building inspector on the basis of police reports,
citizen complaints, and other information of other type considered reliable by reasonable persons, to not require boarding to prevent unauthorized entry
may not remain vacant for more than two (2) years without an approved plan for occupancy, sale, demolition, or other disposition of the building. (Ord. 10-
21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
12-15-13: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day per
violation to a maximum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day per violation, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to
the village. Such other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition,
or condemnation, contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any lien the village may have thereon.
B. A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this chapter.
C. The village may enforce this chapter in its administrative adjudication system or through the court system.
D. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the village from immediately condemning or demolishing, as provided for in this code and by state statute, a
building or taking other immediate action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an imminent danger to the occupants of
the building, or the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 10-21-08-01, 10-21-2008)
Chapter 16
FAIR HOUSING
12-16-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY; ADMINISTRATION:
A. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the village, to assure that all
persons have full and equal opportunity to consider all available housing and obtain fair and adequate housing for themselves and their families within
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 245/307
the village without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status, sexual
orientation, source of income, military discharge status, gender identity, retaliation or housing status or by aiding/abetting or wilful interference thereof
and to promote a stable community.
B. It is hereby further declared to be the policy of the village to undertake all actions necessary and proper to achieve the policy expressed in this chapter.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the housing administrator to receive and investigate complaints charging unlawful discriminatory and unfair housing
practices and to endeavor, by conciliation, to resolve any such complaints by acting as a bridge between the parties to the dispute. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1,
2-20-2013)
12-16-2: CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policies stated herein. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-2013)
12-16-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number.
Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DWELLING: Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more
persons, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or rental and on which any such building, structure, or portion thereof may be constructed or
located.
LENDING INSTITUTION: Any bank, savings and loan association, insurance company, or other organization regularly engaged in the business of lending
money or guaranteeing loans for profit.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: Any building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, which contains two (2) or more dwellings
under common management or ownership.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, a dwelling or who holds legal or equitable title to,
or shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any organization or person which owns a dwelling; and his agent.
PERSON: One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers or fiduciaries.
PURCHASE: To obtain a dwelling through a sale.
RENT OR RENTAL: To lease, sublease, assign or otherwise grant or obtain the right to occupy a dwelling not owned by the occupant in return for
consideration, or a contract or option to do any of the foregoing.
SALE OR SELL: To convey, exchange, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to, or a beneficial interest in, a dwelling in return for consideration, or a
contract or option to do any of the foregoing. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-2013)
12-16-4: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to:
A. The rental of a room or rooms in an owner occupied single-family dwelling;
B. A religious organization, or any nonprofit organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, with respect
to its limitation of the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or with respect to preference given to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national
origin, or handicap;
C. A private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, with respect to its limitation of the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members and their guests, or with respect to
preference given to such persons. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-2013)
12-16-5: DISCRIMINATORY TERMS:
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in this chapter as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing
practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to discriminate against any person in the price, terms, conditions, or privileges relating to
the sale or rental of any dwelling, or in the provision of facilities, repairs, improvements, or services in connections therewith. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-
2013)
12-16-6: ADVERTISEMENTS, SIGNS, NOTICES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 246/307
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in this chapter as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing
practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to make, publish, print, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be made, published, printed,
circulated, issued, or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, sign, symbol, listing or other writing of any kind, in connection with the sale or
rental of any dwelling, or the financing thereof, that indicates or expresses any preference, limitation, reliance, or discrimination based on race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status, sexual orientation, source of income, military discharge status, gender
identity, retaliation or housing status or by aiding/abetting or wilful interference thereof, or an intention to make such preference, limitation, reliance, or
discrimination. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-2013)
12-16-7: MULTIPLE LISTING SERVICES:
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in this chapter as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing
practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to discriminate against any person by denying access to, or membership or participation in,
any multiple listing service, real estate agents' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;
or discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-2013)
12-16-8: STEERING:
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in this chapter as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing
practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to, for profit, use any word, phrase or action in connection with the sale or rental of a
dwelling which influences or is intended to influence the choice of a prospective purchaser or renter solely or in part because of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status, sexual orientation, source of income, military discharge status, gender identity,
retaliation or housing status or by aiding/abetting or wilful interference thereof; or for profit, otherwise induce or attempt to induce, or deter or attempt to
deter, the inspection, purchase or rental of any dwelling by representations regarding the presence in, proximity to, or entry or prospective entry into, the
block, neighborhood or area of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental
status, sexual orientation, source of income, military discharge status, gender identity, retaliation or housing status or by aiding/abetting or wilful
interference thereof. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-2013)
12-16-9: PANIC PEDDLING:
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in this chapter as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing
practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to, for profit, induce or attempt to induce the sale, rental or listing for sale or rental of any
dwelling by representations regarding the presence in, proximity to, or entry or prospective entry into, the block, neighborhood or area of a person or
persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status, sexual orientation, source of
income, military discharge status, gender identity, retaliation or housing status or by aiding/abetting or wilful interference thereof. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-
2013)
12-16-10: AIDING OR OBSTRUCTING:
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in this chapter as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing
practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to aid, abet, compel, coerce, or attempt the commission of any act declared to be unlawful
under this chapter; or obstruct or prevent enforcement of, or compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-2013)
12-16-11: OTHER DISCRIMINATORY ACTS:
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in this chapter as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing
practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to discriminate by engaging in any other action which makes unavailable, or restricts
consideration of, the inspection, purchase, sale or rental of any dwelling. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-2013)
12-16-12: LENDING:
It is also hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any lending institution to discriminate against any person in
connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting a deed in trust or mortgage, or otherwise obtaining or making available funds
for the purchase, construction, improvement, repair, or maintenance of any dwelling; or discriminate by delaying the processing of or denying such loan or
other financial assistance; or discriminate the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial
assistance; or discriminate on the basis that a dwelling is located in a particular geographic area. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-2013)
12-16-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any section, subsection, or provision of this chapter to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective, such
judgment shall not affect any other section, subsection or provision of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment. If any court of competent
jurisdiction shall adjudge the application of any section, subsection, or provision of this chapter to any person or circumstance to be unconstitutional, void,
or ineffective, such judgment shall not affect the application of said section, subsection, or provision to any other person or circumstance not specifically
included in said judgment. (Ord. 02-20-13-O1, 2-20-2013)
Title 13
ZONING REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 247/307
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 3 of this code for alarm system regulations.
Chapter 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
13-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the LYONS ZONING ORDINANCE and may be referred to herein as "this title". (1965 Code title 6 § 101.1;
amd. 2009 Code)
13-1-2: PURPOSE:
This title is adopted with the purpose of protecting and promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare. This purpose is to be
accomplished by seeking:
A. To establish adequate standards for the provision of light, air, and open spaces.
B. To zone all properties with a view to conserving the value of buildings and land and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
village.
C. To lessen congestion on the public streets, and to facilitate the provision of adequate transportation, and of other public requirements and services such
as water, sewage, schools, and parks.
D. To avoid hazards to persons and damage to property from inappropriate development of lands.
E. To avoid undue concentration of population and to prevent the overcrowding of land.
F. To foster a more rational pattern of relationship between residential, business, commercial, and industrial uses for the mutual benefit of all.
G. To provide for and preserve appropriate open space.
H. To protect residential, business, commercial, and industrial areas from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses and to ensure that land allocated to
a class of uses shall not be usurped by other inappropriate uses.
I. To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance producing uses.
J. To establish reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall conform, and to encourage reasonable flexibility of development design
through appropriate innovation.
K. To provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses.
L. To prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions and limitations
imposed herein.
M. To define the powers and duties of the administrative and enforcement officers and bodies.
N. To prescribe penalties for any violation of the provisions of this title or of any amendment hereto.
O. To implement the objectives of the village comprehensive plan, as well as protect all appropriate existing structures and uses. (1965 Code title 6
§ 101.2)
13-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
A. Minimum Requirements; More Restrictive Provisions Apply: The provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this title are at variance with the requirements of any other
lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, or resolutions, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 248/307
B. Uses: The permitted uses and special uses enumerated in each zoning district category of this title are the only uses permitted for that district. All other
uses, unless formally interpreted by the village board of trustees after first being considered by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission in an
open session as promulgated by Illinois statutes to be substantially similar in nature to an expressly permitted or special use, shall be prohibited. All
uses so interpreted shall be added to the listing of permitted or special uses for that district, as designated by the village board of trustees. (1965 Code
title 6 § 101.3)
13-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
It is the intention of the village that the provisions of this title are severable if:
A. A court of competent jurisdiction adjudges any provision of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this title not
specifically included in said judgment; or
B. A court of competent jurisdiction adjudges invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular property, building or structure, such judgment
shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically included in said judgment. (1965 Code title 6
§ 101.5)
13-1-5: NONCUMULATIVE PROVISIONS:
This title is noncumulative in nature. Zoning district requirements do not accumulate from one district to another unless expressly stated. (1965 Code title 6
§ 101.4)
13-1-6: RELATIONSHIP TO VILLAGE CODE:
This title shall be considered an integral part of the village code, and as such, is interrelated with all other articles, chapters and provisions of the village
code. All applications for permits under the terms of this title shall be subject to all the provisions of all other pertinent village regulations. (1965 Code title 6
§ 101.6)
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
13-2-1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; WORD INTERPRETATION:
For purposes of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
A. "Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business
trust, receiver, syndicate, this village and any county, city, municipality, or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
or personal representative thereof.
B. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
C. The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
D. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied".
E. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel". (1965 Code title 6 § 201.1)
13-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this title, shall be construed as hereinafter defined:
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE: A building, structure or use which is customary in connection with and clearly incidental to the principal
building, structure or use on a zoning lot. Accessory uses do not include the conduct of business or the raising of livestock, poultry or pets.
ACCESSORY RESIDENCE (Business District): A dwelling unit or units which do not meet the density or unit requirements for multiple-family housing in a
business district, but which occupy the second or subsequent floor of a primary commercial building, initiated on the property in a lawful manner and
comply with the village building and property maintenance codes. Such residences shall in no way occupy the first floor of any building on the property, nor
more than forty percent (40%) of the total gross floor area of the building, and must otherwise comply with the parking requirements for residential units.
Parking priority on such properties shall first be assigned to the commercial use requirements. Rooming houses or similar living arrangements or
residences above accessory buildings shall not be considered to be an "accessory residence" as defined herein. Accessory apartments shall total no more
than two (2) such apartments in a single building. Three (3) or more dwelling units shall constitute a multi-family residence and subject such properties to
the requirements of chapter 6, article D of this title unless such use is part of an approved PUD.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 249/307
ACRE: Forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
ADULT DAYCARE CENTER: A nonresidential facility offering supervised care, recreation or physical training for adults.
ASPHALT RECYCLING, STORAGE AND SALES: The process whereby previously manufactured asphalt is received, stored, segregated, processed and
remixed, without the application or use of heat, for sale to end markets.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR FACILITIES: A building or premises used for the mechanical and/or electrical repair or reconditioning of motor vehicles.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building, all or partly underground, by having at least one-half (1/2) of its height below the average level of the adjoining
ground.
BODY SHOP: A building or premises used for the repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of automobiles including bodywork, collision, service, welding,
painting, and steam cleaning of vehicles. A "body shop" shall not provide for the storage of damaged vehicles except those which are to be immediately
repaired.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished ground grade within twenty feet (20') of the front of the
proposed building to the highest point of the roof. In the B-1 and B-2 commercial business districts and the I-1 industrial district, height shall be measured
at the maximum vertical projection of any structure, including antennas, chimneys and spires.
BUILDING LINE: See definition of Setback Line.
BUILDING PERMIT: A document issued by the building department which authorizes performance of an activity which is subject to the Lyons building
code.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building permanently affixed to the land in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is
situated.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not permanently affixed to the land.
BULK REGULATIONS: Regulations regarding any of the following characteristics:
A. Ground floor area.
B. Height of building.
C. Setbacks of exterior walls of buildings or structures at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or to other buildings or structures.
D. Gross floor area of the building or structure in relation to lot area (floor area ratio).
E. All open spaces allocated to the building.
F. The size and shape (area, lot frontage and lot width) of the zoning lot and the amount of lot area and lot width provided per dwelling unit or other
unit of measure.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the animal or human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories,
mausoleums and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
CHURCH: A building primarily used for religious worship. The word "church" shall include chapel, temple and synagogue.
CLUB: A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated for social, literary, political, educational or recreational purposes primarily for the
exclusive use of members and their guests.
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY: An educational institution of higher learning generally offering academic training to graduates of high schools (grade 12).
COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT: A zoning lot or contiguous lots, consisting of a minimum of twenty eight thousand (28,000) square feet/maximum one acre
of land area, whose sole use is the provision of short or long term parking space for operative, currently licensed automobiles and trucks. A "commercial
parking lot" shall not be combined with or encroach upon off street parking areas required by this title.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle, except standard passenger vehicles, operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of
any commercial or industrial enterprise, for hire or not for hire, but not including a vehicle used in a ride sharing arrangement when being used for that
purpose or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially. In any event, any vehicle with a license above a B plate or that is licensed for a gross
weight, including vehicle and cargo, of eight thousand one (8,001) pounds or more, or any vehicle used in a commercial enterprise or containing lettering
on the vehicle body advertising that commercial enterprise, shall be considered a "commercial vehicle".
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the village board, which establishes the goals, objectives and policies of the
community and sets forth the general location and extent of present and proposed physical facilities including residential and commercial uses, major
streets, parks, schools, other public facilities and land uses, including amendments thereto, when adopted.
CONCRETE RECYCLING, STORAGE AND SALES: The process whereby previously manufactured concrete is received, stored, segregated, processed
and remixed for sale to end markets.
COOKING FACILITY: A portion of a residential use or building which is primarily constructed, designed or otherwise utilized as a place for preparing meals
or consuming same through the existence of cooking appliance(s) and compatible water distribution arrangements. The elimination of a "cooking facility" in
conjunction with this definition shall require the removal of the cooking appliance(s) and compatible water distribution arrangement.
CORNER LOT: See definition of Lot Types.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 250/307
DAYCARE CENTER: A. Any childcare facility which regularly provides daycare for less than twenty four (24) hours per day for more than eight (8) children
in a family home (daycare center); or a family home which receives more than three (3), up to a maximum of twelve (12), children for less than twenty four
(24) hours per day, including the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12) (daycare home); or a family home
which receives than more than three (3), up to a maximum of sixteen (16), children for less than twenty four (24) hours per day, including the family's
natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12) (group daycare home). Any "daycare center", as defined, shall be licensed
by the Illinois department of children and family services and shall require special use approval from the village. Such uses shall comply with the village
property maintenance, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and life safety codes for childcare uses, as well as the bulk, area and parking
requirements promulgated by this title.
B. The term does not include:
1. Kindergartens or nursery schools or other daytime programs operated by public or private elementary school systems or secondary level school
units or institutions of higher learning;
2. Facilities operating in connection with a shopping center or service, or other similar facility, where transient children are cared for temporarily
while parents or custodians of the children are occupied on the premises or are in the immediate vicinity and readily available;
3. Any type of daycare center that is conducted on federal government premises; or
4. Special activities programs, including athletics, crafts, instruction and similar activities conducted on an organized and periodic basis by civil,
charitable, governmental and religious organizations.
C. Whenever care is provided in a private dwelling unit to a number of children that is less than the totals indicated above, the use shall be regulated as
a home occupation if the number of children total more than two (2). The care of less than three (3) children shall be deemed as intermittent
babysitting, of which such use is not regulated by this title.
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are
calibrated in "decibels".
DENSITY: A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, construction of or substantial improvements
to buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. For purposes of
requiring formal site plan approval by the village board of trustees, "development" shall mean the construction of a new commercial, industrial or multifamily
building or buildings, parking lots or significant alteration of same. Planned unit development and redevelopment areas shall be construed as
"development" for purposes of this definition. Such definition shall not include an accessory garage or storage shed of an area less than six hundred
seventy six (676) square feet or ordinary repair and/or maintenance of existing parking areas and buildings.
DISTRICT: A part of the village wherein regulations of this title are uniform.
DRIVE-IN COMMERCIAL FACILITIES: A use of land where services or goods are rendered or delivered to customers in vehicles.
DRIVEWAY: A bituminous, concrete or similarly surfaced area on a zoning lot upon which vehicles may be driven or parked, and which may provide
access to parking spaces.
DRIVEWAY APPROACH: A hard surface area from street pavement to zoning lot which provides vehicular access to a driveway; also known as a
driveway apron.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building, or part thereof, which has living, sleeping, sanitary facilities and no more than one cooking facility, which is occupied in
whole or in part as the residence or living quarters of one or more persons, permanently or temporarily, continuously or transiently, in a single
housekeeping arrangement.
DWELLING UNIT, MULTI-FAMILY: A building consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units, including condominiums with varying arrangements of party
walls.
DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building consisting of a single dwelling unit only, separated from other dwelling units by open space.
DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A building consisting of not more than four (4) dwelling units which are attached by common vertical
walls.
DWELLING UNIT, TWO-FAMILY: A building consisting of two (2) dwelling units which may be either attached side by side or one above the other.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, together with bathroom, kitchen facilities and closet space.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, occupying a dwelling unit as an individual housekeeping organization, and including
foster children placed by appropriate order of the court. A "family" may include no more than two (2) adult persons unrelated by blood, marriage, adoption
or foster child arrangement.
FEEDSTOCK RECYCLING, STORAGE AND SALES: The storage of source segregated gravel, glass, brick, or block in accordance with village
performance standards for use in any permitted operation.
FENCE: A tangible barrier constructed or installed of any allowable material, including plant materials, erected for the purpose of providing a boundary, or
as a means of protection, or to prevent uncontrolled access, or for decorative purposes (such as an ornamental gate(s)), or to screen from view in or on
adjoining properties and streets, materials stored and operations conducted behind it.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence, including entrance and exit gates, designed and constructed so that the surface area of any segment of such fence contains at
least fifty percent (50%) open space, as compared to solid materials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 251/307
FENCE, SOLID: A fence, including solid entrance and exit gates, which effectively conceals from view, in or on adjoining properties and streets, materials
stored and operations conducted behind it.
FILLING STATION: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires or motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed at
retail. A "filling station" may be part of an automobile repair facility if all use permits have been granted. In addition, minimarts or car washes may be
allowed with an approved and operating filling station.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the centerline of the walls separating two (2) buildings. The floor area of a building shall include the basement floor area when more than one-half
(1/2) of the basement height is above the established curb level or finished lot grade, whichever is higher. Floor area shall include elevator shafts and
stairwells at each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment, the attic space having headroom of seven feet ten inches (7'10") or more, interior
balconies and mezzanines.
FLOOR AREA OF A NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING (To Be Used In Calculating Parking Requirements): The floor area of the specified use excluding
stairs, washrooms, elevator shafts and utility shafts.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area of a building or buildings by the net area of the zoning lot on which the
building or buildings are located or intended to be located.
FLOOR AREA, USABLE: The measurement of "usable floor area" shall include that portion of the gross floor area, measured from the interior face of the
exterior walls, used for or intended to be used for services to the public or customers, patrons, clients or patients, including area occupied by fixtures or
equipment used for display or sale of goods or merchandise, but not including areas used or intended to be used for storage or processing or
merchandise, utility or mechanical equipment rooms, or sanitary facilities. In the case of a half story, the "usable floor area" shall be considered to be only
that portion having a clear height above it of four feet (4') or more.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave, measuring the pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONTAGE: The length of that portion of a lot which is adjacent to a street or highway.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or portion of a principal building used or occupied for the parking or temporary storage of
automobiles, travel trailers and/or boats of the occupants of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A principal or accessory building, other than a private garage, used or occupied for parking or temporary storage of vehicles and in
which no other service is provided for remuneration.
GARAGE, STORAGE: Any building space offered for sale or rental to be used or occupied for the storing of vehicles.
GRADE: The average elevation of the finished surface of the ground.
GROUP HOME: A residential building housing not more than eight (8) service dependent or developmentally disabled people living with professional staff.
The "group home" constitutes a single housekeeping unit in which residents share responsibilities, meals and recreation. "Group homes" do not include
rehabilitation centers or halfway houses for persons leaving prison or jail or as an alternative to prison or jail.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation, business or commercial enterprise conducted within the home. (See section 13-4-8 of this title.)
HOSPITAL: A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured persons, and those who are in need of medical and surgical
attention, and who are provided board or room and kept overnight.
HOTEL, MOTEL: A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation.
KENNEL1: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more domesticated animals more than four (4) months of age are housed, groomed, bred, boarded,
trained or sold, or which offers provisions for minor medical treatment.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT: A. For purposes of requiring special use approval, "live entertainment" shall be those activities conducted in a commercial entity
for entertainment purposes that is not purely incidental to the main use. Live bands, comedic and theatrical performances and similar activities are
considered "live entertainment" for purposes of this title. Karaoke, not provided as part of tournament, convention or other organized event, shall not be
considered "live entertainment" for the purposes of this title. Jukeboxes and dinner music, such as a piano bar, shall not be considered "live entertainment"
for purposes of this title. "Live entertainment" containing activities or areas as defined in chapter 5 of this title are regulated by that chapter and are not
permitted special use activities where prohibited by that chapter.
B. Special use permits for "live entertainment" shall not only adhere to the special use elements promulgated within this title, but shall require, at
minimum, conditions for special approval, adequate parking, means of egress, fire detection and suppression as required by this code, and adequate
security as determined by the Lyons police department. Special use approval is not required for events conducted or officially sponsored by the
village.
LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open area of land, other than a street, public way, or required parking space, the principal use of which is for
standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. A loading space
need not be a dock. Also known as a "loading berth".
LOT: A parcel or tract of land.
LOT COVERAGE: The ground floor area of all buildings and accessory uses (including, but not limited to, driveways, parking areas, patios, decks,
garages and sheds, but not including swimming pools) on a zoning lot divided by the area of the zoning lot.
LOT, FRONT OF: The narrowest portion of a zoning lot, which abuts a street.
LOT LINES: The dividing lines between a public way and an abutting lot, piece or parcel or the projected dividing lines between lots, pieces and parcels
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 252/307
without regard to any recorded plat.
Front Lot Line: The front street right of way line.
Rear Lot Line: The lot line most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
Side Lot Lines: Other lines.
LOT MEASUREMENTS: A lot shall be measured as follows:
A. Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the end points of the side lot lines at the front
and the rear.
B. Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting the front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot measured
at the front building setback line.
C. The area of a lot shall be computed exclusive of any portion of the right of way of any public street or alley.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot properly platted and recorded in the office of the Cook County recorder of deeds.
LOT TYPES: Terminology used in this title with reference to corner lots, interior lots and through lots is as follows:
Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be considered a "corner lot" if straight lines
projected tangent to the curve from the points of intersection between the curve and the side lot lines meet at an interior angle of less than one
hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on one street.
Reversed Frontage Lot: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the general pattern in the area. A "reversed frontage lot" may also be a corner
lot.
Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street.
MAINTENANCE AND STORAGE FACILITIES: Land, buildings and structures devoted primarily to the maintenance and storage (including, without
limitation, outdoor storage) of construction equipment and material.
MAJOR CHANGE: With regard to planned unit developments, a change in the approved materials, configuration or design of the development or a change
in an element which was specifically approved in the PUD ordinance. Normal engineering modifications are not to be considered "major changes" with
regard to planned unit developments.
MINOR CHANGE: Those changes not considered "major changes".
MOBILE HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. A "mobile home" need not be designed or used as a residence. The term does not include
recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
NONCONFORMING: A building, structure or use of land which does not conform to the zoning regulations of the district in which it is situated.
NURSERY: Land, building, structure or combination thereof for the storage, cultivation, or transplanting of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for sale on
the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping.
NURSING/RETIREMENT HOME: A place or residence for the aged or infirm in which three (3) or more persons are received, kept or provided with food
and shelter, or care, for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick
or injured. "Nursing homes" typically provide ongoing, on site medical care.
OBSTRUCTION: Any building or structure, or part thereof, which is located so as to intrude upon any open space required by this title. Trees or shrubs
shall not be considered as "obstructions", except as may be regulated herein. Recreational equipment, including swing sets and aboveground swimming
pools, shall be considered "obstructions". Recreational vehicles shall be considered "obstructions".
OCCUPANCY PERMIT: A written statement by the zoning administrator stating that the building, use and premises are in compliance with all applicable
standards, including this title.
OCTAVE BAND: A term denoting all the sound frequencies between any given frequency and doubles that frequency.
OUTDOOR CAFE OR EATING ESTABLISHMENT: An area located within the exterior premises of a licensed restaurant utilized for the purposes of food
and beverage consumption. Such area shall be screened and protected as required by special use conditions, if any, and shall not be located within the
required off street parking area of the restaurant. An "outdoor cafe or eating establishment" may be located on the public sidewalk adjacent to the
restaurant, if so approved through the special use process and conditioned so as to be protected from cars and not cause a public hazard or nuisance.
Such areas on public sidewalks shall not be permanent in nature. Alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in such areas, provided all applicable sections of
the village alcohol control regulations2 are met, and the area is properly contained to control and contain such use. Consideration for special use in this
category shall include the potential for significant noise and other nuisances to adjacent properties, potential hazards, blighting and unsanitary conditions.
PARK OR PLAYGROUND, PUBLIC: A land use designed principally to offer recreation, passive and/or active, to the public.
PARKING LOT: An open vehicle parking area containing more than four (4) parking spaces.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 253/307
PARKING SPACE: A bituminous, concrete or similar surfaced area, at least nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18'), other than a street or alley, accessible
from an approved driveway approach and upon which vehicles may be parked.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat
generated by or inherent in the uses of land or buildings.
PERMITTED USE: A use of land, building or structure expressly permitted within a district.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: One or more uses accommodated in a planned environment under more flexible standards than those allowed in the
district(s) in which the development is located.
PREMISES: A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
PUBLIC USES: Administrative and cultural buildings, uses and structures, including buildings, lots and facilities owned, used or operated by any
governmental agency.
PUBLIC UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY: Power plant; or bus, rail station, or other transportation depot; water treatment plant or pumping
station; sewage disposal or pumping plant; and other similar public service structures erected, operated or regulated by a public utility, by a railroad,
whether publicly or privately owned, or by a municipal or other governmental agency, including, but not limited to, electrical, gas, rail transport,
communication, and public water and sewage services facilities.
PUBLIC WAY: An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right of way, road, sidewalk,
street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk or other way in which the general public or public entity has a right, or which is dedicated, whether improved or not.
RAILWAY FACILITIES: One or more rail lines including, without limitation, tracts, spurs, branch lines, extensions, and/or tramways, that are located within
an industrial zone and that serve an industrial operation adjacent to said rail lines.
RECLAMATION OR FILL OPERATIONS: The operations necessary to receive and place uncontaminated soil or "clean construction or demolition debris",
as defined by 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.160(b), in a former quarry site in order to reclaim the site and make it suitable for redevelopment. These
operations include the inspection, segregation, preparation and placement of such materials in accordance with the laws, rules and regulations of the state
of Illinois. These operations may be combined with other permitted or approved special uses, subject to the applicable performance standards for each.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any camping trailer, motor home, mini-motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, van camper, boat or boat trailer used primarily
for recreational purposes and not used commercially, as well as any vehicle bearing recreational vehicle (RV) registration (license) plates.
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES: The conduct of research, development, and testing in various fields of science, such as, but not limited to, chemistry, pharmacy,
medicine, electricity, transportation and engineering.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: A place of business devoted in whole or in part to the sale, rental and/or servicing of goods or commodities which are normally
delivered or provided on the premises to a consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, a "right of way" normally incorporates the curbs,
lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY, JUNIOR HIGH OR HIGH: A public or private educational institution whose principal use is the offering of primary and secondary
school classes, grades K through 12.
SCREENING: Any structure or vegetation that conceals, protects or separates. Screening vegetation shall have year round opacity of at least seventy five
percent (75%).
SEAT: The number of devices for seating individual persons or the number of spaces allocated for seating individuals (but not less than 24 linear inches) in
multiperson seating units.
SETBACK LINE: A line generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard within which no building or structure may be
located aboveground, except as may be permitted by this title.
SIDEWALK, PUBLIC: That portion of the road right of way which is paved and intended for the use of pedestrian traffic.
SIGN: An identification, description, illustration, or device, illuminated or not illuminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on private
property and exposed to the public, and which directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including
any permanently installed or situated merchandise, or any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard, or temporary sign designated to advertise, identify
or convey information, and which is subject to regulation by the sections of the sign ordinance3. For purposes of removal, "signs" shall also include sign
structures.
SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING ARRANGEMENT: The layout and use of a dwelling unit that is compatible for persons living together as a single unit. A singlefamily
dwelling unit shall not be partitioned, cordoned or locked in such a manner that one adult occupant does not have free access to another part of the
dwelling. The rental of individual rooms or certain portions of a dwelling unit is not a "single housekeeping arrangement".
SPECIAL USE: Includes, but is not limited to: a) public and quasi-public uses related to the public interest; b) uses which may have a unique, special, or
unusual impact upon the use or enjoyment of neighboring property; and c) planned unit developments. "Special uses" require a special use permit.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: The ordinance authorizing a special use.
STANDARD SHRUB: Any plant specimen, evergreen or deciduous, which, upon maturity, occupies a space not less than eighteen (18) cubic feet.
STANDARD TREE: A tree with a minimum caliper of three inches (3") (measured 1 foot aboveground), ten (10) to twelve feet (12') high, of a deciduous or
evergreen variety, which is normally capable of attaining a twenty five foot (25') overall spread when the plant is twenty (20) years old.
STREET, PRIVATE: An undedicated street, privately owned and maintained, and intended as a primary means of access to a lot or lots.
STREET, THOROUGHFARE, OR ROAD: The full width between property lines bounding every public way of whatever nature, with a part thereof to be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 254/307
used for vehicular traffic.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, except those required by law or ordinance, which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a
building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, but not including openings in bearing walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, "structures" include buildings, walls, fences, signs, light standards, air conditioning units and heat pumps, and other fixed mechanical
equipment as well as recreational equipment which is not moved on a regular basis.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals fifty percent (50%) of the fair market
value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. The term does not, however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or b) any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving
preservation by the Illinois department of natural resources or listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
SWIMMING POOL: A pool, open tank or other containment of water intended for swimming or bathing, containing at least twenty four inches (24") of water
at any point, and maintained by the owner or manager.
Private Swimming Pool: Exclusively used, without paying an additional charge for admission, by the residents and guests of a single household, a
multi-family development, the members and guests of a club, or the patrons of a motel or hotel.
Public Swimming Pool: All other pools.
TOWER AND ANTENNA: Structure attached to a building or a detached structure affixed to the ground, used in the transmission, relaying or receiving of
electromagnetic waves or signals.
TRUCK TERMINAL: A zoning lot or contiguous lots, exceeding one acre in total land area, utilized as accessory parking and loading for commercial trucks
in conjunction with a single cartage, truck dispatching or similar enterprise. The use requires the presence of a primary building of substantial design and
construction located on the affected property or contiguous thereto which is solely devoted to and occupied for the office, dispatch or similar operations of
the truck terminal use.
USE: The specific purposes for which land or a building are designated, arranged, intended or for which they are or may be occupied or maintained. "Use"
includes construction, establishment, maintenance, alteration, enlargement, and occupation.
VARIATION: An ordinance granting specific relief from the bulk requirements of this title.
VETERINARY CLINIC: A place used for the diagnosis and medical and surgical treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured animals and which may include
overnight indoor accommodations.
WATER PARKS, AMUSEMENT PARKS: Publicly or privately owned amusements and recreational uses, indoor or outdoor, which include public swimming
pools, water slides, mechanical rides and/or similar activities that are not purely incidental to a principal approved use. When determining approval of this
special use, the village board may set such reasonable terms and conditions that will provide for the protection of health, safety and welfare of the park
participants, as well as area residents and businesses. Such determination may include the imposition of such fees and surcharges as may be necessary
to provide for village services such as police protection, ambulance and fire response, public works and inspections.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers rather than consumers.
YARD: An open space on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, FRONT: The open space across the full width of the lot extending from the closest point of the front line of the principal building to the front lot line.
On corner lots, the front yard shall face the street adjacent to the shortest lot line dimension.
YARD, REAR: The open space extending the full width of the lot between the closest point of the principal building and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: The open space between the closest point of the principal building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front line to the rear line
of the building.
ZONING CERTIFICATE: A written statement by the zoning administrator attesting that the application complies with all pertinent requirements of this title.
ZONING LOT: A single tract of land in common ownership located within a single block, which is used or occupied for any principal use, whether permitted,
special or nonconforming. A "zoning lot" need not coincide with a lot of record and may consist of:
A. A single lot of record.
B. A portion of a lot of record.
C. A combination of complete lots of record; of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record; or of portions of lots of record.
D. A piece of property described by metes and bounds. (1965 Code title 6 § 201.2; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
13-3-1: ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 255/307
The administration of this title is hereby vested in the following:
A. The zoning administrator;
B. The zoning board of appeals;
C. The plan commission; and
D. The president and board of trustees. (Ord. 08-17-11-O1, 8-17-2011)
13-3-1-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator shall be that person charged by the village manager to enforce this title and, in addition, to perform the following duties:
A. Issue all zoning certificates and occupancy certificates and make and maintain records thereof;
B. Direct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this title;
C. Maintain permanent and current records of this title including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special uses, variations, appeals and
applications therefor, and nonconforming uses, and records of all hearings on any of the aforementioned;
D. Receive, file and forward for action all appeals and applications for appeals, variations, amendments, and special uses;
E. Initiate, direct and review from time to time a study of the provisions of this title and submit a written report and recommendation to the zoning board of
appeals/plan commission or corporate authorities; and
F. Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission in the exercise of its duties. (1965
Code title 6 § 601.1)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 12-09-15-05 - COMPENSATION. Go to new ordinance.
13-3-1-2: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. Established; Appointment; Terms: There is hereby established a zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall consist of seven (7)
members appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The terms of the zoning board of appeals members shall be
five (5) years after the first appointments. However, first appointments shall be as follows: one person for one year; one person for two (2) years; one
person for three (3) years; one person for four (4) years; one person for five (5) years; one person for six (6) years; one person for seven (7) years.
One of the members shall be named chair by the president at the time of his/her appointment.
B. Removals; Vacancies: The president shall have the power to remove any member for cause after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of any member whose place has become vacant. In the event that the office of chair is vacated for any reason, the president shall
appoint either one of the remaining members or any member who is appointed to fill such vacancy as the new chair.
C. Meetings And Records:
1. All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as a majority of the zoning board of appeals
may determine.
2. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this title shall be given under oath. The chair, or in his absence the acting chair, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
3. All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be open to the public.
4. No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the zoning board of appeals being present, which shall consist of a majority of all the members.
Any absent member who certifies that he has read the transcript of the proceedings before the zoning board of appeals may vote upon any question
before the zoning board of appeals.
5. The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
6. Every rule, regulation, amendment, repeal, order, requirement or determination of the zoning board of appeals shall immediately be filed in the office
of the zoning board of appeals and shall be a public record.
7. The zoning board of appeals shall decide matters as authorized by this title. A concurring vote of four (4) members of the zoning board of appeals
shall be necessary on any matter upon which it is authorized to decide by this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 256/307
D. Jurisdiction And Authority: The zoning board of appeals is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
1. To establish a time for and conduct public hearings on and make written findings of fact and recommendations to the village board concerning
applications for: a) variations; b) special use permits.
2. To decide appeals from any final order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator.
3. To hear, decide and consider all other matters referred to it by the village board or upon which it is required to act pursuant to the provisions of this
title, or as prescribed by the applicable provisions of this code or the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 08-17-11-O1, 8-17-2011)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 12-09-15-05 - COMPENSATION. Go to new ordinance.
13-3-1-3: PLAN COMMISSION:
A. Established; Appointment; Terms: There is hereby established a plan commission. Said plan commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed
by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The terms of the plan commission members shall be one year. One of the
members shall be named chair at the time of his/her appointment.
B. Removals; Vacancies: The president shall have the power to remove any member for cause after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of any member whose place has become vacant. In the event that the office of chair is vacated for any reason, the president shall
appoint either one of the remaining members or any member who is appointed to fill such vacancy as the new chair.
C. Meetings And Records:
1. All meetings of the plan commission shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as a majority of the plan commission may
determine.
2. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this title shall be given under oath. The chair, or in his absence the acting chair, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
3. All meetings of the plan commission shall be open to the public.
4. No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the plan commission being present, which shall consist of a majority of all the members. Any
absent member who certifies that he has read the transcript of the proceedings before the plan commission may vote upon any question before the
plan commission.
5. The plan commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
6. Every rule, regulation, amendment, repeal, order, requirement or determination of the plan commission shall immediately be filed in the office of the
plan commission and shall be a public record.
7. The plan commission shall decide matters as authorized by this title. A concurring vote of four (4) members of the plan commission shall be
necessary on any matter upon which it is authorized to decide by this title.
D. Jurisdiction And Authority: The plan commission is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
1. To establish a time for and conduct public hearings on and make written findings of fact and recommendations to the village board concerning
applications for amendments to the zoning district map or text of this title.
2. To review the recommendations of the zoning administrator as to the effectiveness of this title and report its conclusions and recommendations to the
village board.
3. To review the zoning district map for accuracy at least annually so that the zoning district map may be updated and published in the manner required
by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
4. To review the comprehensive plan at least annually and to recommend any changes to the village board after a public hearing in compliance with the
Illinois Compiled Statutes.
5. To hear, decide and consider all other matters referred to it by the village board or upon which it is required to act pursuant to the provisions of this
title, or as prescribed by the applicable provisions of this code or the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 08-17-11-O1, 8-17-2011)
13-3-1-4: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The village board of trustees is the elected legislative authority of the village and has reserved unto itself the final authority on variations, special uses, and
amendments to be exercised pursuant to its legislative discretion. (1965 Code title 6 § 601.3; amd. Ord. 08-17-11-O1, 8-17-2011)
13-3-2: CERTIFICATES:
A. Zoning Certificates: No permit, as required by the building code of the village, shall be issued for the construction of a building, structure or land
improvement or an alteration or enlargement of an existing building, structure, or land improvement, and the uses thereof, until the zoning administrator
certifies that the application for a permit, with accompanying plans and specifications, conforms with the regulations of this title. Any permit issued in
conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void. (1965 Code title 6 § 601.4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 257/307
B. Occupancy Certificates1:
1. Certificate Required:
a. No land shall be occupied or used and no building or structure hereinafter erected, altered or enlarged shall be occupied or used in whole or in
part for any purpose until an occupancy certificate has been issued by the zoning administrator.
b. No change of use shall be made in any building, structure or land improvement, or part thereof, now or hereafter erected or constructed unless an
occupancy certificate has been issued by the zoning administrator.
2. Conditions Of Issuance: An occupancy certificate shall be issued only after the zoning administrator has inspected the land, building or structure and
finds: (1965 Code title 6 § 601.5)
a. It to be in compliance with all applicable regulations of the village, including, but not limited to, this title and the village building code, fire code and
property maintenance code; and (1965 Code title 6 § 601.5; amd. 2009 Code)
b. That the use is a permanent use or a special use in the zoning district where such land, building or structure is located. If the use is a special use,
a special use permit shall have properly been granted prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. (1965 Code title 6 § 601.5)
C. Temporary Occupancy Certificate: The zoning administrator may issue one temporary occupancy certificate for a period of six (6) months with one
extension of not more than three (3) months if it is for the occupancy of a portion of land, building or structure that has been completed and conforms
with subsection B2 of this section and the remaining portion of the land, building or structure or improvement is in the process of completion. (1965
Code title 6 § 601.6)
13-3-3: VARIATIONS:
A. Authority: The board of trustees, after a hearing by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission, may determine and vary the regulations of this title in
harmony with their general purpose and intent in specific cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out
the strict letter of the regulations of this title. Provided, however, that no variation shall be granted authorizing the use of land, buildings or structures
which is not a permitted use or a special use in the district in which said land, buildings or structures are located. (1965 Code title 6 § 602.1)
B. Application For Variation; Fee: An application for a variation shall be filed with the zoning administrator along with an application fee as provided in
section 13-3-8 of this chapter. The application shall contain the following information: (1965 Code title 6 § 602.2; amd. 2009 Code)
1. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, the owner of the property, if different, and the applicant's attorney or representative, if any;
2. The legal description, common address and permanent index number of the property;
3. The specific provisions of this title from which the variation is sought;
4. A description of the proposed structure or use including a dimensioned site plan or plat; and
5. A brief summary of the factual evidence upon which the applicant will rely to show that the standards for a variation are met. (1965 Code title 6
§ 602.2)
C. Hearing And Standards: The zoning administrator shall forward the application to the zoning board of appeals/plan commission to conduct a public
hearing. In determining whether there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this
title, the zoning board of appeals/plan commission and village board shall take into consideration the extent to which the following facts are established:
1. That the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular hardship upon
the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of the regulation were to be carried out;
2. That the conditions upon which the petition for variation is based would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning district;
3. That the variation is not solely and exclusively for the purpose of enhancing the value of the property;
4. That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property;
5. That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located; and
6. That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or substantially increase the danger of fire or
otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. (1965 Code title 6 § 602.3)
D. Conditions Of Approval: The zoning board of appeals/plan commission may recommend and the village board of trustees may impose such conditions
and restrictions upon the property benefited by a variation as they deem necessary to assure compliance with other regulations of this title or to reduce
or minimize the effect of the variation upon other property in the neighborhood or to implement the general purpose and intent of this title. (1965 Code
title 6 § 602.4)
E. Findings Of Fact, Recommendations And Approval: Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals/plan commission
shall report its findings of fact and recommendations to the board of trustees in writing. Upon receipt of the findings of fact and recommendations, the
board of trustees, by ordinance, without further public hearing, may adopt any proposed variation or may refer it back to the zoning board of
appeals/plan commission for further consideration. Provided, that any proposed variation which fails to receive a positive recommendation from the
zoning board of appeals/plan commission shall be passed only by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees of the village. Every ordinance granting a
variation shall contain a statement of findings specifying the reason or reasons for making the variation. (1965 Code title 6 § 602.5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 258/307
F. Expiration Of Variation: No variation shall be valid for a period longer than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date it was granted, unless a building
permit or certificate of occupancy is obtained within such period. The village board may grant one extension of this period, valid for no more than an
additional one hundred eighty (180) days, upon written application and good cause shown, without notice or hearing. (1965 Code title 6 § 602.6)
13-3-4: SPECIAL USES:
A. Purpose; Use Categories: The development and execution of this title is based upon the division of the village into zoning districts, within any one of
which the use of land and use of buildings are essentially uniform. However, certain uses, because of their unique character, cannot be properly
classified in any particular district or districts without consideration in each case of the impact of those uses upon neighboring lands and upon the
public need for the particular use at the particular location. Such uses fall into two (2) categories:
1. Uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated utilities or uses traditionally affected with a public interest; and
2. Uses entirely private in character but of such a nature that the operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities.
B. Authority: Special uses shall be authorized by the board of trustees after a hearing before the zoning board of appeals/plan commission in accordance
with the Illinois statutes and standards set forth in this title for special uses. (1965 Code title 6 § 602.7)
C. Application For Special Use: An application for a special use shall be filed with the zoning administrator along with an application fee as provided in
section 13-3-8 of this chapter. Said application shall contain the following information: (1965 Code title 6 § 602.7; amd. 2009 Code)
1. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, the owner of the property, if different, and the applicant's attorney or representative, if any;
2. The legal description, common address and permanent index number of the property;
3. A description of the existing use of the property;
4. The zoning district in which the property is located;
5. Description of the proposed special use;
6. An architectural sketch, and either a dimensioned site plan or plat showing the location of all buildings, parking areas, traffic access and circulation,
open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities, signs and yards; and
7. A brief summary of the factual evidence upon which the applicant will rely to show that the standards for a special use are met.
D. Hearing And Standards: The zoning administrator shall forward the application to the zoning board of appeals/plan commission to conduct a public
hearing. In deciding whether or not to recommend granting the special use to the village board, the zoning board of appeals/plan commission shall take
into consideration the extent to which the proposed use:
1. Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives of the comprehensive plan and this title;
2. Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity;
3. Will not change the essential character of the general vicinity;
4. Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighborhood uses; and
5. Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is located.
E. Conditions Of Approval: The zoning board of appeals/plan commission may recommend and the village board may impose such conditions and
restrictions upon the property benefited by the special use as they deem necessary to assure compliance with other provisions of this title, or to reduce
or minimize the effect of such special use upon other property in the neighborhood, or to implement the general purpose and intent of this title. Said
conditions or restrictions may include variations from the bulk requirements of this title.
F. Findings Of Fact, Recommendations And Approval: Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals/plan commission
shall report its findings of fact and recommendations to the board of trustees in writing. Upon receipt of the findings of fact and recommendations, the
board of trustees, by ordinance, without further public hearing, may authorize or deny an application for a special use in accordance with Illinois
statutes or it may refer the application back to the zoning board of appeals/plan commission for further consideration.
G. Specific Special Use Permits:
1. Group Homes: Review and approval of a special use permit for a group home need not take into consideration the standards in subsection D of this
section. Said review and approval shall be based principally on whether the structure and facilities sought to be used for a group home are physically
adequate for the number of proposed residents and their particular disability(ies) and whether the structure or facility meets subsection D2 of this
section.
2. Facilities Operating Under 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.38, "Facilities Accepting Exclusively General Construction Or Demolition Debris For
Transfer, Storage Or Treatment":
a. In addition to the requirements of this section, including that of the submission of a site plan, applicants seeking a special use permit to operate a
facility under 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.38 shall submit a plan of operations demonstrating traffic flow and the manner in which the debris
shall be received and accepted, processed, stored and made ready for transport to end markets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 259/307
b. The village may permit a facility with a boundary less than one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') from the nearest property zoned for
primarily residential use.
c. All special use permits granted hereunder shall be conditioned upon compliance with the requirements of 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.38,
as now existing or hereafter amended, and all administrative regulations promulgated thereunder. All special use permits granted hereunder shall
also be conditioned upon compliance with all performance standards of the I-1 district, unless modified as a condition of the special use permit.
(1965 Code title 6 § 602.7)
13-3-5: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under this title may be amended from time to time by ordinance in accordance with
applicable Illinois statutes. An amendment shall be granted or denied by the board of trustees only after public hearing before the zoning board of
appeals/plan commission and report of its findings and recommendations has been submitted to the board of trustees. (1965 Code title 6 § 603.1)
B. Application For Amendment: An application for amendment shall be filed with the zoning administrator along with an application fee as provided in
section 13-3-8 of this chapter. Said application shall contain the following information: (1965 Code title 6 § 603.2; amd. 2009 Code)
1. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, the owner of the property, if different, and the applicant's attorney or representative, if any.
2. The legal description, common address(es) and permanent index number(s) of the property.
3. A description of the existing use of the property.
4. The zoning district in which the property is located.
5. The proposed use of the subject property.
6. The land uses and zoning districts of all properties abutting or across a street or alley from the subject property.
7. The proposed zoning of the subject property.
8. If the proposed amendment is a "text amendment" rather than "map amendment", the application need only include subsection B1 of this section
and the proposed language of the text amendment. (1965 Code title 6 § 603.2)
C. Hearing: The zoning administrator shall forward the application to the zoning board of appeals/plan commission to conduct a public hearing. (1965
Code title 6 § 603.3)
D. Conditions Of Approval: The zoning board of appeals/plan commission may recommend, and the village board may impose, such conditions and
restrictions upon the property benefited by a map amendment as they deem necessary to assure compliance with other provisions of this title or to
reduce or minimize the effect of such map amendment upon other property in the neighborhood or to implement the general purpose and intent of this
title. Said conditions or restrictions may include approval of a special site plan including variations from the bulk requirements of this title. (1965 Code
title 6 § 603.4)
E. Findings Of Fact, Recommendations And Approval:
1. The zoning board of appeals/plan commission shall make the following findings of fact, where applicable, in relation to all applications under this
section for a map amendment (rezoning):
a. The existing uses and zoning classifications of properties in the vicinity of the subject property.
b. The trend of development in the vicinity of the subject property, including changes, if any, in such trend since the subject property was placed in its
present plan designation or zoning classification.
c. The extent to which the value of the subject property is diminished by the existing comprehensive plan designation or zoning classification.
d. The extent to which such diminution in value is offset by an increase in the public health, safety, and welfare.
e. The extent, if any, to which the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
f. The extent, if any, to which the value of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
g. The extent, if any, to which future orderly development and redevelopment of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
h. The suitability of the subject property for uses permitted or permissible under its present comprehensive plan designation or zoning classification.
i. The availability of adequate ingress and egress from the subject property and the extent to which traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity of the
subject property would be affected by the proposed amendment.
j. Availability of adequate public utilities and essential public services to the subject property to accommodate the uses permitted or permissible
under its present comprehensive plan designation or zoning classification.
k. Length of time that the subject property has been vacant or underutilized, in consideration of the contest of the pace of development and
redevelopment in the vicinity of the subject property and the community's need for the proposed map amendment and for the uses and
development that it would allow.
2. In considering any application for a text amendment to this title, it is not necessary for the zoning board of appeals/plan commission to make any
specific findings of fact, but the zoning board of appeals/plan commission should be guided by the principle that such amendments are reserved to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 260/307
the sole legislative discretion of the board of trustees, which discretion may not be exercised in an arbitrary manner, but in accordance with the
purposes of this title set forth in section 13-1-2 of this title and in accordance with the land use policies and objectives set forth in this title.
3. Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals/plan commission shall report its findings of fact, if applicable, and
recommendations to the board of trustees in writing. Upon receipt of the findings of fact, if applicable, and recommendations, the board of trustees,
by ordinance, without further public hearing, may adopt any proposed amendment or may refer it back to the zoning board of appeals/plan
commission for further consideration.
4. In the event a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an
alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the village
clerk, the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees then holding office. In such cases, a copy of
the written protest shall be served by the protester or protesters on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the applicant's
attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment. (1965 Code title
6 § 603.5)
13-3-6: APPEALS:
A. Authority: An appeal from a final order, requirement, decision or determination to issue, not to issue, revoke, rescind or extend a permit or certificate
requiring compliance with the provisions of this title may be taken to the zoning board of appeals/plan commission by any person aggrieved by any
officer or department of the village. Such an appeal shall be taken within forty five (45) days of the decision complained of by filing a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof and an appeal fee, as provided in section 13-3-8 of this chapter, with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator
shall transmit all papers constituting the record of the decision to the zoning board of appeals/plan commission. (1965 Code title 6 § 601.7; amd. 2009
Code)
B. Actions Stayed: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the zoning
board of appeals/plan commission, after notice of the appeal has been filed with the zoning administrator, that by reason of a fact stated in the zoning
administrator's statement, to deny a stay would, in the zoning administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the
proceedings shall not be stayed unless determined otherwise by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission or as ordered by a court of competent
jurisdiction for due cause shown. (1965 Code title 6 § 601.7)
C. Hearing And Decision: The zoning board of appeals/plan commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal and give at least ten (10)
days' notice to all parties interested in the appeal. The notice shall be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the village and also by
mailing notice thereof to the parties in interest. In addition, any party may appear in person or by agent. The zoning board of appeals/plan commission
shall reach its decision within a reasonable period of time after the conclusion of the hearing. The zoning board of appeals/plan commission may affirm
or may reverse wholly or in part or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal was taken. The decision of the zoning board of appeals/plan commission may be appealed by either the building and planning
director (or village manager) or the petitioning party to the village board. Said appeal shall be on the record only. Judicial review of the decision of the
village board on appeal shall be in accordance with the administrative review law of the Illinois Compiled Statutes2. (1965 Code title 6 § 601.7; amd.
2009 Code)
13-3-7: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIATIONS, SPECIAL USES AND AMENDMENTS:
A. Published Notice: No public hearing before the zoning board of appeals/plan commission on any application for a variation, special use or amendment
shall be held unless notice of the time and place of the hearing is published at least once not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before
the beginning of the hearing in one or more newspapers published within the village or if no newspaper is published within the village, then in one or
more newspaper with a general circulation within the village which is published in Cook County. (1965 Code title 6 § 604.1)
B. Radius Of Notices: Each application for a variation, special use or amendment shall include a list of all property owners of all property within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the parcel, exclusive of road rights of way. The list of property owners shall be obtained either by the record from the county
recorder of deeds or from the tax records maintained by the county clerk. (1965 Code title 6 § 604.2)
C. Timetable: The zoning administrator shall cause notice of the public hearing to be published as required herein. The applicant shall mail notice to the
property owners on the required list at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing by first class mail and submit an affidavit to the zoning
administrator stating that the required mailing has been done. (1965 Code title 6 § 604.3)
D. Requirements For C-R Zoning District: Notice of a public meeting for site plan approval in a C-R district shall be by publication only. The zoning
administrator, at his discretion, may require mailing and posting notice. (1965 Code title 6 § 604.4)
13-3-8: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEES:
A. Fee Schedule: The following zoning fee schedule is adopted. All fees are cumulative.
Variance request $500.00
PUD 750.00
Special use request 500.00
Site plan review 500.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 261/307
Zoning amendment 750.00
ZBA determination 500.00 Miscellaneous interpretations and appeals
Administrative review 50.00 Determinations involving significant review
(1965 Code title 6 § 101.7; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Determination Of Fee Amount; Fee Nonrefundable: An applicant shall pay the appropriate application fee for each of the requests as set out in
subsection A of this section. By way of example, a project involving a variance, special use and site plan review request would require a total
application fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). All fees are nonrefundable.
C. Additional Costs: In addition to the payment of the foregoing fees, the applicant or owner of the subject property shall reimburse the village or pay
directly to the village consultants, as determined by the village, all expenses, costs and fees incurred by the village in its sole judgment in connection
with the consideration and review of applications for variation, special use, planned unit development, zoning amendment, site plan review or appeal.
Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, stenographic fees; engineering review fees; traffic engineer fees; financial consultants, planning
consultants, landscape consultants and other consulting fees; attorney fees; public hearing and publication charges and recording charges.
D. Time For Payment: Such charges shall be paid within seven (7) days after an invoice is submitted to the applicant, owner or appellant by the village
staff, but in no event shall the village zoning board of appeals/plan commission or board of trustees take any final action or render any final decision on
any application or appeal prior to payment of all invoiced items. These fees and charges shall be paid notwithstanding an adverse decision to the
applicant by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission or board of trustees; the abandonment of the proceedings by the applicant; or the denial of
the request of an applicant in whole or in part by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission or board of trustees.
E. Deposit May Be Required: In addition to the foregoing, the village may require a deposit for such services and subsequent increases at its discretion at
any time during the pendency of such proceedings. Failure to pay such deposit shall hold such proceedings in abeyance, with such proceedings
terminating upon a failure to pay, within forty five (45) days of notice to pay, such deposit or increased deposit. (1965 Code title 6 § 101.7)
13-3-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the terms and conditions of this title shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) with each and
every day that a violation of this title is allowed to remain in effect being deemed a complete and separate offense. In addition, the appropriate authorities
of the village may take such other action as they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of this title including, without limitation, an action in
equity to compel compliance with its terms. In addition, any person who refuses a request by the zoning administrator to abate a perceived violation of a
performance standard set forth in this title will be subject, in addition to the foregoing penalties, to pay the costs of any professional testing required to
prove a violation of the performance standard. (1965 Code title 6 § 605.0)
Footnote 1: See also section 12-1-3 of this code.
Footnote 2: 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
Chapter 4
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
13-4-1: MINIMUM DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
A. The regulations for each district set forth in this title shall be minimum regulations for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare.
B. No portion of any zoning lot, whether improved or unimproved, shall be sold, granted or otherwise divided if such division will cause the lot width, lot
frontage, lot area, setbacks, maximum lot coverage, floor area ratio or required open space of any of the resulting parcels to be less than the minimum
requirements set forth in this title for the particular zoning district in which the property is located. (1965 Code title 6 § 301.0)
13-4-2: CONTIGUOUS SUBSTANDARD LOTS:
Where two (2) or more contiguous substandard lots of record or parts of lots of record are in common ownership and are of such size as to constitute at
least one conforming "zoning lot", such lots of record or portions thereof shall be joined, developed and used jointly for the purpose of forming an effective
and conforming zoning lot(s). Such contiguous substandard lots of record in common ownership on the effective date hereof shall be considered jointly
thereafter as being a single parcel, lot or zoning lot for the purposes of this title. (1965 Code title 6 § 301.0)
13-4-3: RESIDENTIAL LOTS DEFICIENT IN SIZE:
Any residentially zoned lot that was already platted prior to the July 1993 adoption of this title that is deficient in overall lot size or frontage may be
constructed upon for residential use, provided all other requirements of this title and the village building code are complied with, including, but not limited
to, permitted use, setback and lot coverage. Such construction shall not be permitted unless the subject lot has been allocated its own parcel identification
number (PIN) by the proper authority. The above definition notwithstanding, construction shall not be permitted on lots where the frontage is less than forty
feet (40') or the deficiency is not significantly uniform with fifty percent (50%) of the block on which the property is located. (1965 Code title 6 § 301.0)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 262/307
13-4-4: ONE STRUCTURE PER LOT:
Except as may be allowed in planned unit developments, there shall be only one principal structure or building on any platted lot. (1965 Code title 6
§ 301.0)
13-4-5: SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
A. Required: Site plan review and approval shall be required for all new principal buildings and developments in the B-1, B-2, M, C-R, P-1 and R-3
(multiple-family) zones. (1965 Code title 6 § 301.0; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Criteria: The building director shall establish a general criteria for required site plans, which shall be mandatory for accepting such plans and submitting
same for review.
C. Hearing: The zoning board of appeals/plan commission shall conduct a public hearing for the review and recommendations pertaining to the site plan in
the same manner and notice required for special use hearings1. The village board of trustees shall have final administrative site plan approval.
D. Recommendations And Approval: The zoning board of appeals/plan commission may recommend and the village board of trustees may require, as part
of the site plan approval, such green space and aesthetic requirements on proposed land and building development that is necessary to protect and
promote the health, safety and welfare of the community and promote architecture and land design that is harmonious with the concept of openness,
conservation and the surrounding neighborhood and compatible with the comprehensive land use plan. (1965 Code title 6 § 301.0)
13-4-6: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN YARDS:
A. All yards:
1. Chimneys, but not greater than two feet (2') into a required setback.
2. Bay windows, but not more than two feet (2') into a required setback.
3. Eaves, but not more than twenty four inches (24") into a required setback.
4. Gutters and downspouts, but not extending more than twelve inches (12") from the edge of the eaves.
5. Basketball poles, hoops and backboards. (1965 Code title 6 § 302.1)
B. Side yards:
1. Stairs from a side door, but not more than three feet (3') into the required setback.
2. Canopy over a side door entrance, but not more than three feet (3') into the required setback.
3. Garages in interior side yards, provided there is at least a three foot (3') setback from the side lot line and a five foot (5') setback from the alley if
there is an alley entrance. (1965 Code title 6 § 302.2)
C. Front and corner side yards:
1. Open, unenclosed porches and stairs, but not more than eight feet (8') into the required setback.
2. Enclosed vestibules not more than four feet (4') into the required setback. (1965 Code title 6 § 302.3)
D. Rear yards:
1. Swing sets and other similar recreation equipment.
2. Decks and patios.
3. Swimming pools.
4. Storage sheds, but not over eight feet (8') in height.
5. Garages, provided there is at least a three foot (3') setback from the rear lot line and a five foot (5') setback from the alley if there is an alley
entrance.
6. Radio or television poles, towers, or antennas, including satellite dishes. (1965 Code title 6 § 302.4)
13-4-7: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The performance standards found in the I-1 industrial district regulations shall apply to all uses in all districts2. (1965 Code title 6 § 301.0)
13-4-8: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 263/307
The following regulations shall apply to all home occupations:
A. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.
B. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and
not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
C. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other
than one sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, nonilluminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building.
D. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
E. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need
for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall meet the off street parking requirements as specified in this title and shall not be
located in the required front yard.
F. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable
to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a
single-family residence. There shall be no storage of hazardous or toxic materials. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall
be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the
premises. (1965 Code title 6 § 303.0)
Footnote 1: See sections 13-3-4 and 13-3-7 of this title.
Footnote 2: See section 13-8-6 of this title.
Chapter 5
ADULT USES1
13-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having twenty five percent (25%) or more of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for rent, sale or
for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas; or an establishment with a segment or
section devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon
its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises
or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which:
A. Features topless dancers, strippers, or male or female impersonators;
B. Not infrequently features entertainers who display specified anatomical areas; or
C. Features entertainers who, by reason of their appearance or conduct, perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient
interest of the patron, or entertainers who engage in or are engaged in explicit simulation of specified sexual activities.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having twenty five percent (25%) or more of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing
"novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or use for specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,
or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, exclusion
of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment cabarets, adult novelty stores and other similar uses.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals, pubic region; 2) buttock; 3) female breasts below
a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. (1965 Code title 6 § 304.1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 264/307
13-5-2: SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED; STANDARDS:
No adult use shall operate even at those locations where they may be allowed pursuant to section 13-5-4 of this chapter without first having obtained a
special use permit in the manner set forth in section 13-3-4 of this title. However, the standards for special uses set forth in subsection 13-3-4D of this title
shall not apply with regard to the application for a special use permit for an adult use. Instead, the standards of this section shall apply. No adult special
use permit shall be granted by the village board unless the board finds:
A. The design and operation of the facility will not adversely affect the public health and safety.
B. It will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is located.
C. It will not unduly increase traffic congestion in the public streets and highways in the area in which it is located.
D. It will not cause additional public expense for fire or police protection.
E. It will not substantially increase the possibility of criminal acts against persons and properties within five hundred feet (500') of such proposed special
use or against persons who regularly use such properties. (1965 Code title 6 §§ 304.4, 304.5)
13-5-3: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
The owner of a building or premises, his agent for the purposes of managing, controlling or collecting rents, or any other person managing or controlling a
building or premises, any part of which contains an adult use, shall register the following information with the village clerk:
A. The address of the premises.
B. The name of the owner of the premises and names of the beneficial owners if the property is in a land trust.
C. The addresses of the owner and the beneficial owners.
D. The name of the business or establishment subject to the provisions of this chapter.
E. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner, beneficial owner or the major stockholders of the business or establishment subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
F. The date of initiation of the adult use.
G. The nature of the adult use.
H. If the premises or building is leased, a copy of said lease must be attached. (1965 Code title 6 § 304.6)
13-5-4: LOCATION:
Adult uses may be allowed, upon obtaining a special use permit, in any I-1 industrial district; provided, that no adult use shall be located on a parcel, a lot
line of which is within two hundred feet (200') of any property which is used as a school or another adult use. (1965 Code title 6 § 304.3)
13-5-5: LIQUOR LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or consumed on premises of any adult use. (1965 Code title 6 § 304.2)
13-5-6: EXTERIOR DISPLAY PROHIBITIONS:
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any property not registered as an adult use. This section shall apply to any display, decoration,
sign, show window or other opening. (1965 Code title 6 § 304.7)
13-5-7: EXISTING ADULT USES:
Any adult use which existed lawfully, but which became nonconforming upon the effective date hereof, may be continued as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 265/307
A. Upon written notice from the village to the owners/interests therein that any building, structure, lot or regulated use is nonconforming under the
provisions of this title, as amended, the owners/interests therein shall, within two (2) months from the date of such notice, apply to the village clerk for a
certificate of nonconformance.
B. Failure to apply for a certificate of nonconformance within two (2) months of the notice provided in section A of this section will require the amortization
of the nonconformance within six (6) months of the notice provided for in said subsection A. (1965 Code title 6 § 304.8)
C. Nonconforming business owners/interests that have applied for a certificate of nonconformance from the village clerk shall be allowed to continue the
business if the business becomes conforming within one year of the notice provided in section A of this section. (1965 Code title 6 § 304.8; amd. 2009
Code)
Chapter 6
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
13-6A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Churches, temples or synagogues _ on a lot not less than one acre in area.
Convents, monasteries and seminaries _ on lots not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') in width and eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet in area.
Group homes.
"Home occupations" as defined in section 13-2-2 of this title.
Municipal playgrounds.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work. Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction
work.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. (1965 Code title 6 § 401.1; amd. 2009 Code)
13-6A-2: SPECIAL USES:
Daycare centers and nursery schools.
Off street parking for permitted or special uses in other districts.
Parks and playgrounds, private, not for profit _ on lots not less than one acre in area.
Planned unit development.
Public buildings, including libraries, fire stations and police stations.
Recreational buildings.
Schools _ elementary, junior high and high _ nonboarding.
Utility uses including water filtration plants, pumping stations, and reservoirs. (1965 Code title 6 § 401.2)
13-6A-3: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Lot Area:
1. Minimum width: Fifty feet (50').
2. Minimum total area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet; except, that in that part of the village bounded by 43rd Street on the south, Gage Avenue on
the west, Fisherman's Terrace on the east and the line running east from the northwest corner of the lot at 4103 Gage through the northeast corner
of the lot at 4102 Fisherman's Terrace on the north, wherein inclusively, the minimum total area shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet.
B. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Twenty five feet (25') minimum. However, where the front yard setback for fifty percent (50%) of the frontage on the same side of a street
as the subject property, between two (2) intersecting streets, is less than the minimum, the front yard setback shall be not less than the average front
yard setback for the existing buildings.
2. Rear Yard: Thirty foot (30') minimum.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 266/307
3. Side Yard: Both side yards shall be five feet (5') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width, whichever is greater.
4. Corner Side Yard: Ten feet (10') or twenty percent (20%) of the lot width, whichever is greater.
C. Lot Coverage:
1. Total Lot Coverage: Maximum fifty percent (50%).
2. Rear Yard: Maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard covered by accessory buildings (carport, garage, storage shed, etc.). In addition, a
detached garage or other accessory building shall not be constructed closer than ten feet (10') to the residential structure.
D. Building Height: Maximum thirty five feet (35') as measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within twenty feet (20') of the front of the
proposed building.
E. Accessory Buildings: Residential zoned or properties utilized solely for residential purposes will be restricted to one garage and one shed per zoning lot.
1. Garages shall be:
a. A maximum of fifteen feet (15') in height.
b. A maximum eight foot (8') high door.
c. A maximum six hundred seventy six (676) square feet in area.
2. Sheds or other accessory storage building shall be limited to one hundred (100) square feet in area and eight feet (8') in height.
3. "Height", for purposes of this subsection, shall be measured from the established grade at the base of the structure to the top of the ridge of the
structure. The building director shall have final jurisdiction regarding the computation of height under this subsection. (1965 Code title 6 § 401.3;
amd. 2009 Code)
ARTICLE B. R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
13-6B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-1A single-family detached residence district is to recognize the existing areas of the village which have been developed with thirty
foot (30') wide lots. It specifically is not the intention of the village to expand the existing R-1A districts or to add additional R-1A districts in other portions
of the village. (1965 Code title 6 § 402.1)
13-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The same as allowed in the R-1 district. (1965 Code title 6 § 402.2)
13-6B-3: SPECIAL USES:
The same as allowed in the R-1 district. (1965 Code title 6 § 402.3)
13-6B-4: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Lot Area:
1. Minimum width: Thirty feet (30').
2. Minimum total area: Three thousand four hundred eighty (3,480) square feet.
B. Setbacks: All minimum setback requirements are the same as those in the R-1 residence district; except, that the side yard setbacks shall be no less
than four feet (4') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width, whichever is greater, and corner side yard setbacks shall be seven feet (7') or twenty percent
(20%) of the lot width, whichever is greater.
C. Lot Coverage:
1. Total Lot Coverage: Maximum fifty percent (50%).
2. Rear Yard: Maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard covered by accessory buildings (carport, garage, storage shed, etc.). In addition, a
detached garage or other accessory building shall not be constructed closer than ten feet (10') to the residential structure.
D. Building Height: Maximum thirty five feet (35') as measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within twenty feet (20') of the front of the
proposed building. (1965 Code title 6 § 402.4; amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 267/307
ARTICLE C. R-2 TWO-FAMILY DWELLING RESIDENCE DISTRICT
13-6C-1: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 district.
Single-family attached dwellings.
Two-family dwellings _ duplexes or two-flats. (1965 Code title 6 § 403.1)
13-6C-2: SPECIAL USES:
All special uses in the R-1 district. (1965 Code title 6 § 403.2)
13-6C-3: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Lot Area:
1. Minimum width: Fifty feet (50').
2. Minimum total area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet for single-family detached dwellings, duplexes or two-flats; nine thousand (9,000) square feet
for three (3) single-family attached dwellings; and ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet for four (4) single-family attached dwellings.
B. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Twenty five feet (25') minimum.
2. Rear Yard: Thirty feet (30') minimum.
3. Side Yard: Both side yards shall be five feet (5') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width, whichever is greater.
4. Corner Side Yard: Ten feet (10') or twenty percent (20%) of the lot width, whichever is greater.
C. Lot Coverage:
1. Total Lot Coverage: Maximum sixty five percent (65%).
2. Rear Yard: Maximum of forty percent (40%) of the rear yard covered by accessory buildings (carport, garage, storage shed, etc.). In addition, a
detached garage or other accessory building shall not be constructed closer than ten feet (10') to the residential structure.
D. Building Height: Maximum twenty seven feet (27') with peaked roof, twenty one feet (21') with flat roof as measured from the average elevation of the
finished grade within twenty feet (20') of the front of the proposed building (not including chimney).
E. Accessory Buildings: The same as those enumerated for R-1 districts. (1965 Code title 6 § 403.3; amd. 2009 Code)
ARTICLE D. R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING RESIDENCE DISTRICT
13-6D-1: PERMITTED USES:
All permitted uses in an R-1 district except single-family detached dwellings.
Multiple dwellings. (1965 Code title 6 § 404.1)
13-6D-2: SPECIAL USES:
All special uses allowed in an R-1 zoning district.
Nursing homes.
Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, and lodges except those where the chief activity is a service customarily carried on as a business. (1965 Code title 6
§ 404.2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 268/307
13-6D-3: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Lot Area:
1. Minimum Width: Fifty feet (50').
2. Minimum Total Area: Maximum twelve (12) units per acre of land area (prorated at 3,630 square feet of land area per unit for lots less than one acre
in land area).
B. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Thirty feet (30') minimum, plus two feet (2') for every story above the first floor.
2. Rear Yard: Thirty five feet (35') minimum, plus two feet (2') for every story above the first floor.
3. Interior Side: Ten feet (10') or fifteen percent (15%) of the lot width, whichever is greater, plus two feet (2') for every story above the first floor.
4. Corner Side Yard: Fifteen feet (15') or twenty five percent (25%) of the lot width, whichever is greater, plus two feet (2') for every story above the first
floor.
C. Lot Coverage:
1. Total Lot Coverage: Maximum sixty five percent (65%).
2. Rear Yard: Maximum of forty percent (40%) of the rear yard covered by accessory buildings (carport, garage, storage shed, etc.). In addition, a
detached garage or other accessory building shall not be constructed closer than ten feet (10') to the residential structure.
D. Building Height: Maximum thirty five feet (35') as measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within twenty feet (20') of the front of the
building.
E. Open Land Area: Open land area shall be landscaped as required by the village board of trustees through the site plan review process.
F. Dwelling Units:
1. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of the following table:
Space
1 To 2 Occupants
3 To 5 Occupants 6 Or More Occupants
Living
room
100 square feet 120 square feet 150 square feet
Dining
room
No requirements 80 square feet 100 square feet
Kitchen 50 square feet 50 square feet 60 square feet
Bedrooms
Minimum 70 square feet for 1 occupant. Minimum 50 square feet per each occupant, 2 or more occupants. The above space cannot be
counted toward minimum sleeping area requirements.
2. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to the other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress
from other habitable spaces. Exceptions are units containing fewer than two (2) bedrooms.
3. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a
dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent way.
4. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. (1965 Code title 6 § 404.3; amd. 2009 Code)
Chapter 7
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
13-7-1: BULK REGULATIONS:
The following bulk regulations apply to the B-1 and B-2 business districts: (2009 Code)
A. Minimum Lot Size: With the exception of requirements that may be placed on planned unit developments, there are no lot size requirements for any
permitted or specially permitted use listed in articles A and B of this chapter.
B. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: A substantially uniform front yard setback amounting to ten percent (10%) of the total lot area shall remain free of structures, buildings,
parking lots and other hard surfaces (except sidewalks and driveways). Said area shall be landscaped with bushes and grass pursuant to a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 269/307
landscape plan approved by the zoning administrator or zoning board of appeals/plan commission prior to issuance of any permits.
2. Rear Yard: A twenty foot (20') rear yard setback shall be required where any B-1 or B-2 zoned property abuts or is separated from any residentially
zoned or community recreation property. The width of an alley may be counted in the twenty foot (20') rear setback. The rear yard setback, other
than any alley width, shall be appropriately landscaped to screen the abutting residential or community recreation zoned property.
3. Side Yard: A twenty foot (20') side yard setback shall be required where any B-1 or B-2 zoned property abuts or is separated from any residentially
zoned or community recreation zoned property. The width of an alley may be counted in the twenty foot (20') side yard setback. The side yard
setback, other than any alley width, shall be appropriately landscaped to screen the abutting residential or community recreation zoned property.
C. Building Height: Maximum forty five feet (45') from the average elevation of the finished grade within twenty feet (20') of the front of the proposed
building.
D. Off Street Parking: See chapter 12 of this title.
E. Refuse Receptacle Screening: All dumpsters and other garbage or refuse receptacles shall be screened from view by landscaping, fences, or walls.
(Ord. 05-15-07-02, 5-15-2007)
ARTICLE A. B-1 RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT
13-7A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-1 retail business district is to provide for a range of retail businesses along the primary commercial thoroughfares of the village,
including those businesses that meet the day to day shopping needs of the village residents and provide destination oriented retail, restaurants, and
entertainment, together with limited service oriented businesses on second floors, for a wider regional population. (Ord. 05-15-07-02, 5-15-2007)
13-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses below, but not limited to off street parking, off street loading, and signs.
Antique shops.
Art and school supply stores.
Art galleries.
Audio and video equipment sales and service.
Automobile accessory stores with no drive-in service.
Automobile sales, new vehicles only, and service, but not including body shops.
Bakeries with retail sales.
Bicycle stores; sales, rental, and service.
Books and stationery stores.
Butcher shops.
Camera and photographic supplies stores.
Candy stores and ice cream parlors.
Carpet and rug stores.
China and glassware stores.
Christmas tree sales.
Clothing stores.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Delicatessens.
Department stores.
Drugstores.
Fabric and upholstery stores.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 270/307
Florist shops.
Furniture stores.
Furrier shops, including storage and conditioning.
Gardening supply and plant stores.
General office - second floor only.
Gift shops.
Grocery stores.
Hardware stores.
Hobby shops.
Jewelry stores.
Leather and luggage stores.
Liquor stores.
Music stores; sheet and recorded music and instrument sales.
Office supply stores.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Pet shops.
Picture frame shops.
Restaurants, including sale of alcoholic beverages.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Taverns, bars, saloons, and brewpubs.
Tobacco shops.
Toy stores.
Other uses that may, from time to time, be recommended by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission and approved by the board of trustees, and that
are substantially similar to above listed uses. (Ord. 05-15-07-02, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 12-16-10-05, 12-16-2010)
13-7A-3: SPECIAL USES:
A. Second Floor Only: The following special uses shall be permitted only on the second floor above any permitted use:
Custom dressmaking and tailor shops.
Live/work space.
Mobile communication sales.
Mortgage and loan services.
Multi-family residential.
Travel agencies. (Ord. 05-15-07-02, 5-15-2007)
B. First Floor, Second Floor And Freestanding Only: The following special uses may be permitted on either a second floor above a permitted use, on a first
floor, or as a freestanding structure:
Banks.
Barbershops/hair salons.
Bars and taverns with live entertainment, not including adult uses.
Billiard parlors.
Currency exchanges, not payday loan.
Drive-in businesses; restaurants and retail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 271/307
Dry cleaners.
Gasoline stations with minimarts.
Hotels and motels, with meeting facilities.
Insurance sales.
Leather and shoe repair.
Nail salons.
Open air markets.
Outdoor cafes.
Photography studios.
Physical health services; including health clubs.
Planned unit developments.
Real estate sales. (Ord. 05-15-07-02, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 03-16-10-04, 3-16-2010)
C. Office Space On Ground Floor: Office space on the ground floor of an occupancy located in a B-1 zoned district will be allowed as a special use subject
to the following conditions:
1. The special use will be assigned to and run with the occupant, not the occupancy. Should the occupant that was granted the special use vacate the
property, the special use will be immediately vacated.
2. The applicant must file a floor plan showing the area that is to be occupied under the special use as office space. This area may not be increased at
any time without applying for a new or amended special use.
3. The applicant must show there is adequate parking to meet the needs of the special use and the remaining retail sales space for both employees
and patrons. Such parking shall conform to the requirements of this code.
4. Should the retail sales occupancy vacate the premises, the vacated space may only be occupied by a retail sales business allowed as a permitted or
special use as set forth in this code.
5. The applicant may not sublease any of the office space to any business that is not affiliated with or a subsidiary activity of the applicant. (Ord. 12-16-
10-05, 12-16-2010)
ARTICLE B. B-2 SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
13-7B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-2 service business district is to provide for a range of service businesses along the secondary commercial thoroughfares of the
village that meet the day to day service needs of the village residents. (Ord. 05-15-07-02, 5-15-2007)
13-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Unless otherwise designated as a special use in section 13-7B-3 of this article, any permitted or special use in the B-1 retail business district; second floor
location not required. (Ord. 05-15-07-02, 5-15-2007)
13-7B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Assembly uses, religious institutions, fraternal organizations, and social clubs.
Automobile service, including body shops.
Building materials storage and sales.
Child daycare facilities.
Outdoor storage and parking; site plan required.
Planned unit development.
Print shops.
Soda packaging.
Wholesale distribution. (Ord. 05-15-07-02, 5-15-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 272/307
Chapter 8
I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
13-8-1: PURPOSE; PROHIBITED USES:
The I-1 industrial district is intended to provide locations for light manufacturing including, but not limited to, assembly, packaging, light metal fabrication
and warehousing conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except off street parking, off street loading, and some outdoor storage of materials and
equipment. In this regard, the following uses are not permitted:
Arsenal.
Auto wrecking.
Blast furnace.
Brick, tile, pottery or terra cotta manufacturing (except for handcraft products).
Coke ovens.
Creosote manufacture or treatment.
Disinfectants manufacture.
Distillation of bones, coal or wood.
Dyestuff manufacture.
Explosives or fireworks manufacture or storage.
Fat rendering.
Forge plant.
Iron, steel, brass, or copper foundry or fabrication plant (except light metal fabrication).
Junkyard.
Manufacture of acid, alcohol, ammonia, asphalt, bleaching powder, chlorine, fertilizer, glue, size, gelatin, oil cloth, linoleum, oiled rubber goods, paint, oil,
shellack, turpentine, varnish, paper and pulp, soap, tallow, grease or lard, roofing tar or waterproofing or vinegar.
Recycling of aluminum containers or plastic containers.
Refining or manufacture of any gas or petroleum product.
Tanning, curing, or storage of rawhides or skins.
Tar distillation or manufacture.
Wool pulling or scouring.
Yeast plant. (1965 Code title 6 § 406.1)
13-8-2: PERMITTED USES:
All permitted uses in the B-1 and B-2 districts.
Any establishment, the principal use of which is metal fabrication, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing or testing of materials,
goods or products; provided, that all operations conform to the performance standards and other regulations set forth herein.
Asphalt recycling, storage and sales.
Automobile accessory stores, including drive-in service.
Concrete recycling, storage and sales.
Feedstock recycling, storage and sales.
Maintenance and storage facilities.
Newspaper offices, including printing.
Printing, publishing or lithography establishments.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 273/307
Quarrying operations on contiguous properties of twenty (20) acres or more or which, when included with contiguous previously mined property,
aggregates twenty (20) or more acres.
Railway facilities.
Reclamation or fill operation.
Warehousing. (1965 Code title 6 § 406.2; amd. 2009 Code)
13-8-3: SPECIAL USES:
All special uses in the B-1 and B-2 districts.
Automobile repair facilities, including body shops.
Commercial parking lots.
Facilities operation under 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.28.
Truck terminals.
Water parks, amusement parks and similar activities. (1965 Code title 6 § 406.3; amd. 2009 Code)
13-8-4: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Minimum Lot Size: With the exception of requirements that may be placed on planned unit developments, there are no lot size requirements for
industrial uses.
B. Setbacks And Landscaping: A substantially uniform front yard setback amounting to ten percent (10%) of the total lot area shall remain free of all
structures, buildings, parking lots and other hard surface areas (except for sidewalks and driveways). Said area shall be landscaped with bushes and
grass in a manner to provide for absorption of moisture and shall be approved by the zoning administrator or zoning board of appeals/plan commission
prior to issuance of any permits. In addition, a twenty foot (20') rear yard setback is required if the rear yard abuts or is only separated by an alley from
a lot in a residential or community recreation district, and a twenty foot (20') side yard setback is required if the side yard abuts or is only separated by
an alley from a lot in a residential or community recreation district. The width of an alley may be counted in the twenty feet (20'). Said rear or side
yards, other than an alley, shall be appropriately landscaped to screen the abutting residential or community recreation lot.
C. Building Height: Maximum sixty feet (60') from the average elevation of the finished grade within twenty feet (20') of the front of the proposed building.
D. Off Street Parking: See chapter 12 of this title.
E. Quarrying Exempt: Notwithstanding anything contained herein, the provisions in this section shall not apply to quarry operations. (1965 Code title 6
§ 406.4)
13-8-5: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Enclosed Premises: All activities, including, but not limited to, manufacturing, assembly, packaging or fabrication, but excluding quarrying; asphalt
recycling, storage and sales; concrete recycling, storage and sales; feedstock recycling, storage and sales; maintenance and storage facilities; railway
facilities; and reclamation or fill operations, shall be performed within a completely enclosed, lawfully constructed building. The doors and windows of
said buildings may remain in an open position during the hours of business operation, provided such openings do not create or contribute to verifiable
nuisance conditions which include, but are not limited to, the emission of noise, dust, particulate matter, odors or other situations which cause
conditions which adversely affect the public peace, health, safety or welfare.
B. Screening Of Garbage And Refuse Receptacles: All dumpsters and other garbage or refuse receptacles for municipal solid waste shall be screened
from view by landscaping, fences or walls. This requirement shall not apply to dumpsters or receptacles used exclusively to receive screened or
segregated waste materials in conjunction with quarrying; asphalt recycling, storage and sales; concrete recycling, storage and sales; feedstock
recycling, storage and sales; maintenance and storage facilities; railway facilities; and reclamation or fill operations. (1965 Code title 6 § 406.5)
13-8-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS1:
A. Noise:
1. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by the
American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be
subject to the performance standards hereinafter prescribed; provided, that such noises shall be capable of being accurately measured with such
equipment. Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this title, shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of
the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (±2) decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an
irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
2. At no point on the boundary of a residence or business district shall the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant (other than the
operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown on the following table:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 274/307
(1965 Code title 6 § 406.6)
Maximum Permitted Octave Band (Frequency, Cycles Per
Second)
Sound Level (Decibels)
Along Residence District
Boundaries
Along Business District
Boundaries
0 to 75 72 75
76 to 150 67 70
151 to 300 59 63
301 to 600 52 57
601 to 1,200 46 52
2,401 to 4,800 34 40
above 4,800 32 38
(1965 Code title 6 § 406.6; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Smoke And Particulate Matter:
1. The emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to endanger or to be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or
welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
2. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann chart, published and used by the United States bureau of mines, shall be
employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater than no. 2 on the Ringelmann chart is prohibited at all times, except as
otherwise provided hereinafter.
3. The emission from all sources within any lot area of particulate matter containing more than ten percent (10%) by weight of particles having a particle
diameter larger than forty four (44) microns is prohibited.
4. Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and the like, within lot boundaries, shall be
kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, fencing or other acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter from such sources in
excess of the weight limitation hereinafter specified is prohibited.
5. The emission of more than eight (8) smoke units per hour per stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann no. 2.
However, during one 1-hour period in each twenty four (24) hour day, each stack may emit up to sixteen (16) smoke units when blowing soot or
cleaning fires. Only during fire cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of Ringelmann no. 3 be permitted, and then for not more than three (3)
minutes.
C. Toxic Or Noxious Matter: No use shall, for any period of time, discharge across the boundaries of the lot wherein there is located toxic or noxious matter
in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or
business.
D. Odors: The emission of odorous matter in such a quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines or as to produce a public nuisance or
hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited.
E. Fire And Explosion Hazard:
1. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined for liquids by a
closed cup flashpoint of not less than one hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187°F), is permitted, subject to compliance with all other
performance standards for the I-1 district.
2. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products ranging from free or active burning, as determined for liquids by a closed cup
flashpoint of less than one hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187°F), but not less than one hundred five degrees Fahrenheit (105°F), is
permitted, subject to compliance with all other performance standards for the I-1 district, and provided the following conditions are met:
a. Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible exterior
walls or an underground storage tank; and
b. All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty feet (40') from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures shall be
protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system (or a carbon dioxide system of equal protection) complying with installation standards
prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association; or if the materials, goods, or products are liquids, the protection thereof shall be in
conformity with standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association.
3. The storage for utilization in manufacturing processes of materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases, as determined for liquids
by a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred five degrees Fahrenheit (105°F), shall be permitted in this district; provided:
a. That the final manufactured product does not itself have a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit
(187°F); and
b. Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible exterior
walls or an underground storage tank; and (1965 Code title 6 § 406.6)
c. All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty feet (40') from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures shall be
protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system (or a carbon dioxide system of equal protection) complying with installation standards
prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association; or if the materials, goods, or products are liquids, the protection thereof shall be in
conformity with standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 275/307
d. Exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers, which shall be unrestricted, aboveground flammable liquid and gas storage
tanks shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') from all lot lines. Flammable liquids and gases in original sealed containers of fifty five (55)
gallons' liquid capacity or less may be stored prior to utilization without restriction as to location; and (1965 Code title 6 § 406.6; amd. 2009 Code)
e. (1) The total amount of flammable materials stored shall not exceed the amounts shown in the following table:
In Gallons
Aboveground Underground
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint over 187°F but less than 300°F 20,000 50,000
From and including 105°F to and including 187°F 10,000 50,000
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint of less than 105°F 3,000 50,000
(2) When flammable gases are stored, utilized, or manufactured and measured in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and
pressure shall not exceed thirty (30) times the quantities listed above.
F. Glare Or Heat: Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within completely enclosed buildings in such a manner as not to create
a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
G. Vibration: No industrial operation or activity shall cause at any time ground transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set forth below. Vibration (the
periodic displacement, measured in inches of earth) shall be measured at any point along a residence district boundary line with a three (3) component
measuring instrument commonly accepted in the field and shall be expressed as displacement in inches. (1965 Code title 6 § 406.6)
Frequency
(Cycles Per Second)
Maximum Permitted Displacement Along Residence District Boundaries
(In Inches)
0 to 10 0.0008
11 to 20 0.0005
21 to 30 0.0003
31 to 40 0.0002
41 and over 0.0001
(1965 Code title 6 § 406.6; amd. 2009 Code)
H. Exceptions: Notwithstanding any other provisions contained herein, this section shall not apply to quarry operations; asphalt recycling, storage and
sales; concrete recycling, storage and sales; feedstock recycling, storage and sales; maintenance and storage facilities; railway facilities; and
reclamation or fill operations. Rather, each and every such operation or facility shall be regulated by and comply with state laws and regulations
concerning dust, noise, light, and vibration as applicable to each such operation or facility. By adopting state standards, the village does not relinquish
its standing or right to enforce those state standards2. (1965 Code title 6 § 406.6)
Chapter 9
C-R COMMUNITY RECREATIONAL DISTRICT
13-9-1: PURPOSE:
The C-R community recreational district is intended to provide and protect locations for outdoor recreational areas as well as community oriented social
and recreational facilities. (1965 Code title 6 § 407.1)
13-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
Churches, temples or synagogues.
Forest preserve districts.
Parks and playgrounds.
Public buildings, including libraries, fire stations and police stations.
Recreational buildings.
Schools _ elementary, junior high and high _ nonboarding. (1965 Code title 6 § 407.2)
13-9-3: SPECIAL USES:
Cellular towers and similar structures.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 276/307
Private clubs and fraternal organizations.
Utility uses including water filtration plants, pumping stations and reservoirs. (1965 Code title 6 § 407.3)
13-9-4: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Minimum Yard And Lot Sizes: There are no set minimum yard or lot requirements for structures in a community recreational district.
B. Site Plan Review: Prior to the construction, alteration or enlargement of any structure within a community recreational district, site plan approval shall be
obtained from the village board of trustees after review and recommendation by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission at a public meeting.
C. Other Requirements: Setbacks, lot area coverage and other bulk requirements shall be required, taking into context the size of the subject property and
the setbacks and other bulk standards established in the vicinity of the subject property. (1965 Code title 6 § 407.4)
Chapter 10
P-1 PARKING DISTRICT
13-10-1: PURPOSE:
The P-1 parking district is intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for off street vehicular parking of private passenger and small
commercial vehicles only, so as to benefit and serve business or industrial areas. This district is also designed to afford maximum protection to adjacent
residential areas by providing appropriate screening and well designed parking lot facilities. It is also intended that this district act as a transitional area
between business or industrial areas and residential areas. (1965 Code title 6 § 408.1)
13-10-2: PERMITTED USES:
In all P-1 districts, no land shall be utilized and no building shall hereafter be erected, converted or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided for in this
chapter, for any use other than automobile and small commercial vehicle parking. This section notwithstanding, zoning lots which are platted and zoned
residential, and have an existing residential building and use prior to the effective date hereof, are specifically protected as lawful nonconforming uses.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the repair of a nonconforming single-family residential structure, as enumerated in subsection 13-13-7B of this title.
The repair or restoration of all other nonconforming structures shall be controlled by subsection 13-13-7A of this title. (1965 Code title 6 § 408.2; amd.
2009 Code)
13-10-3: LIMITATIONS OF USE:
A. Parking areas in a P-1 district shall be utilized for parking of private passenger vehicles and small commercial vehicles only, for periods of less than one
day, and shall contain a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet of area.
B. Parking may be with or without charge.
C. No repairs, service, sale, display, storage or activity other than that which is enumerated in subsection 13-12-2K of this title shall be permitted in a P-1
district. Owners and/or operators of P-1 parking lots shall post such signs and take such action as directed by the building director or his designee to
prevent and cure such activity.
D. Except for parking garages, no buildings, other than those for shelter of attendants, shall be erected upon the premises, and there shall be no more
than one attendant shelter building on site, and such building shall be otherwise lawfully constructed and located and shall not exceed fifty (50) square
feet in area and/or fifteen feet (15') in height. (1965 Code title 6 § 408.3)
13-10-4: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
Initial development and substantial alteration of P-1 parking lots shall require site plan review and recommendation by the village zoning board of
appeals/plan commission and site plan approval from the village board of trustees. (1965 Code title 6 § 408.11)
13-10-5: LOCATION:
All P-1 districts shall be contiguous to a business or industrial district. Lots that are utilized for parking shall be the adjacent successive lots or across a
public street or alley from the business or industrial block or lot to be served. (1965 Code title 6 § 408.5)
13-10-6: SCREENING FRONT YARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 277/307
Front yard screening shall be required where a P-1 district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district with a common street frontage on the same block
as the residential district. In such instances, parking spaces developed in the P-1 district shall be screened from the adjacent street in accordance with the
provisions of sections 13-10-7 and/or 13-10-8 of this chapter. The applicant shall propose screening consistent with either section of this chapter, subject
to review and approval by the village board, with recommendations from the zoning board of appeals/plan commission as a result of the site plan review
process. (1965 Code title 6 § 408.6)
13-10-7: PROTECTIVE WALL OR FENCE:
A. Where the P-1 district has a common side or rear lot line with residentially zoned property, there shall be provided along the common lot line a
continuous solid, brick appearing masonry wall not less than six feet (6') in height, measured from the surface of the parking area.
B. Where the P-1 district is located on a street or alley opposite a residential zoning district, a continuous solid, brick appearing masonry wall not less than
forty two inches (42") in height, measured from the surface of the parking area, shall be provided along the street or alley front. The wall shall be set
back from the adjacent street or alley not less than six feet (6'). The area between the wall and the adjacent street or alley shall be landscaped in
accordance with the provisions of section 13-10-8 of this chapter. (1965 Code title 6 § 408.7)
13-10-8: LANDSCAPING:
All land within the required setback area shall be landscaped and maintained with ground cover, deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental
trees. The landscape greenbelt shall be a minimum of six feet (6') wide. Landscaping shall be low maintenance variety and in no way create or contribute
to a hazard or nuisance. (1965 Code title 6 § 408.8)
13-10-9: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
The parking area design and maintenance shall be in compliance with section 13-12-3 of this title. (1965 Code title 6 § 408.9)
13-10-10: NUMBER OF SPACES:
The required number of parking spaces in a P-1 parking lot shall be the maximum amount supported by the subject property after factoring in required
setbacks, maneuvering lanes, ingress/egress, greenbelts and other design items as required by ordinance and/or to provide for the health, safety and
welfare of the occupants and/or community. The number of required spaces shall be finally determined by the board of trustees via the site plan review
process. (1965 Code title 6 § 408.10)
13-10-11: SIGNAGE:
Signs are permitted as follows:
A. The face and area of traffic control signs, such as stop, yield, handicap parking and similar signs, which conform to IDOT and Illinois accessibility
standards. The amount, type and location of such signs shall be determined by the village board of trustees, with recommendations by the village
zoning board of appeals/plan commission, as a result of the site plan review process.
B. No trespassing, no dumping, towing/impound fee and/or ownership signs, not exceeding four (4) square feet in gross surface display area for each
exposed face nor exceeding an aggregate gross surface display area of eight (8) square feet and not exceeding four (4) in number per zoning lot.
(1965 Code title 6 § 408.4)
Chapter 11
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
13-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the planned unit development regulations is to allow an integration of combinations of uses in order to provide improved flexibility and more
creative and imaginative design for land developments than is possible under the more conventional zoning regulations. In this regard, the bulk and use
regulations of any district may be modified within a planned unit development. Preservation of natural site qualities, better urban amenities, more open
space and a higher quality project are the desired results of the planned unit development process. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.0)
13-11-2: OBJECTIVES; INTENT:
A. The following objectives are sought through the use of the planned unit development procedure:
1. To permit a creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that results in better design and development, with the inclusion of
aesthetic amenities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 278/307
2. To encourage a pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic and geological features and environmentally appropriate
features.
3. To create a method for the permanent preservation of common open space for the continued use and enjoyment of the residents of the
development.
4. To provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities and other public and private facilities.
5. To encourage a land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare consistent with the general principles of the village
comprehensive plan.
6. To achieve a higher quality of development than would otherwise be achieved.
7. To encourage assembly of lots and redevelopment of outdated commercial corridors.
8. To provide enhanced housing, employment and shopping opportunities.
B. The planned unit development is intended to provide for projects incorporating a single type or a variety of residential and commercial uses which are
planned and developed as a unit. The planned unit development should provide amenities not otherwise required by law and often establishes facilities
and open space greater than the minimums required by law.
C. The unique and substantially different character of planned unit developments requires their administrative processing as a special use in this title.
Planned unit developments are more complex and of a different character than other special uses requiring the establishment herein of specific and
additional procedures, standards and exceptions to guide the recommendations of the zoning board of appeals/plan commission and the action of the
board of trustees. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.1)
13-11-3: GENERAL PROCEDURE:
A. A planned unit development may be granted as a special use in accord with the procedures and standards of this chapter and may depart from the
normal procedures, standards and other requirements of the other sections of this title.
B. Applications shall be made as hereinafter provided and shall be accompanied by the required plats and documents. Detailed plans, drawings and other
information as specified by this title shall be required at the time of the various meetings and hearings. Each step shall be reviewed and certified by the
zoning administrator as being in accordance with the planned unit development requirements. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.2)
13-11-4: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE (OPTIONAL):
Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a planned unit development, the developer may request of the zoning board of appeals/plan commission
an informal meeting to discuss the development of the land and submit an informal proposal therefor. The request for a preapplication conference shall be
a part of a regularly scheduled zoning board of appeals/plan commission meeting and shall be open to the public. The application shall be accompanied
by a fee, which shall be as provided in section 13-3-8 of this title, and the materials set forth in section 13-11-3 of this chapter. The preapplication
conference is not mandatory. It is intended that the informal proposal submitted will be in preliminary conceptual form, and the substance and detail of the
matters presented shall, beyond complying with section 13-11-8 of this chapter, be largely within the discretion of the developer. However, the zoning
board of appeals/plan commission may request the submission of other specified information or documentation. The purpose of the conference shall be
informal communication, information and discussion, and no commitments shall be given, nor shall statements or opinions of the zoning board of
appeals/plan commission members be deemed binding. No recommendations need be made to or acted upon by the board of trustees. (1965 Code title 6
§ 701.3; amd. 2009 Code)
13-11-5: PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the preliminary plat is to obtain tentative approval and/or commitments from the village that the plans, design and program that
the developer intends to build and follow are acceptable, and that the developer can reasonably proceed into final detailed architecture, engineering,
surveying and landscape architecture in anticipation of final plat approval and subsequent construction. This is a relatively detailed submission that
assures the developer that his plan is acceptable and that he can invest the money necessary to prepare final plans with the assurance that the final
plat and plans will be accepted if they substantially conform to the preliminary plat and plans. It is at this stage that final modifications, adjustments and
interpretations are made to the conceptual plan.
B. Procedure: A request for preliminary plat approval of the planned unit development shall be submitted to the zoning administrator who shall refer same
to the zoning board of appeals/plan commission for a public hearing and report and recommendation as to whether or not the board of trustees should
approve the preliminary plat. The required procedure for review of the preliminary plat shall be:
1. Submission of the following:
a. Application for review of a planned unit development preliminary plat including all information and materials required in section 13-11-3 of this
chapter. Twelve (12) copies of all required information shall be submitted. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.4)
b. The application shall be accompanied by a fee, which shall be as provided in section 13-3-8 of this title, and a signed agreement that the applicant
will pay all fees incurred by the village for any consulting planners, engineers or legal review of the proposed development. (1965 Code title 6
§ 701.4; amd. 2009 Code)
2. The zoning board of appeals/plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for a planned unit development, in accordance with the
procedures of this title applicable to a special use. However, the zoning administrator may require notice to be given to residents beyond two
hundred fifty feet (250') in any direction if he deems it necessary and reasonable because of the size or nature of the development, unusual
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 279/307
configuration of the property involved, or any other reason likely to result in a direct impact of the development on residents beyond two hundred fifty
feet (250').
3. Following the public hearing on the preliminary planned unit development plat and supporting data, the zoning board of appeals/plan commission
shall, within forty five (45) days, unless an extension is requested by the petitioner, submit findings of fact and a written recommendation for
approval, modification or disapproval, and the reasons therefor, or indicate why a report cannot be rendered to the board of trustees at that time.
4. The board of trustees, after receipt of the findings of fact and recommendation from the zoning board of appeals/plan commission, shall approve,
modify or disapprove the preliminary plat within a period of forty five (45) days, unless an extension is requested by the petitioner. In the case of
approval or approval with modification, the board of trustees shall pass an ordinance granting the special use and indicate their approval of the plat
and arrange zoning map modifications as necessary. The board of trustees may require such special conditions as they may deem necessary to
ensure conformance with the intent of the planning objectives of the village and the stated purposes of the planned unit development.
5. Approval of a preliminary planned unit development plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of
approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the
village and subsequent recording upon the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and conditions of the preliminary approval, if any. The
final plat shall be approved if it conforms with the preliminary plat.
6. The preliminary and final plats may be filed and approved simultaneously or the final plat may be filed and approved without a preliminary plat if all of
the land is to be developed at one time, and if all requirements of both the preliminary plat and final plat procedures are met.
7. No building permit shall be issued for any structure until the final plat has been filed, approved and recorded. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.4)
13-11-6: FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the final plat is to designate, with particularity, the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other lands
not so subdivided into common open space and building sites. The final plat is intended as a document to be recorded. The final plat shows the exact
location of facilities, while the preliminary plat shows the general location of the same facilities.
B. Procedure: The final plat shall be submitted as a planned unit development plat and shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and,
if desired by the developer, may be submitted in stages with each stage reflecting the approved preliminary plat which is proposed to be recorded and
developed; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The required procedure for approval of a final plat
shall be:
1. The final plat and supporting data required in section 13-11-3 of this chapter shall be submitted, with appropriate comments by the building director,
to the zoning board of appeals/plan commission for certification that the final plat and other required documentation are in conformity with this title
and consistent with the approved preliminary plat and with any documentation corollary thereto and conditions of approval thereof, and further, for
review and recommendation at a public hearing of all architectural, landscaping, and any other aesthetic or other matters remaining to be approved
after the preliminary plat stage.
2. After review of the final plat, the zoning board of appeals/plan commission shall, within forty five (45) days, unless extension is required by the
petitioner, recommend approval or disapproval, and the reasons therefor, to the board of trustees.
3. The board of trustees, after receipt of the final plat from the zoning board of appeals/plan commission, shall approve or disapprove the final plat
within a period of forty five (45) days, unless an extension is requested by the petitioner, and if approved, shall pass an ordinance authorizing the
planned unit development and allowing the issuance of all necessary permits.
4. Permits are to be issued only after the final planned unit development plat and supporting data have been recorded with the county recorder of
deeds, and shall be issued in full conformance with this title. Proof of the recording of the final plat shall be provided to the zoning administrator.
However, the zoning board of appeals/plan commission may authorize the issuance of permits for public improvements prior to recordation of the
final plat, upon application of the developer and good cause shown.
5. The ordinance authorizing construction of the planned unit development shall be effective only upon recording of the final planned unit development
plat and supporting data with the county recorder of deeds. The recording of the final plat shall inform all who deal with the planned unit development
of the restrictions placed upon the land and said restrictions act as a zoning control device.
6. The final plats must be submitted for approval in accordance with the scheduling approved by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission. The
first final plat must be submitted not later than one year from the approval of the preliminary plat, and construction, as authorized by the issuance of a
building permit, must begin within one year of the date of the filing of the final plat dealing with such construction. In the event that same is not done,
the planned unit development special use shall be null and void, and the zoning board of appeals/plan commission shall initiate such zoning changes
as it deems necessary to serve the public interest. If construction falls more than six (6) months behind the building schedule filed with the final plat,
the board of trustees shall either extend the schedule period or initiate action to revoke the planned unit development special use. Extensions in the
building schedule for a six (6) month period may be recommended by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission and granted by the board of
trustees.
7. Upon the completion of the planned unit development, a portion thereof, or an individual building or element of the planned unit development in full
compliance with the final planned unit development plat and supporting data, then and only then may an occupancy permit be issued by the zoning
administrator to allow the use of a building or facility. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.5)
13-11-7: REQUIRED INFORMATION:
The planned unit development plats and supporting data shall include at least the following information, unless waived by the zoning board of appeals/plan
commission:
A. Preapplication Stage:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 280/307
1. General Site Information: Data regarding the site conditions, land characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, existing covenants, and
other related information.
2. Sketch Plan: A drawing showing the proposed location and extent of the land uses, streets, lots and other features.
3. Legal Description: A complete property survey and legal description of the site proposed for development.
B. Preliminary Plat Stage:
1. Detailed Plan: A drawing of the planned unit development shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') and
shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and private), all buildings and their use, common open space, recreation facilities, parking
areas, service areas, and other facilities to indicate the character of the proposed development. The submission may be composed of one or more
sheets and drawings and shall include:
a. Boundary Lines: Bearings and distance.
b. Easements: Location, width and purpose.
c. Streets On And Adjacent To The Tract: Street names, rights of way widths, existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement type, walks,
curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
d. Utilities: A preliminary engineering study providing information on existing and proposed sanitary, storm, water and other utilities necessary to
adequately service the development.
e. Ground Elevations: Ground elevations on the tract.
f. Other Conditions On The Tract: Watercourses, floodplains, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more
in diameter, houses, accessory buildings, and other significant features. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.8)
g. Other Conditions On Adjacent Land: Approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character
and location of major buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; and owners of adjacent
land. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.8; amd. 2009 Code)
h. Zoning: Show zoning districts on and adjacent to the tract.
i. Improvements: Proposed public improvements highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or
near the tract.
j. Open Space: All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated.
k. Structures: General location, purpose and height of each building.
l. Map Data: Name of development, name of site planner, north point, scale, date of preparation, and acreage of site.
m. Miscellaneous: Such additional information as may be required by the zoning board of appeals/plan commission.
2. Objectives: A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the planned unit development. This statement should include a description of the
character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices of the developer.
3. Ownership: Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project, including present tract designation according to official
records in the offices of the county recorder of deeds. If legal title to the property is in trust, then a statement of the names and percentage of interest
of all the beneficiaries shall be submitted. If legal title to the property is in a corporation, limited partnership or other legal entity, then a statement of
the names of all persons or entities owning ten percent (10%) or more of the stock or other ownership interest shall be submitted.
4. Schedule: Development schedule indicating:
a. Stages in which the project will be built, with emphasis on area, density, use and public facilities such as open space to be developed with each
stage. Overall design of each stage shall be shown on the plat and through supporting graphic material.
b. Approximate dates for beginning and completion of each stage.
5. Covenants: Proposed agreements, provisions or covenants which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned
development and any of its common open space. Said covenants shall be reviewed and approved by the village attorney prior to recordation.
6. Density: Provide information on the density of residential uses, including the number of dwelling units per acre, the number of dwelling units by type,
the number of buildings by type, and the number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit type.
7. Nonresidential Use: Provide information on the type and amount of ancillary and nonresidential uses, including the amount of common open space.
8. Service And Off Street Parking Facilities: Provide information on all service facilities and off street parking facilities.
9. Architectural Plans: Preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the
style of the development, the design of the building, and the number, size and type of dwelling units. Also, provide floor area of building types and
total ground coverage and height of buildings.
10. Landscape Plans: Preliminary plans for vegetation, earth sculpturing, berming and aesthetic features shall be submitted.
11. Facilities Plans: Preliminary plans or information, adequate to indicate that the proposed development can be serviced, shall be submitted for:
a. Roads, including classification, width of right of way, width of pavement and typical construction details.
b. Sanitary sewers.
c. Storm drainage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 281/307
d. Water supply system.
e. Lighting programs.
f. Sidewalks, paths and trails.
12. School Impact Study: Provide information on the student load and financial impact on the local school districts, including expected scheduling of
potential students.
13. Tax Impact Study: Provide information on the taxes to be generated by the proposed project and the cost to the various taxing bodies to provide the
necessary service to the project.
14. Traffic Analysis: Provide information on the adequacy of the local transportation and thoroughfare system to handle anticipated traffic volumes
generated by the planned unit development. Also, an analysis should be made of the adequacy of the internal vehicular circulation pattern.
15. Market Study: Provide an economic feasibility study of the proposed development, including information on land utilization and marketing potential.
Evidence should be presented showing the need and feasibility of the proposed development. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.8)
C. Final Plat Stage:
1. Final Detailed Plan: A final planned unit development plat, suitable for recording with the county recorder of deeds, shall be prepared and submitted
to the zoning board of appeals/plan commission for approval. The purpose of the final plat is to designate with particularity the land subdivided into
conventional lots as well as the division of other land not so treated into common open areas and building areas. The final plat shall include, but not
be limited to:
a. An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate development within the planned development.
b. Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be constructed.
c. Certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of lands, and recording the documents.
d. Tabulation on separate use area, land area, number of buildings, number of dwelling units, and dwelling units per acre. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.8;
amd. 2009 Code)
2. Common Open Space Documents: All common open space may be either conveyed to a municipal or public corporation or conveyed to a not for
profit corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefiting the owners and residents of the planned unit development or retained by the
developer. In any event, the zoning board of appeals/plan commission may require legally binding covenants and other guarantees, in a form
approved by the village attorney, that the common open space will be permanently preserved as an open area. All land conveyed to a not for profit
corporation or like entity shall be subject to the right of said corporation to impose a legally enforceable lien against the individually owned property in
the planned unit development for maintenance and improvement of the common open space. Such documents shall also provide that the village
shall have the right, but not the obligation, to perform necessary maintenance of the common open space, and shall have a lien against the
individually owned property in the planned unit development for the costs thereof.
3. Public And Quasi-Public Facilities: All public and quasi-public facilities and improvements made necessary as a result of the planned unit
development shall be either constructed in advance of the approval of the final plat pursuant to a permit duly obtained, or a bond or letter of credit in
a form approved by the village attorney shall be posted to guarantee construction of the required improvements. The bond or letter of credit, payable
to the village, shall be sufficient to cover the full cost of the improvements as estimated by the village, plus ten percent (10%). Detailed construction
plans shall be submitted for all public and quasi-public facilities to be built. Public and quasi-public facilities shall include, but not be limited to, roads,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, street signs, water, sewer improvements, open spaces, recreational facilities, landscaping and public parking
facilities.
4. Detailed Plans: Detailed plans, as required for a preliminary plat, with final revisions, and all site amenities shall be submitted. All buildings shall
include the building code construction type, use groups and calculations indicating that the height/area of the proposed buildings comply with the
allowances granted by the building code for such buildings. Detailed building construction plans shall not be required for the final plat, but shall be
subject to the established plan review and permit process for building and fire code construction.
5. Construction Schedule: A final construction schedule shall be submitted for that portion of the planned unit development for which approval is being
requested.
6. Guarantee Deposit: A deposit shall be made to the village in cash, letter of credit or maintenance bond in a form approved by the village attorney,
equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the estimated cost of public facility installations. This deposit shall be a guarantee of satisfactory performance of the
facilities constructed within the planned unit development and shall be held by the village for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date of
acceptance of the facilities by the village. After such eighteen (18) months, the deposit shall be refunded if no defects have developed, or if any
defects have developed, then the balance of such deposit, if any, shall be refunded after reimbursement for amounts expended in correcting
defective facilities.
7. Covenants: Final agreements, provisions or covenants which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit
development shall be submitted to the village attorney for review and approval. Said covenants shall not be recorded without the written approval of
the village attorney. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.8)
13-11-8: CHANGES IN PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
The planned unit development project shall be developed only according to the ordinance approving the final plat and all supporting data. The ordinance
and supporting data, together with all amendments, shall be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees and assigns and shall limit and control
the use of premises and location of structures in the planned unit development project as set forth therein. Changes to the approved and recorded planned
unit development may be made, as follows:
A. Major Changes: Changes which alter the concept or intent of the planned unit development including increases in density, increases in the height of
buildings, reductions of proposed open space, significant changes in building facility locations, changes in the development schedule, changes in road
standards, or other changes may be approved only by submission of a new final planned unit development plat and supporting data and following the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 282/307
final plat procedure. All changes to the original final plat shall be recorded with the county recorder of deeds as amendments to the final plat or
reflected in the recording of a new corrected final plat.
B. Minor Changes: The zoning administrator may approve minor changes in the planned unit development which do not change the concept or intent of
the development. Minor changes shall be any change not defined as a major change. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.6)
13-11-9: LOCATION:
The planned unit development is authorized as a special use in each of the zoning districts of this title. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.7)
13-11-10: STANDARDS:
The planned unit development must meet the following standards:
A. Size And Ownership: The site of the planned unit development must be under single ownership and/or unified control and be not less than two (2) acres
in area. The approval process may proceed while ownership is under active acquisition, but final approval and permit issuance shall be contingent
upon single ownership and/or unified control being achieved.
B. Compatibility: The planned unit development shall be demonstrated by the developer to be of a type and to be so located as to exercise no undue
detrimental influence upon surrounding properties, and to be compatible with surrounding uses.
C. Need: A showing of the desirability of the plan and its benefit to the community must be made.
D. Lots Usage: A PUD may contain combinations of two (2) or more uses permitted in other districts by this title. In considering the proposed changes for a
PUD, the planning commission and village board shall give special attention to the compatibility of uses to each other and to surrounding properties.
E. Applicable Base Regulations: Unless waived or modified by the village board of trustees subsequent to the approval process outlined in this chapter, the
yard, bulk, parking, loading, landscaping, lighting and other standards for the districts listed below shall generally be applicable for uses proposed as
part of a planned unit development:
1. Residential uses shall comply with the regulations enumerated by the residential district regulations applicable to the type of residential use
proposed. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.9)
2. Commercial uses shall comply with the regulations enumerated by the B-1 and B-2 zoning districts.
3. Industrial and manufacturing uses shall comply with the regulations enumerated by the I-1 zoning district. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.9; amd. 2009
Code)
4. Mixed uses shall comply with the regulations applicable for each individual use, as outlined above; except, that if regulations are inconsistent with
each other, the regulations applicable to the most dominant use shall apply.
F. Infrastructure And Services: The proposed planned unit development shall not exceed the capacity of existing and available public services, including,
but not limited to, water, sewer, gas and electrical utilities; public roads; police and fire protection services; and educational services, unless the project
proposal contains an acceptable plan for providing necessary services or evidence that such services will be available upon completion of the planned
unit development.
G. Traffic: Adequate provision shall be made to provide ingress and egress so designated as to minimize traffic congestion on the public streets and
promote safety. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.9)
13-11-11: CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES:
Prior to the granting of any planned unit development, the zoning board of appeals/plan commission may require, and the board of trustees may require,
such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout, height, density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation and
other elements of the planned unit development as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest, protection of the adjacent area, and to
secure compliance with the standards specified in section 13-11-10 of this chapter. In all cases in which planned unit developments are granted, the board
of trustees shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being
and will be complied with. (1965 Code title 6 § 701.10)
Chapter 12
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
13-12-1: GENERAL OFF STREET PARKING REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 283/307
In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or substantially altered and which requires off street parking space, there shall be
provided off street parking space in accordance with the following regulations:
A. Compliance Required: Any off street parking space in connection with existing buildings or structures, on the effective date hereof, shall not be removed
or altered, except to be in conformance with the requirements of this title. All existing uses shall provide off street parking in compliance with this title to
the extent determined practical by the building director.
B. Use Restrictions:
1. Except as may otherwise be provided for the parking of trucks or for special uses, required accessory off street parking facilities shall be solely for
the parking of vehicles of patrons, occupants, or employees of a specific establishment.
2. No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in parking lots.
3. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in conjunction with any accessory parking facilities.
C. Joint Use: Off street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum
of the separate requirements of each such use and if all regulations governing the location of accessory parking spaces in relation to the use served
are observed. But no parking space, or portion thereof, shall serve as the required space for more than one use unless otherwise authorized in
accordance with this title. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.0)
D. Off Site Parking Facilities: In cases where parking facilities are permitted on land other than the lot on which the building or use served is located, such
parking facilities shall be within three hundred feet (300') of the lot occupied by the building or use to which the parking facilities are accessory. A
covenant running with the land must be recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds on the lot upon which the accessory off street parking is
located which prohibits any other uses on that portion of the lot needed for accessory parking until such time as either one of the following conditions
occurs:
1. The use on the lot containing the principal use is terminated or replaced with a use where there is enough parking on the lot containing that use; or
2. Another lot of the required size within the required distance is properly developed and used for the required accessory off street parking in place of
and in lieu of the initial lot used for accessory off street parking with the same requirements, covenants and conditions attached to such substitute
accessory lot as required for the approval of such initial lot used. (1965 Code title 6 § 803.10)
E. Location In Yards: Off street parking spaces may be located in yards except required front yards and required side yards adjoining a street.
F. Size: A required off street parking space shall be at least nine feet (9') in width and at least eighteen feet (18') in length unless otherwise indicated,
exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps, columns, and office or work area. Such space shall have vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
G. Access: Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or a driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off street parking facilities shall be provided with appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street, alley, or driveway in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements and provide the least potential for hazards and/or nuisances. All
parking areas shall have vehicular access to it over a street, alley, or driveway containing all-weather, hard surfaced pavement, and the location and
route of access to such a parking area shall be identified. No driveway across public property shall have a width exceeding twenty four feet (24'),
exclusive of curb returns.
H. Computation Of Number Of Spaces:
1. When determination of the number of off street parking spaces required by this title results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of onehalf
(1/2) or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
2. When more than one use exists on a lot, the number of off street parking spaces required shall be the sum of the number required for each use.
3. "Floor area" shall mean gross floor area, unless otherwise designated.
4. Streets, parkways, alleys, lanes, aisles, landscaped areas, offices, work areas and similar locations shall not be counted toward the off street parking
requirements. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.0)
I. Handicap Spaces: Handicap parking spaces shall be provided in the size, location and number required by the Illinois accessibility code or any other
state or federal regulation. (1965 Code title 6 § 803.11)
13-12-2: RESIDENTIAL GARAGES AND DRIVEWAYS:
A. Computation: Garages providing the requisite parking space dimensions shall be counted as required off street parking. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.2)
B. Improved Driveways And Approaches: Garages providing access for vehicles through the use of private drives shall provide an improved driving
surface and approach complying with the surfacing and approach requirements of this title. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.3)
C. Surfacing: All driveways shall meet the surfacing and dimension requirements of this title. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 284/307
D. Driveway Dimensions: Driveway dimensions shall be as follows:
Use Minimum Width Minimum Length Minimum
Setback
Single driveway 10 feet 27 feet 1 foot from side
property line
Driveway to
attached garage
10 feet and equal to width of vehicle entrance door to
garage
Minimum 18 feet from property line where accessing
over a public sidewalk or parkway
1 foot from side
property line
Driveway to
detached garage
10 feet to within 18 feet of garage access door; equal
to width of garage door thereafter
Must extend from street or alley access to garage
door
1 foot from side
property line
(1965 Code title 6 § 802.5)
E. Driveway Setbacks: Residential one- and two-family parking shall not be in the required front yard space except for that portion of a driveway extending
from the front property access through the front yard setback. No portion of a driveway shall be located in the area of the front yard located in front of a
one- or two-family dwelling. The total amount of open area devoted to off street parking, in addition to the maximum area for a driveway and garage,
shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the remaining open area of the property. All additional parking areas shall have a minimum three foot (3') setback
from adjoining property lines and a minimum ten foot (10') setback from the dwelling. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.6)
F. Multi-Family Residential Parking: Multi-family residential parking shall not be located in the front yard setback unless otherwise modified for a planned
unit development. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.7)
G. Vehicles Parking In Open; License And Operable Condition Required: Motor vehicle parking on private residential property outside a completely
enclosed, lawfully constructed structure for such purposes shall be limited to licensed, operative vehicles. All such parking shall be on an improved
surface and of a design and layout as approved by the building director. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.8)
H. Inoperable, Unlicensed Vehicles1: The parking or storage of unlicensed and/or inoperative motor vehicles on private residential property is limited to
those vehicles which are titled to a lawful occupant of the address in question. All such vehicles must be stored inside a completely enclosed structure
which has been lawfully constructed for such use. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.12)
I. Commercial Vehicles; Trucks2:
1. Commercial Vehicles: No more than one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit may be parked or stored; however, no commercial vehicle or portion
thereof with a license above a B plate or licensed for a gross weight, including vehicle and cargo, of eight thousand one (8,001) pounds or more may
be parked in or adjacent to a residential zone other than for loading and unloading purposes not affiliated with a home occupation. (1965 Code title 6
§ 802.9)
2. Tow Trucks: No tow trucks or similar vehicles may be parked or stored on residential property. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.10)
3. Trucks With Snowplow Blades: No trucks with snowplow blades attached shall be parked on streets in residential zoned areas. (1965 Code title 6
§ 802.11)
J. Renting Garages Prohibited: The provision of private residential garage or yard space for motor vehicle parking or storage of any kind, for any type of
remuneration, is prohibited. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.13)
K. Repair And Sale Of Vehicles:
1. Private residential property may not be utilized for any type of use which involves the repair and sale of motor vehicles. Repeated import of disabled
vehicles to a residence shall be prima facie evidence of such use. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.14)
2. Automotive repair on residential property shall be regulated as follows: (1965 Code title 6 § 802.15)
a. Minor Automotive Repair:
(1) Minor automotive repair consists of fluid replacement, tire, wiper, light changes and all other repairs not involving a major disassembly of a
motor vehicle. All such repairs must be completed within forty eight (48) hours of commencement and are limited to vehicles titled to a lawful
occupant of the premises where the repairs are conducted.
(2) Minor automotive repairs may be conducted in all residential districts.
b. Major Automotive Repair:
(1) Major automotive repair consists of all repairs involving a major disassembly of a motor vehicle. All such repairs must be conducted entirely
within an enclosed building lawfully constructed for such use, where such buildings exist on the premises, and are limited to vehicles titled to a
lawful occupant of the premises where the repairs are conducted. Open area major automotive repairs shall be limited to one vehicle at a time
for no more than a seven (7) day period. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.15; amd. 2009 Code)
(2) Major automotive repairs may only be conducted in the R-1, R-1A and R-2 districts. Such repairs shall not in any way decrease or adversely
affect the availability of required off street parking for said property.
c. Unattended Vehicles On Supports: No vehicle may be left on jack stands or other means of support unattended. (1965 Code title 6 § 802.15)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 285/307
13-12-3: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING LOTS:
A. Open And Enclosed Parking Spaces: Accessory parking spaces located on the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or
enclosed in a building. Accessory parking spaces located elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use shall be open to the sky. (1965 Code
title 6 § 803.1)
B. Surfacing:
1. All open off street parking shall have an improved parking surface as follows:
Use
Subbase/ Aggregate
Surface
Additional
One- And Two-Family
Asphalt 4 inch compacted stone CA6 or
grade 8
Two 1.5-inch courses of hot mix bituminous
None
Concrete
Compacted earth 4 inch concrete with 6 x 6 WI.4 x WI4 WWF
Expansion paper required at existing concrete or
masonry
Multi-Family, Commercial Or Industrial
Asphalt 8 inch compacted stone CA6 or
grade 8
Two 1.5-inch courses of hot mix bituminous
Must be minimum 5 feet from building
Concrete
6 inch compacted stone 6 inch + - concrete with 6 x 6 WI.4 x WI4
WWF
Must be minimum 5 feet from building
2. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a substitute design or materials being approved by the building director, upon satisfactory recommendation
of the village engineer, that meets the purpose and results intended by the table set out in subsection B1 of this section. (1965 Code title 6 § 803.2)
C. Screening And Landscaping: All open automobile parking areas containing more than four (4) parking spaces shall be effectively screened on each side
adjoining or fronting on any residential property by a decorative wall or fence of substantial construction, not less than five feet (5') in height. Wheel
stops of masonry, steel or heavy timber shall be placed not nearer than five feet (5') from the street line in districts where a front yard is not required or
from side lot lines. Landscaping shall be provided as required by the site plan approval process. Landscaping shall be minimum low growth, low
maintenance and not present a nuisance or hazard or be incompatible with the surrounding area. (1965 Code title 6 § 803.3)
D. Lighting: Illumination of an off street parking area shall be provided so as to adequately provide for the safety of occupants for such lots. Lighting shall
be arranged so as not to reflect rays of light into adjacent residential districts and streets. (1965 Code title 6 § 803.4)
E. Striping And Protective Devices: Parking spaces shall be striped on the parking lot surface, and parking blocks, curbing or other barriers shall be
provided as required by the building director to protect structures, vehicles and pedestrians. (1965 Code title 6 § 803.6)
F. Temporary Parking: Off street parking which does not meet the design and construction requirements of this title may be temporarily permitted at the
discretion of the building director, provided such parking is in conjunction with a permitted construction project and/or is for municipal use. (1965 Code
title 6 § 803.5)
G. Existing Parking Lots: All existing parking lots shall be maintained in compliance with the design and maintenance standards of this section. (1965
Code title 6 § 803.7)
13-12-3-1: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PARKING LOTS IN B-1, B-2, I-1, C-R AND R-3 DISTRICTS:
Commercial, industrial and multi-family parking lots shall be designed according to the following standards:
Parking
Pattern
Maneuvering
Lane Width
Parking
Space Width
Parking Space
Length
Total Width Of One Tier Of Spaces
Plus Maneuvering Lane
Total Width Of Two Tiers Of Spaces
Plus Maneuvering Lane
0 degree
(parallel)
12 feet 9 feet 23 feet 20 feet 28 feet
30 to 53
degree
12 feet 9 feet 20 feet 32 feet 52 feet
54 to 74
degree
15 feet 9 feet 20 feet 36.5 feet 58 feet
75 to 90
degree
20 feet 9 feet 20 feet 40 feet 60 feet
(1965 Code title 6 § 803.9; amd. 2009 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 286/307
13-12-4: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
Off street parking spaces accessory to designated uses shall be provided as follows:
Use Number Of Parking Spaces
Automobile
service
stations
1 for each employee, plus 2 for each service stall or area within the building. Service stalls or service areas shall not count toward
the satisfaction of the off street parking requirement. The above listed calculated parking area is for the off street, accessory parking
of licensed, operable passenger vehicles of owners, employees and customers of the subject use. Effective September 21, 2004, as
part of the special use requirements for automotive uses, new occupancies are required to demonstrate that the use will include a
storage area that is sufficient to store vehicles awaiting repair by the new occupancy. Such storage area shall be properly zoned for
such use and shall be situated, constructed, paved and drained in accordance with the applicable sections of this title. Exterior
storage areas shall further be screened by a decorative 6 foot wall or fence, which design shall be consistent with the architecture of
other structures in the area. The absence of an approved storage area shall be considered a failure of the proposed occupancy to
meet the conditions of this title for obtaining special use approval
Banks 1 for each 400 square feet of floor area
Bowling alleys
5 for each alley, plus such additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated uses such as restaurants and the like
Business and
professional
offices or
public
administration
buildings
1 for each 500 square feet of floor area
Carryout
restaurants
1 per 100 square feet of usable floor area or 8, whichever is greater
Churches 1 for each 5 seats or 90 inches of seating space in the main auditorium. The building director shall compute additional required
spaces for accessory uses, e.g., daycare
Drive-in
restaurants
1 per 40 square feet of usable floor area, plus 8 stacking spaces for each drive-in or drive-through transaction station
Establishments
handling the
sale and
consumption
on the
premises of
food and
refreshment
1 for each 4 occupants of the building, as defined by the building and fire code occupancy calculations. If the minimum required
parking area is not provided, the eatery owner may reduce his parking requirement by agreeing in writing to post and adhere to a
lower occupancy load, subject to the approval of the building director. In such instances, the required off street parking shall be
calculated at 1 space per every 4 occupants at the lower, agreed upon rate of occupancy
Fast food
restaurants
1 for each 4 occupants of the building, as defined by the building and fire code occupancy calculations. If the minimum required
parking area is not provided, the eatery owner may reduce his parking requirement by agreeing in writing to post and adhere to a
lower occupancy load, subject to the approval of the building director. In such instances, the required off street parking shall be
calculated at 1 space per every 4 occupants at the lower, agreed upon rate of occupancy
Furniture and
appliance
stores, motor
vehicle sales,
wholesale
stores, stores
for repair of
household
equipment or
furniture
1 for each 600 square feet of floor area
Hospitals 1 for each 3 hospital beds, plus 1 for each 4 employees other than doctors, plus 1 for each 2 doctors assigned to the staff
Hotels and
motels
1 for each lodging room, and 1 for each 100 feet of retail sales and meeting rooms
Libraries and
museums
1 for each 800 square feet of floor area
Manufacturing,
fabricating,
and processing
plants not
engaged in
retail trade
1 for every 11/2 employees in the largest working shift or 1 per 500 square feet of usable floor area, whichever is greater. When the
amount of office area exceeds 25 percent of the gross floor area, the parking requirements for such office area shall be that which is
required in this section for office uses. The parking requirements for the remainder of the building shall be 1 for every 550 square
feet of usable floor area
Medical and
dental clinics
3 for each examining or treatment room, plus 1 for each doctor and employee in the building
Motor vehicle
sales, trailer
sales and
rental
1 for each 400 square feet of gross floor area of salesroom, plus such space as is required for any affiliated automotive service,
repair and/or vehicle display/storage area
Multi-family
housing for
senior citizens
(55 years and
older)
1 per dwelling unit. This requirement may be reduced if recognized standards and empirical data are provided establishing a
reduced need. Such reduction shall not be lowered to less than 1/2 space per dwelling unit
Multiple-family 2 for each dwelling unit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 287/307
dwellings
Private clubs
and lodges
2, and 1 for each 7 seats in accordance with the design capacity of the main meeting room
Public utility
and public
service uses
1 for each 3 employees, plus spaces in adequate number as determined by the zoning administrator to serve the visiting public
Recreational
buildings or
community
centers
1 for each 3 employees, plus spaces in adequate number as determined by the zoning administrator to serve the visiting public
School and
institutional
auditoriums
1 for each 2 persons employed on the premises, and 1 additional for each 4 seats or for each 80 inches of seating space in the main
auditorium or assembly hall
Schools,
elementary or
middle _
private or
public
1 for each faculty member and other full time employees; 1 per each 5 classrooms for visitor parking. The building director shall
compute additional required spaces if an auditorium and/or athletic field is provided
Schools,
high _ private
or public
1 for each 7 students, and at least 1 for each faculty member and other full time employees; 1 per each 5 classrooms for visitor
parking. The building director shall compute additional required spaces if an auditorium and/or athletic field is provided
Shopping
center or
clustered
commercial
1 for each 125 feet of usable floor area
Single-family
dwellings
2 for each dwelling unit
Theaters 1 for each 4 seats up to 400 seats, plus 1 for each 6 seats over 400, plus 1 for each employee
Truck terminals
1 per vehicle of suitable dimension to accommodate the size of the truck and trailer being parked, plus those spaces required by this
section for accessory uses such as offices
Two-family
dwellings
2 for each dwelling unit
Undertaking
establishments
and funeral
parlors
1 for each 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 for each funeral vehicle maintained on the premises
Warehouse
and storage
establishments
1 for each employee, plus 1 for each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise, plus 1 for each 4,000 square feet of floor area
All other retail
stores and
commercial
establishments
1 for each 150 square feet of floor area
Other uses Parking spaces on the same basis as required herein for the most similar use as determined by the zoning administrator
(1965 Code title 6 § 803.8)
13-12-5: OFF STREET LOADING:
In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or substantially altered and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or
merchandise by trucks or other similar vehicles, there shall be provided off street loading berths not less than the minimum requirements specified in this
section. (1965 Code title 6 § 801.0)
A. Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the use to be served, and no portion of the vehicles shall project into a street or
alley. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets, nor
shall it be located in a required rear or side yard. (1965 Code title 6 § 801.1)
B. Size: A required off street loading berth shall be at least ten feet (10') in width and thirty five feet (35') in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering
space. It shall have vertical clearance of at least twelve feet (12'). Enclosed loading spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least fifteen feet (15').
(1965 Code title 6 § 801.2)
C. Access: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic movements. (1965 Code title 6 § 801.3)
D. Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted macadam base not less than seven inches (7") thick, or equal,
surfaced with not less than two inches (2") of asphaltic-concrete or some comparable all weather, dustless material. (1965 Code title 6 § 801.4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 288/307
E. Use Restrictions:
1. No storage of any kind nor motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted within any required loading berth. (1965 Code title 6
§ 801.5)
2. Space allowed to any off street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street parking
facilities or portions thereof. (1965 Code title 6 § 801.6)
F. Number Of Loading Berths Required:
1. Nonresidential Uses In Residence Districts: The minimum number of off street loading spaces accessory to nonresidential uses in residence districts
shall be one loading space for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus
one additional loading space for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
2. Commercial/Business And Industrial Districts: The minimum number of off street loading spaces accessory to uses in the commercial/business and
industrial districts shall be as follows:
Floor Area Of Establishments Required Number
Minimum Size
Minimum Vertical Clearance
5,000 through 10,000 1 10 feet x 35 feet 12 feet
10,001 through 25,000 2 10 feet x 35 feet each 12 feet
25,001 through 40,000 2 12 feet x 50 feet each 14 feet
40,001 through 100,000 3 12 feet x 50 feet each 14 feet
For each additional 100,000 square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, 1 additional loading
space. Such additional loading space shall be at least 12 feet in width by 50 feet in length.
(1965 Code title 6 § 801.7)
Footnote 1: See also title 9, chapter 10 of this code.
Footnote 2: See also title 9, chapter 6, article A of this code.
Chapter 13
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
13-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming uses, buildings and structures and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be eliminated. It is the intent of this title that nonconforming buildings,
structures and uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in
the same district except as otherwise specifically permitted herein. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.0)
13-13-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMITIES:
Any nonconforming building, structure or use which existed lawfully at the effective date hereof and which remains or becomes nonconforming upon the
effective date hereof, or of any subsequent amendment hereto, may be continued subject to the regulations of this chapter. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.1)
13-13-3: DETERMINATION OF LAWFUL NONCONFORMITY:
A. For the purpose of this chapter, a building or structure shall be deemed to be lawfully established or lawfully existing on the effective date hereof if it was
established or existed pursuant to a building permit which was lawfully issued prior to such date and on which construction was begun within the period
of time required by the applicable building code or, in the case of nonconforming uses, was a permitted or an approved special use pursuant to the
village zoning ordinance dated February 28, 1952, or any amendments thereto.
B. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, and upon which actual building construction has
been carried on diligently. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.2)
13-13-4: REPAIRS OR ALTERATIONS:
Ordinary repairs and nonstructural alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure. However, no structural alteration shall be made to a
building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, except those
required by law. For the purpose of this section, ordinary repairs and alterations shall be determined by the zoning administrator. "Structural alterations"
are those which move, increase or otherwise modify any structural support for the building or structure. The replacement of storage tanks where the safety
and operation of the installation requires such replacement shall also be permitted. Notwithstanding any of the above requirements, structural alterations
may be made to any nonconforming building or structure in a manner so that the entire building or structure and use conform to all regulations of the
district in which it is located. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 289/307
13-13-5: ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS:
A. A nonconforming building or structure, other than a single-family dwelling, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such nonconforming
building or structure and use, including all additions and enlargements, are made to conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. A single-family dwelling, nonconforming as to bulk, may be added to or enlarged without seeking a variation, if all ground floor additions or
enlargements conform to all setback, height and lot coverage limitations of the district in which the property is located. A second story addition or
dormer to such buildings is allowed, provided such additions or enlargements do not exceed the footprint of the existing nonconforming dwelling, and
such addition or enlargement does not otherwise present a significant nuisance or hazard. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.4)
13-13-6: MOVING BUILDINGS:
No building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to another location unless every portion of such building or structure and its use is made to
conform to all regulations of the district in which it is moved. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.5)
13-13-7: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A. Generally: A building or structure which does not conform to the bulk requirements or use restrictions of the district in which it is located and which is
destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of nature may be restored only if the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was prior to the
destruction or damage is less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of constructing the entire building or structure new. No repairs or restoration shall be
made unless such work is started within six (6) months from the date of the partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion. Notwithstanding
any of the above requirements, nothing in this subsection shall preclude the reconstruction of a building in a manner so that the entire building or
structure and use conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located. Regardless of the general requirement that new construction comply
with the required yard setbacks, the replacement of existing means of egress, porches, stoops and steps for residential buildings may be constructed to
its existing nonconforming footprint if, in the opinion of the building director, the existing footprint is the minimum necessary to provide for an adequate
and safe means of egress. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.6; amd. 2009 Code)
B. Single-Family Dwellings: Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a single-family dwelling or structure accessory to a single-family dwelling located
on a zoning lot which existed prior to the effective date hereof or was lawfully established thereafter and which has less than the required minimum lot
width or area, destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of nature, may be restored or reconstructed, provided the restored or reconstructed
dwelling or accessory structure is not larger than that which was damaged or destroyed and does not exceed the limits established by the footprint of
the original structure. If the restored or reconstructed dwelling or accessory structure is to be larger than the damaged or destroyed structure, it shall
meet all bulk requirements except lot width and area. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.7; amd. 2009 Code)
13-13-8: DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:
A building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which it is
located and which is vacant on the effective date hereof or thereafter becomes vacant or is not used for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180)
days, shall not, thereafter, be occupied or used except by a use which conforms to the regulations of the district in which it is located. (1965 Code title 6
§ 501.8)
13-13-9: NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR LAND:
The lawfully existing nonconforming use of all or part of a building, structure or parcel may be continued subject to the following provisions:
A. The nonconforming use of part of a building, structure or parcel shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such building, structure or
parcel.
B. If a nonconforming use of a building, structure or parcel is discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days, it shall not be renewed.
C. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.9)
13-13-10: CASUAL, ILLEGAL USE:
The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use. The
existence of a nonconforming use on part of a lot, tract or parcel shall not be construed to establish a right to extend the nonconforming use to the entire
lot, tract or parcel. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.10)
13-13-11: EXISTING SPECIAL USES:
Existing uses which are special uses under the provisions of this title shall not be nonconforming uses, but shall require a special use permit for any
enlargement, extension, intensification or change of use. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.11)
13-13-12: NONCONFORMING PARKING AND LOADING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 290/307
Where the legal existing use of a premises is nonconforming as to the parking or loading requirements set forth in chapter 12 of this title or any
subsequent amendment thereto, the use may be changed to another permitted use without seeking a variation as to parking or loading requirements,
provided the new use does not require more parking or loading spaces than the existing use. (1965 Code title 6 § 501.12)
Title 14
FLOOD CONTROL
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 3 of this code for alarm system regulations.
Chapter 1
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
14-1-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and
5/11-31-2. The general purpose hereof is to maintain the eligibility of the village in the national flood insurance program; to minimize potential losses due to
periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and
to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values for the wise utilization of water and related land resources
and for the following specifically enumerated purposes: (1965 Code § 17-18-2)
A. To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g, "100-Year Floodway", of the rivers, lakes and streams act; (1965 Code § 17-18-2;
amd. 2009 Code)
B. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or draining hazards to the person or property of others, or create unstable conditions
susceptible to erosion;
C. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
D. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
E. To lessen the burden on the village taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and relief
operations;
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance program;
G. To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program (44 CFR 59-79 as amended);
H. To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
I. To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats; and
J. To preserve the natural characteristics of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality,
reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and
economic development. (1965 Code § 7-18-2)
14-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are hereby adopted:
ACT: An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers lakes and streams of the state of Illinois, 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4.9 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be
allowed are as specified in section 14-1-4 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The "base flood" is also known as the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 291/307
100-year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is defined in section 14-1-4 of this chapter.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. This term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, manufactured
home, mobile home, and prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed at the site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway use.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, pond area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash
or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface water or ground water flows either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimension material of its bed or banks. "Channel modification" includes
damming, riprapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. "Channel modification" does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. "Channelization" is a severe
form of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (commonly
known as "straightening").
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, or their successor
agencies, of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant hereto, gives assurances to the property owner that once
an appropriate use is constructed according to permitting plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of
as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISIONS (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones,
flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as built plans are submitted and
approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or
diverting water or creating a pool. An underground water storage tank is not a "dam" as that term is defined herein.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated
by IDNR/OWR, or their successor agencies, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1
foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
A. The floodways are designed for the Des Plaines River and/or Salt Creek on map number 17031C and panels 0479F, 0483F, 0487F, 0491F, dated
November 6, 2000, respectively, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management
agency (FEMA) and for the Des Plaines River and/or Salt Creek on the regulatory floodplain map prepared by IDNR/OWR and dated November 6,
2000. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
B. The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and one-half (11/2) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
village that may be annexed into the village are designed for the Des Plaines River and/or Salt Creek on map number 17031C and panels 0479F and
0483F, dated November 6, 2000, respectively, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency and for the Des Plaines River and/or Salt Creek on the regulatory floodplain map prepared by IDNR/OWR and dated
November 6, 2000.
C. The maps and panels adopted by this chapter shall, without further legislation, be the same as the most current adopted by FEMA, or its
successor agency, for the village corporate limits and those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
village or that may be annexed into the village.
D. To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designed floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and
located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the
designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: A. Any manmade change to real estate, including:
1. Construction, reconstruction, repair, placement or replacement of a building or addition to a building.
2. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on site for less than one hundred eighty (180) days, it must be fully licensed
and ready for highway use.
3. Drilling, mining, installing utilities and the construction of roads, bridges or similar projects.
4. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
5. Clearing of land as an adjunct to construction.
6. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; or deposit of solid or liquid waste.
7. Any other activity of a person or persons that might change the direction, height or velocity of floodwater or surface water, including extensive
removal of vegetation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 292/307
B. "Development" does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase
in elevation; or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices which do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Any organization which is exempt from the requirements of this chapter pursuant to Illinois law, including state, federal or
local units of government.
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations (44 CFR 59-79, effective as of September 29, 1989, but not including any later
editions or amendments).
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland waters or the unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map
includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood, plus one foot (1') of freeboard, at any given
location in the SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: A. The land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. "Floodplains" may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. "Floodplain" is also known as the "special flood hazard
area (SFHA)".
B. "Floodplains" are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The
SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such on map number 17031C and panels 0479F, 0483F, 0487F, 0491F, dated November 6, 2000,
respectively, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA).
C. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into
the village are designated for the Des Plaines River and/or Salt Creek on map number 17031C and panels 0479F and 0483F, dated November 6,
2000, respectively, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduces or eliminates flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave action and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements
for individual listing on the national register.
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
C. Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): An official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone. Such letter amends
the effective flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): A letter which revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 293/307
or sale. A "new manufactured home park or subdivision" is a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April 1, 1990.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare including, but not limited to, compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control and channel restoration. "Mitigation"
may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's susceptibility to flooding.
NGVD: "National geodetic vertical datum of 1929". "NGVD" is a reference surface set by the national geodetic survey deduced from a continental
adjustment of all existing adjustments in 1929.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels, means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by
man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed
or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the stream
caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions through regrading and revegetation.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS: All open public streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and
purposes, and all lakes, rivers and streams which, in their natural condition, were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected
with or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within or upon the borders of the state of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters
and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project that will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures, that includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall or is intended to preclude the design engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or
parties who are not public agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle that is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, seasonal or similar
use(s).
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois, pursuant to the provision of the Illinois professional land surveyor act,
225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 330/1 et seq.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of Illinois, pursuant to the provision of the Illinois professional
engineering practice act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 325/1 et seq.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities that do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A "retention facility" stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A "detention facility" provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This
term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, pond areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris and other material either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified
channel or ponding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, V0, V30, VE, V, M, E, D
or X.
STRUCTURE: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement
of a building or any addition to a building, installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on
a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of the structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the structure either:
1. Before the improvement or repair is started; or
2. If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 294/307
B. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
C. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of a stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa. (1965
Code § 7-18-3; amd. 2009 Code)
14-1-3: DUTIES OF BUILDING DIRECTOR:
A. The village building director shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the following:
1. Determining Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA) and, if
so, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe, or a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more than
one square mile.
2. Professional Engineering Review: If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted
which drains more than one square mile, then the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer (PE) employed by the village or
under contract by the village for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of section 14-1-6 of this chapter. In the case of an
appropriate use, the PE shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 14-1-6 of this chapter.
3. Dam Safety Requirements: Ensure that an IDNR/OWR permit has been issued or a letter indicating no permit is required, if the proposed
development activity includes construction of a "dam", as defined in section 14-1-2 of this chapter. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures.
4. Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
5. Plan Review And Other Requirements: Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements of this chapter and issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of the
village when the development meets the conditions of this chapter.
6. Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
they comply with the provisions of this chapter.
7. Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain the permit files including an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a
floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to section 14-1-8 of this chapter.
8. Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies
of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and
as built elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation and floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter. (1965 Code
§ 7-18-5)
9. State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the IDNR/OWR for all development projects subject to sections 14-1-6
and 14-1-7 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village. Upon acceptance of this chapter by IDNR/OWR and
FEMA, responsibility is hereby delegated to the village pursuant to 17 Illinois administrative code 3708 for construction in the regulatory floodway and
floodplain when floodways have not been defined in sections 14-1-6 and 14-1-7 of this chapter. However, the following review approvals are not
delegated and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR: (1965 Code § 7-18-5; amd. 2009 Code)
a. Organizations that are exempt from this chapter, pursuant to Illinois Compiled Statutes.
b. IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 14-1-2 of this chapter and all other state, federal or local unit of
government projects, including projects of the village and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of subsection 14-1-6W of this
chapter.
c. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed
flood profile pursuant to subsection 14-1-6H of this chapter.
d. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 14-1-6G of this chapter.
e. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in subsections 14-1-6D, E and K of this chapter.
f. Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable lakes and streams.
g. Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations.
h. Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
10. Cooperation With Other Agencies:
a. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and
improve the administration of this chapter.
b. Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 295/307
c. Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program and notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
11. Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject, however,
to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA, for any ordinance changes. (1965 Code § 7-18-5)
B. 1. The village building director shall be responsible for performing all of the duties listed in subsection A of this section. To fulfill such duties, the village
building director first should use the criteria listed in section 14-1-4 of this chapter to determine whether the development site is located within a
floodplain.
2. Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the village building director must determine whether the development site is
within a flood fringe, a regulatory floodway or within an SFHA or floodplain on which no floodway has been identified.
3. If the site is within a flood fringe, the village building director shall require that the minimum requirements of section 14-1-5 of this chapter be met.
4. If the site is within a floodway, the village building director shall require that the minimum requirements of section 14-1-6 of this chapter be met.
5. If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the village building director shall
require that the minimum requirements of section 14-1-7 of this chapter be met.
6. In addition, the general requirements of section 14-1-8 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of sections 14-1-5,
14-1-6 and 14-1-7 of this chapter.
7. The village building director shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 14-1-9 of this chapter.
8. If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the village building director shall review the requirements of section 14-1-10 of this chapter to assure
compliance. In addition, the village building director shall complete all notification requirements.
9. In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this chapter, the village building director may take any and all actions outlined in
section 14-1-12 of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-18-4)
14-1-4: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
A. The protection standard of this chapter is based on the flood insurance study for the village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood
elevation is not available for a particular site, the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water
survey's floodplain information repository. When a party disagrees with the best available data, he or she may finance the detailed engineering study
needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA.
B. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of the Des Plaines River and Salt Creek shall be delineated on the 100-year flood
profiles in the countywide flood insurance study for Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated November 6, 2000, and such amendments to such
studies and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
C. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and one-half
(11/2) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year profiles in the
countywide flood insurance study for Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated November 6, 2000, and such amendments or revisions to such
studies and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
D. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an AH zone or AO zone shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated
on the flood insurance rate map of the village.
E. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an A zone on the flood insurance rate map of the
village shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository. When no base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a
backwater model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2 or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a
hydrologic model such as HEC-1, TR-20 or HIP or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States geological survey for
estimating peak flood discharges. Flood flows should be based on anticipated future land use conditions in the watershed, as determined from adopted
local and regional land use plans. Along any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analysis shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR
for approval, and once approved, must be submitted to the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository for filing. For a nonriverine
SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record, plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved
by the IDNR/OWR for drainage areas greater than one square mile. (1965 Code § 7-18-6)
14-1-5: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper
elevation and compensatory storage and other provisions of this chapter are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage
facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of section 14-1-
8 of this chapter, as follows:
A. Development Permit:
1. Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA
without first obtaining a development permit from the village building director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 296/307
2. Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the village. The application shall be accompanied
by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer,
architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevation in mean sea level, 1929 adjustment datum of NGVD, and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling; and the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans, and the development will be subject to the
requirements of section 14-1-8 of this chapter.
3. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan: A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall
include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate
their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures and the identification of a responsible party to
ensure post construction maintenance.
4. Other Permits And Documents: The village building director shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state and
federal permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for the type of activity proposed. The village shall not issue a permit
unless all other permits have been obtained.
5. Review Of Information: Upon receipt of a development permit application, the village building director shall compare the elevation of the site to the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation of
the current flood insurance rate map and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the
SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The village building director shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
B. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety. If fill is being used to elevate the
site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR)
from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
C. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and one-half
(1.5) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or
adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed
10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood
elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (1965 Code § 7-18-7)
14-1-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway. The regulatory
floodway for the Des Plaines River and Salt Creek shall be as delineated on the regulatory floodway maps for Salt Creek and the Des Plaines River
designated by IDNR/OWR and referenced in section 14-1-2 of this chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria set
forth below. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the
following requirements and those of section 14-1-8 of this chapter:
A. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway
without first obtaining a development permit from the village building director. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by
the village and shall include:
1. Name and address of applicant;
2. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in
an incorporated or unincorporated area;
3. Name of stream or body of water affected;
4. Description of proposed activity;
5. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
6. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
7. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant;
8. Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;
9. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form;
10. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and
11. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with
the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
B. Other Required Documents And Information:
1. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include, as minimum:
a. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical
scale and north arrow.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 297/307
b. A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or
work, elevation in mean sea level, 1929 adjustment datum of NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when
the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), regulatory floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and
dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale.
c. Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphic or numerical scale (horizontal and vertical).
d. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post construction maintenance.
e. A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location.
f. Any and all other local, state and federal permits, approvals or letters that may be required for this type of development.
g. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of this section.
h. If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application will
not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change. No structures may be built
until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
i. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevation and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered
professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and
the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 14-1-8 of this chapter.
j. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information:
(1) A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
(2) A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
(3) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected;
(4) Any analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection K1 of this section would have on
the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
(5) An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected.
2. The village building director shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other required local, state and federal permits and
approvals and shall not issue the development permit until said documents have been submitted to him.
3. The review and approval of applications and required documents under this section by a registered professional engineer, employed or under
contract to the village, shall be required. (1965 Code § 7-18-8)
C. Preventing Increased Damages; Appropriate Uses:
1. The only developments in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation and which will
not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity, or be a threat to public health, safety and welfare, or impair the
natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction
impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses as specified in 17 Illinois
administrative code 3708, as amended, will be allowed. The approved appropriate uses are as follows: (1965 Code § 7-18-8; amd. 2009 Code)
Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways, and any modification thereto.
Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse.
Detached garages, storage sheds or other nonhabitable accessory structures, without toilet facilities, to existing buildings that will not block flood
flows nor reduce floodway storage.
Flood control structures, dikes, dams, and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion or water
quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.
Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating structures, or
construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more
than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure.
Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood elevation
and which will not block flood flows including, but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios and second story additions. If the building
was improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the modification occurred (e.g., a substantial improvement), the building
will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot) or the applicant
of a short term recreational use facility parking lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and accepts liability for all
damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank flooding events.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 298/307
Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any one
direction) built parallel to the direction of the flood flows and including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (maximum 4 stalls) that will not block
flood flows nor reduce floodway storage.
Replacement, reconstruction or repair of a damaged building; provided, that the outside dimensions are not increased and if the building was
damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the damage occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation.
Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls.
Structures or facilities relating to the use of or requiring access to the water or shoreline such as pumping and treatment facilities and facilities and
improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses.
Underground and overhead utilities.
2. Within the regulatory floodway as identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR, the construction of an appropriate use will
be considered permissible; provided, that the proposed project meets the engineering and mitigation criteria in the following subsections and is so
stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer; and provided, that any structure meets the
protection requirements of section 14-1-8 of this chapter.
D. Preservation Of Flood Conveyance To Prevent Increase In Flood Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on
stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
1. Regulatory Floodway Conveyance Formula:
K = (1.486/N)AR
Where:
N = Manning's roughness factor
A = Effective area of the cross section
R = Ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter
(Ref. "Open Channel Hydraulics", Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY)
2. Manning's "N" Value: The same Manning's "N" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance
agreement with a federal, state or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from
a vegetative to a nonvegetative land cover.
3. Transition Sections: Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculation of effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following
expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR, through engineering calculations or model
tests, that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
a. When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length;
b. When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length;
c. When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length
shall be used;
d. Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory floodway
delineation on adjacent properties; and
e. All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.
E. Preservation Of Floodway Storage To Prevent An Increase In Downstream Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least one and one-half (1.5) times the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially
created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory regulatory floodway
storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost
below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost above the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely
and openly to the watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer
shall demonstrate to IDNR/OWR, through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations, that the compensatory storage is
hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is
necessary to reduce flooding at the existing structure.
F. Preservation Of Floodway Velocities To Prevent An Increase Of Stream Erosion Or Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or
on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage, for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However, in the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of
backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be
avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
G. Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway Approaches:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 299/307
1. The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for all
flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or recorded with
the flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR,
dam safety section, for a dam safety permit or waiver.
2. The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater
conditions for the flood study specified in section 14-1-4 of this chapter. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT "FHWA Hydraulic Chart For
The Selection Of Highway Culverts". Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT "Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics Of Bridge
Waterways" calculation procedures.
3. Lost floodway storage must be compensated for pursuant to subsection E of this section.
4. Velocity increases must be mitigated pursuant to this section.
5. If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, a department of transportation permit must be
received.
6. The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by subsection C1 of this section.
7. All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed pursuant to subsection K of this section.
H. Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts And Approach Roads:
1. The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in backwater
over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of flood damage.
2. If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the
applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects
on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties. (1965 Code § 7-18-8)
3. The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance
with the Illinois department of natural resources rules 17 Illinois administrative code 3708 (Floodway Construction In Northeastern Illinois) and
submitted to the IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.
I. On Stream Structures Built For Purpose Of Backing Up Water: Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot, when compared to the
existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing
vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood
easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR, dam safety section, for a dam safety permit or
waiver for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All "dams" and impoundment structures, as
defined in section 14-1-2 of this chapter, shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois administrative code 3702 (Construction And Maintenance
Of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
(1965 Code § 7-18-8; amd. 2009 Code)
1. The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation or regional stormwater detention.
2. The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as
for spawning.
3. The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank
slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin.
4. A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the
input of the nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality
in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control.
5. The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section.
J. Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing
building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the building.
Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities.
K. Excavation In Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of
existing bridge and culvert structures or to compensate for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the
excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering
calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
1. When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
2. When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
3. When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length shall
be used.
4. Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 300/307
L. Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
1. There are no practicable alternatives to the activity that would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of water
affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the floodplain,
clearing the channel, high flow channel or the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or greenbelt. Channel modification is acceptable if the
purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;
2. Water quality, habitat and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may be
destroyed or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;
3. The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the
body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
a. The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross section, slope
and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into
channel modification design, where practical;
b. Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will prevent
erosion;
c. One sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of stream side (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side of the
channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation;
d. Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel;
e. Channel banks shall be constructed with side slope no steeper than three to one (3:1), horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Natural
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap is the preferred material. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions or construction
rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives;
f. All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of construction.
Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative cover;
g. If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles and other similar features, such features shall be provided
in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established where appropriate;
h. A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality;
i. New or relocated channels should be built in the dry, and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion of
water into the new channel;
j. There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated by a
public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project;
k. Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway as
a result of the modification; and
4. The project otherwise complies with this section.
M. Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
N. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling and excavation in which there is potential for
erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
1. The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil is
exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to the
initiation of improvements.
2. Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may not be
at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
3. Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of eroded
sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches and
sediment basins.
4. A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished where possible along existing channels.
Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed where necessary to minimize erosion.
Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately.
5. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil
Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (1988), also known as the "Green Book", and "Standards And Specifications For Soil Erosion And
Sediment Control" (IEPA, 1987).
O. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control, permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to
IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights
outside the project right of way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 301/307
P. General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
1. The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory floodway study referenced in section 14-1-4 of this chapter must be used for analysis of
the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and
concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
2. If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream
with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood
elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations.
3. If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, reconstructed or modified or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the
expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
Q. Conditional Letter Of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and to FEMA all the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a conditional
regulatory floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before a permit is issued.
However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by IDNR/OWR until as built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted by
FEMA and IDNR/OWR. In the case of nongovernment projects, the village shall concur with the proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision
before IDNR/OWR approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging, or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. No further
development activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
R. Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer.
S. Construction Within Twenty Five Feet Of Channel: For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the channel, the
following criteria shall be met:
1. A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
2. Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established upon
completion of construction.
3. The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when necessary, for stream
maintenance purposes. After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of
map revision, construction as necessary to change the regulatory floodway designation may proceed, but no buildings or structures or other
construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the regulatory floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision
is received. The regulatory floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the as built plans.
T. State Review: For those projects listed below which are located in a regulatory floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for its
review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
1. IDNR/OWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection G of this section.
2. IDNR/OWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection H of this section.
3. The IDNR/OWR will review alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections D, E and K of this section.
4. The IDNR/OWR will review and approve, prior to the start of construction, any department projects, "dams" (as defined in section 14-1-2 of this
chapter) and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects, including projects of the village or county. (1965 Code § 7-18-8)
U. Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation stating that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/4.9 et seq. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the division has delegated this responsibility to the village.
V. Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam", as defined in section 14-1-2 of this chapter, pursuant to 17
Illinois administrative code 3702 (Construction And Maintenance Of Dams) shall obtain an Illinois division of water resources dam safety permit prior to
the start of construction of a dam. If the village building director finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the village building director shall
immediately notify the dam safety section of the division of water resources. If the village building director finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe
condition, the village building director shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, IDNR/OWR, dam safety section, in Springfield, Illinois, and the
Illinois emergency management agency (EMA). (1965 Code § 7-18-8; amd. 2009 Code)
W. Activities Not Requiring Registered Professional Engineer's Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional
engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements:
1. Underground and overhead utilities that:
a. Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; or
b. Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway; or
c. In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed; or
d. In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch debris.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 302/307
2. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
a. Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and
b. Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
c. Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
3. Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
4. Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection that:
a. Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
b. Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of the bank.
c. Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
d. Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities,
sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap is a preferred material. Artificial
materials such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
5. Temporary stream crossings in which:
a. The approach roads will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above natural grade;
b. The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert;
c. The top of the roadway fill in channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be nonerosive
material, such as riprap or gravel;
d. All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction;
and
e. The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. (1965 Code § 7-18-8)
14-1-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS OR AREAS WITH NONIDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
In SFHA or floodplains (including AO zones, AH zones or unnumbered A zones) where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the
cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the
flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
A. Development Permit:
1. Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in an SFHA or
floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the village building director.
2. Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the village. The application shall be accompanied
by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and
the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 14-1-8 of this chapter. The
application for a development permit shall also include the following information:
a. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose and intended use.
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be
in an incorporated or unincorporated area.
c. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity.
d. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which shall include as a minimum:
(1) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale and north arrow;
(2) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure
of work, elevation in mean sea level, 1929 adjustment datum of NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body
of water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow and a graphical or numerical scale;
(3) Cross section of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and propose conditions including principal dimensions of the work as
shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
(4) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of
final stabilization and revegetation measures and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
3. Other Data And Documents:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 303/307
a. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection B of this
section.
b. The building director shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state and federal permits, approvals or permit
not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The village building director shall not issue the development permit unless all
required local, state and federal permits have been obtained.
4. Review Of Information: Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository, the
village building director shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation
information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 14-1-4E of this chapter. Any development
located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not
in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The building director shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
B. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity, or threat to public health, safety and welfare, or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality of aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods
as called for in this chapter.
C. Floodways Not Determined: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
1. The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations and data that the
project meets the engineering requirements of subsections 14-1-6D, E, F G, H, I, J and K of this chapter for the entire floodplain as calculated under
the provisions of subsection 14-1-4E of this chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a
floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance of the floodway by the
department, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section 14-1-6 of this chapter for the regulatory
floodway. The "designated floodway" shall be defined according to the definition in section 14-1-2 of this chapter.
2. A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a permit is not
required from IDNR/OWR. (1965 Code § 7-18-9)
3. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the IDNR/OWR has delegated permit responsibility to the village pursuant to 17 Illinois administrative
code part 3708 for regulatory floodways, pursuant to IDNR/OWR statewide permit entitled "Construction In Floodplains With No Designated
Floodways In Northeastern Illinois".
D. Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction modification or removal of a "dam" or an on stream structure to impound water, as defined in
section 14-1-2 of this chapter, shall obtain an Illinois division of water resources dam safety permit or letter indicating a permit is not required prior to
the start of construction of a dam. If the village building director finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the village building director shall
immediately notify the dam safety section of the IDNR/OWR. If the village building director finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the
village building director shall immediately notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois emergency management agency (EMA) and the IDNR/OWR, dam
safety section, in Springfield, Illinois. (1965 Code § 7-18-9; amd. 2009 Code)
E. Activities Not Requiring Registered Professional Engineer's Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional
engineer's review of or calculation of a base flood elevation and regulatory floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this
chapter.
1. Underground and overhead utilities that:
a. Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; or
b. Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway; or
c. In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed; or
d. In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as to not catch debris.
2. Storm and sanitary sewer outlets that:
a. Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and
b. Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
c. Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the outfall location.
3. Construction of shoreline and streambed protection that:
a. Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length or two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of streambed;
b. Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of the bank;
c. Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten percent (10%); and
d. Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities,
sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap is a preferred material. Artificial
materials such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
4. Temporary stream crossings which:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 304/307
a. The approach roads will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above natural grade.
b. The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
c. The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be nonerosive
material, such as riprap or gravel.
d. All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction.
e. The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization.
5. The construction of light poles, signposts and similar structures.
6. The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade.
7. The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions and carports built at or below existing
grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters.
8. The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension (e.g., animal
shelters and tool sheds).
9. The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), which are located on
the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do not extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the
flow of floodwaters.
10. Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
a. The affected length of the stream is less than one thousand feet (1,000');
b. The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels; or
c. The cross sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
F. Altered Or Relocated Watercourses: The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
G. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the
areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be placed below the proposed 10-year flood
elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such
excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (1965 Code § 7-18-9)
14-1-8: REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections 14-1-5, 14-1-6 and 14-1-7 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways and
SFHAs or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1-A30, A99, V0, V1-30, VE, V, M or E), the following requirements
shall be met:
A. Storing Hazardous Or Toxic Materials: No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal
wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE.
B. Utilities: New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted, provided all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
C. Channel Modification, Fill Or Stream Maintenance: For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream maintenance (including levees), the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing within thirty (30) days
prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
D. Protection Of Buildings:
1. All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as an SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in
section 14-1-6 of this chapter. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
a. Construction or placement of a new building;
b. A structural alteration to an existing building that either increases the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or the building's market
value by more than fifty percent (50%);
c. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not
apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
d. Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 305/307
2. This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods:
a. Construction On Permanent Landfill: A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent landfill in
accordance with the following:
(1) The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') deep before compaction and should extend ten feet (10') beyond the foundation of
the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However, the ten
foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic
pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto
neighboring properties.
b. Elevation Of Buildings: A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
(1) The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters
and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more
than one foot (1') above grade and shall consist of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation.
(2) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
(3) All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation.
(4) No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for storage of items or materials.
(5) Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules
and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tie-down act1 issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code 870.
c. Dry Floodproofing Of Nonresidential Buildings: Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation); provided,
that a registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, and
the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The
building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and
impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity
(levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection D2).
E. Nonconforming Structures:
1. Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered.
2. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case, it shall be restored to conform to this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-18-10)
14-1-9: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The village board of trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land management, use
and development. (1965 Code § 7-18-11)
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to
assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections 14-1-5, 14-1-6, 14-1-7 and 14-1-8 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood
damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act, 765 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 205/0.01 et seq.
B. Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois state water survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation pursuant to subsection 14-1-4E of this chapter and the "designated floodway" pursuant to the
definition in section 14-1-2 of this chapter and submitting it to the state water survey IDNR/OWR for review and approval as best available regulatory
data. (1965 Code § 7-18-11; amd. 2009 Code)
C. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
D. The village board of trustees shall not approve a planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-18-11)
14-1-10: VARIANCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 306/307
A. No variances shall be granted to any development located in a "designated floodway" as defined in section 14-1-2 of this chapter. However, when a
development proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway and whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village zoning board of appeals/plan commission for a variance. The village zoning board of
appeals/plan commission shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the village board, which shall then
vote to approve or deny the request for a variance. (1965 Code § 17-18-12; amd. 2009 Code)
B. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA.
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted.
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a nuisance.
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing or
repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities or other public facilities.
6. The provisions of subsections 14-1-5B and 14-1-7B of this chapter shall still be met. (1965 Code § 17-18-12)
7. The activity is not in a designated floodway. (1965 Code § 17-18-12; amd. 2009 Code)
8. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem.
9. The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses.
C. The village building director shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of section 14-1-8 of this chapter that would lessen
the degree of protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage.
2. Increase the risks to life and property.
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
D. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or building listed on the National Register of Historical Places or documented as worthy of
preservation by the Illinois historic preservation agency may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsections B1 and B2
of this section. (1965 Code § 7-18-12)
14-1-11: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived
from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply or suggest that development either inside or outside of the SFHA will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability
on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully hereunder. (1965 Code § 7-18-13)
14-1-12: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due
investigation, the village building director may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The village building director
shall notify the property owner in writing of such violation.
B. If such owner fails, after ten (10) days' notice, to correct the violation:
1. The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or for such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
4. The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
5. The village may issue adjudication citations or take other action as allowed by law to prosecute and/or seek remedies and sanctions for violations
of this chapter.
C. The village building director shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may
cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=613 307/307
D. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (1965 Code § 7-18-14)
14-1-13: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail. This chapter is
intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but is not intended to
repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (1965 Code § 7-18-15)
14-1-14: MINOR CHANGES:
Minor changes to correct technical deficiencies in this chapter, as recommended by FEMA and approved by the building director, shall be permitted
without further legislative adoption. (1965 Code § 7-18-17)
Footnote 1: 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
Chapter 2
STORMWATER DETENTION
14-2-1: STORMWATER DETENTION REQUIRED:
Stormwater detention is hereby required on all developments or redevelopments in all use groups within the village having an area greater than two (2)
acres. Wherein the village engineer determines that a development or redevelopment of any size presents a need for stormwater detention, so as to
preclude a significant threat to life or property, the engineer may require the minimum stormwater detention construction needed to mitigate such threat.
(1965 Code § 7-21-1)
14-2-2: ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS:
All provisions, requirements, and methods of calculations that are currently used in administering stormwater detention as defined in the "Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District Of Greater Chicago's Manual Of Procedures For The Administration Of The Sewer Permit Ordinance", or its successor
document, shall apply to the methods required by this chapter. (1965 Code § 7-21-2)
14-2-3: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
In order to eliminate small orifice outlets, the minimum size restrictor that shall be used shall be two inches (2") in diameter. Otherwise, all orifices shall be
calculated based on accepted standard calculations. Complete plans and calculations shall be furnished to the building director at the time application is
made for a building permit. Site plans shall be prepared showing the details of the stormwater detention to be provided, and calculations shall be prepared
by a professional engineer, bearing his professional seal. The plans shall be referred to the village engineer and shall receive his written approval prior to
issuance of a building permit. (1965 Code § 7-21-3)