
Lakemoor, IL Code of Ordinances


VILLAGE OF LAKEMOOR, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-17 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through May 7, 2019; and
State legislation current through ALS 2018 Pamphlet No. 8










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




CHAPTER 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   1.01   Lakemoor Municipal Code



   1.02   Definitions



   1.03   Repeal of ordinances



   1.04   Ordinances repealed and not reenacted



   1.05   Jurisdiction



   1.06   Penalties; ticket program



   1.07   Settlement of offenses



   1.08   Responsibility for acts



   1.09   Separability of provisions



   1.10   Effective date



   1.11   Copies on file



§ 1.01  LAKEMOOR MUNICIPAL CODE.



   (A)   Title. This code of ordinances may be known and cited as the
“Village of Lakemoor Municipal Code”.



   (B)   Amendments. Any additions or amendments to this code are
incorporated in this code so that a reference to the Lakemoor Municipal Code
includes such additions and amendments.



   (C)   Numbering sections. Each section number of this code shall
consist of two component parts separated by a period, the figure before the
period referring to the chapter number and the figure after the period
referring to the section within the chapter.



   (D)   Numbering additions. The decimal system shall be used for all
additions and amendments to this code. When a chapter or section is added,
the new chapter or section shall be given a decimal character.



§ 1.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Terms used in this code, unless specifically defined in this
code, have the meanings prescribed by the Illinois Compiled Statutes for the
same terms.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Lakemoor.



      COUNTY. McHenry County and Lake County.



      ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes.



      ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES. The 1993 edition of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes and when later editions are published the latest
publication thereof.



      ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE. ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5.



      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, trust, estate,
club, association or corporation. As applied to partnerships or associations,
the word includes the partners or members thereof; as applied to
corporations, it includes the officers, agents or employees thereof who are
responsible for the act referred to. The singular includes the plural, and
the plural includes the singular. The masculine gender includes the feminine
and neuter genders.



      STATE. State of Illinois.



      THIS CODE. The Village of Lakemoor Municipal Code.



      VILLAGE. The Village of Lakemoor, Illinois.



      VILLAGE BOARD. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village
of Lakemoor.



      VILLAGE CLERK. The Village Clerk and similarly any reference to
any officer, board or commission means such officer, board or commission of
the Village of Lakemoor unless otherwise stated.



§ 1.03  REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   All general ordinances or parts thereof heretofore adopted by
the President and Board of Trustees and not included in this code are
repealed, except the following which are hereby continued in full force and
effect:



      (1)   Ordinances authorizing contracts or the issuance of
municipal notes or bonds;



      (2)   Ordinances levying taxes or making special assessments;



      (3)   Ordinances appropriating funds or establishing salaries;



      (4)   Ordinances granting franchises or rights to corporations;



      (5)   Ordinances relating to the establishment, dedication,
opening, grading, naming, improving, altering, widening or vacating of any
streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public grounds;



      (6)   Ordinances respecting the annexation of territory to the
village, or the conveyance or acceptance of real property or easements in
real property;



      (7)   Ordinances authorizing or relating to particular a
public improvement;



      (8)   Ordinances relating to zoning and subdivisions; and



      (9)   Any other special ordinances not in conflict with the
provisions of this code.



   (B)   (1)   The provisions of this code, so far as they are the
same in substance as those of heretofore existing ordinances are
continuations of such ordinances and not new enactments.



      (2)   Any act done, offense committed or right accruing or
acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment enforced, prosecuted
or inflicted shall exist as fully and to the same extent as if the repeal had
not been effected.



§ 1.04  ORDINANCES REPEALED AND NOT REENACTED.



   (A)   No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed
shall be considered reordained or reenacted by virtue of this code, unless
specifically reenacted.



   (B)   The repeal of any curative or validating ordinance does not
impair or effect any cure or validation already effected thereby.



§ 1.05  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in this code, this code applies to
acts performed within the corporate limits of the village.



   (B)   Provisions of this code also apply to acts performed outside
the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law where the law
confers power on the village to regulate such particular acts outside the
corporate limits.



§ 1.06  PENALTIES; TICKET PROGRAM.



   (A)   (1)   Standard penalty. Unless another penalty is
specifically provided by this code for violation of any particular provision,
section or chapter, any person violating any provision of this code, or any
rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, or any provision
of any code adopted herein by reference, shall upon conviction be subject to
a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $750. In the event that the
Illinois Municipal Code or any other state statute provides for a penalty for
an ordinance violation of greater than $750, then the applicable state
statute shall apply.



      (2)   Commitment. The person upon whom any fine or penalty is
imposed for violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance of the
village, upon order of the court before whom the conviction is had, may be
committed to the county or state jail as provided by law, or to any other
place provided by statute.



      (3)   Each day of violation. Each act of violation and each
day upon which a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.



      (4)   Applicability. The penalty provided by this section
applies to the amendment of any section of this code or a code adopted herein
by reference whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance.



      (5)   Reference to sections. Reference to a section of this
code shall be understood also to refer to and include the penalty section
relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



      (6)   Failure of officer to perform duties. The failure of an
officer or employee of the village to perform an official duty imposed by
this code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed
for violation of this code, unless a penalty is specifically provided in the
section creating the duty.



      (7)   Collection costs. In the event any charge or fee,
including, but not limited to, those relating to recording, retained
personnel, fines, penalties, repair, abatement, restitution or reimbursement,
found in any section of this code, that is due the village and is not paid,
the cost of collecting said fee and enforcing the ordinance shall be added to
the fee. Collection and enforcement costs shall include, but not be limited
to, prosecution and attorney fees incurred by the village.



   (B)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (B),
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         APT. A ticket issued at the discretion of the Village
Police Department and/or Building and Zoning Department personnel in cases of
certain minor ordinance violations in lieu of arrest.



         REPEAT OFFENDER. Any person who has been previously issued
an APT for the same ordinance violation within the preceding 12-month period.



      (2)   Jurisdiction. An APT may be issued by Police Department
and Building and Zoning Department personnel of the village for violations of
village ordinance provisions with the exception of those offenses enumerated
in division (B)(4) below. An APT shall not be issued to a repeat offender, as
defined in division (B)(1) above.



      (3)   Procedure. At the discretion of the officer or agent of
the village authorized to issue notices of ordinance violations, an APT or
state citation may be issued in lieu of arrest. However, if the fine is not
paid in full at the time the APT is issued a state citation shall be issued.



      (4)   Exceptions. An APT shall not be issued for the following
violations: any vehicle or driver involved in a traffic accident, speeding in
excess of 16 mph, driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotics, reckless homicide, drag racing, leaving the scene of an accident,
driving while license suspended or revoked and any other traffic offenses for
which a court appearance is required pursuant to state statutes.



      (5)   Penalty.



         (a)   Any person who, pursuant to the issuance of an
alternate penalty ticket, is accused of a violation of any section of the
village code, except a traffic offense for which a court appearance is
required pursuant to Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 110A, para. 551, may settle and
compromise that ticket by paying to the village the sum of $50 within ten
days from the date such alleged violation was committed or by paying to the
village the sum of $65 subsequent to said ten-day period and prior to a
determination of guilt by a court of competent jurisdiction.



         (b)   The issuance of alternate penalty tickets shall be
a courtesy in lieu of instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense. If
the person accused of the violation does not settle the claim, the violation
shall be prosecuted before the court and that person shall be subject to the
general penalties set forth in § 1.06(A) of this chapter.



(Ord. 93-O-14, passed 5-27-1993; Ord. 93-O-16, passed 6-24-1993; Ord.
10-O-21, passed 8-26-2010)



§ 1.07  SETTLEMENT OF OFFENSES.



   (A)   Any of the following described offenses arising under the
ordinances of the village may be settled and compromised by the offender in
the following manner: a settlement payment when made within seven days of the
time a notice therefore is delivered to the offender, as listed in Column A;
a settlement payment when made between the eighth and fourteenth day of the
date notice is delivered to the offender, as listed in Column B:



 

Offense
 

Column A

 

Column B





Animal Control

Ch. 14
 

$50

 

$100



Garbage and Refuse

Ch. 13
 

$25

 

$50



Licenses and Permits

Ch. 7 (§§ 7.03 through 7.23)
 

$25

 

$50



Liquor Control and Licensing

Ch. 9
 

$50

 

$100



Nuisances

Ch. 12
 

$25

 

$50



Offenses Against Public Peace, Safety and Morals

Ch. 43 (other than listed below)
 

$50

 

$100



Parks and Playgrounds

Ch. 8 (§§ 8.02 through 8.09)
 

$25

 

$50



Potable Water

Ch. 55
 

$50

 

$100



Streets

Ch. 6 (§§ 6.02 through 6.15)
 

$25

 

$50



Traffic

Ch. 41-1/2 (non-moving violations)
 

$25

 

$50



Unauthorized Use of Parking Places Reserved for Persons with Disabilities
 

$200

 

$350



Unlawful Sale, Possession or Use of Illegal Fireworks

(§ 43.07)
 

$125

 

$250



Vehicle License Tax

Ch. 42
 

$25

 

$50





 



   (B)   Settlement payments shall be made to the Village Clerk who
shall provide the alleged offender with a receipt in the amount of such
payment.



   (C)   The amounts paid to the Village Clerk in settlement of the
foregoing claims shall be promptly deposited by the Village Clerk with the
Village Treasurer and shall be credited by the Treasurer to the General Fund.



   (D)   The village shall refrain from prosecuting any alleged
offender of the foregoing offenses after receipt of such settlement payment.



(Ord. 10-O-21, passed 8-26-2010)



§ 1.08  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS.



   Every person concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by this
code, whether he or she directly commits the act, or prosecutes, counsels,
aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and on conviction is
punishable as if he or she had directly committed such act.



§ 1.09  SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   Each section, division, sentence, clause and provision of this code is
separable and if any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any
reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this code nor any
part thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.



§ 1.10  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This code of ordinances shall take effect ten days after passage and
publication in book form under the authority of the President and Board of
Trustees, as provided by law.



§ 1.11  COPIES ON FILE.



   Copies of this code shall be kept available at the Village Clerk’s
office for public inspection.



CHAPTER 2:  BOARD OF TRUSTEES



Section



   2.01   Government of village



   2.02   Election, term and powers



   2.03   Regular meetings



   2.04   Special meetings



   2.05   Presiding officer



   2.06   Consent agenda



   2.07   Rules of order



   2.08   Records



   2.09   Committees



   2.10   Duties of standing committees



   2.11   Compensation of elected and appointed officials



   2.12   Public comment at village meetings



§ 2.01  GOVERNMENT OF VILLAGE.



   The village shall be governed by a Village Board which shall be elected
at large and shall consist of a President and six Trustees.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 2.02  ELECTION, TERM AND POWERS.



   (A)   The members of the Village Board shall be elected and serve
for a four-year term, and until their successors are elected and qualified,
as provided by law. The Village Board shall be the legislative department of
the municipal government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers
as provided by law and by ordinance.



   (B)   The terms of the members of the Village Board elected at the
April election shall begin at the first meeting in May following their
election. If official election results are not available at the first meeting
in May, the term of office shall begin at the first regular or special
meeting following receipt of the election results.



   (C)   Commencing with the municipal officers election in April,
2013, any person elected to serve as Trustee may serve a maximum of three
full, consecutive terms as a Trustee. This term limit shall be applicable
prospectively to those persons elected to the office of trustee commencing
with the election in April, 2013, and shall apply thereafter. Commencing with
the municipal officers election in April, 2013, any person elected to serve
as President may serve a maximum of three full, consecutive terms as
President. This term limit shall be applicable prospectively to those persons
elect to the office of President commencing with the election in April, 2013,
and shall apply thereafter.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 11-O-07, passed 5-12-2011)



§ 2.03  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   The regular meetings of the Village Board shall be held in the
Board Room at 234 West Rand Road, Lakemoor, Illinois, on the second and
fourth Thursdays of each month at the hour of 7:00 p.m.



   (B)   If the regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the meeting
shall be cancelled.



   (C)   Adjourned meetings may be held at such other times as the
Board may determine.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 2.04  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   Special meetings of the Village Board may be called by the President or
any three members of the Board of Trustees; provided that, written notice of
such meetings shall be given to each member of the Village Board no less than
48 hours before the time set for such meetings. Whenever all of the members
of the Village Board are present at any special meeting, the requirement of
notice of such special meeting shall be deemed waived.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 2.05  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The President shall be the presiding officer of the regular and special
meetings of the Village Board, and of other meetings when the Village Board
convenes as a committee of the whole. In the absence of the President, the
Village Clerk shall open the meeting and the Chairperson of the Executive
Committee shall serve as temporary Chairperson.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 2.06  QUORUM.



   The Board of Trustees may establish and use a “consent agenda” or
“omnibus vote” to streamline the voting and consideration of items that
would otherwise be handled on an individual basis on a regular meeting
agenda. The agenda shall be prepared in a manner which lists all items under
a heading of “Consent Agenda” and each item shall be sufficiently
detailed to comply with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. The Consent Agenda
itself shall be approved by a unanimous vote. Any trustee may have any one or
more items removed from the Consent Agenda by simple request. Any such
removed item shall be handled in customary fashion on an individual basis as
through it were never on such Consent Agenda. Once approved by unanimous
vote, the Consent Agenda need only be approved by a simple majority unless
any item on such Consent Agenda requires a supermajority vote for approval.
In such case, the Mayor shall vote in addition to the Trustees.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 15-O-34, passed 10-22-2015)



§ 2.07  RULES OF ORDER.



   (A)   Order of business. The order of business at meetings of the
Village Board shall be as follows:



      (1)   Roll call of members;



      (2)   Pledge to the flag;



      (3)   Discussion and approval of agenda;



      (4)   Citizen comment;



      (5)   Presentation of the minutes of the previous meetings and
approval by Board of Trustees;



      (6)   Presentation and acceptance of reports by Village
Treasurer and Village Collector;



      (7)   Presentation and approval of bills against the village;



      (8)   Reports of officers;



      (9)   Reports of standing committees;



      (10)   Old business;



      (11)   New business;



      (12)   Purchase orders;



      (13)   Citizen comment; and



      (14)   Adjournment.



   (B)   Motions, resolutions and ordinances. All resolutions and
ordinances submitted to the Village Board shall be reduced to writing before
being voted upon. Where such are adopted and entered upon the minutes of the
proceedings of the Village Board, the name of the member moving the adoption,
and the name of the member seconding same shall be entered in the minutes. On
each matter submitted to the Village Board upon which a vote is taken, the
vote of each member voting, as well as the vote of the President when he or
she is required by law or by ordinance to vote, shall also be entered in the
minutes.



   (C)   Addressing meetings. No person other than the President,
member of the Board of Trustees or a village officer shall address the Board
of Trustees at any regular or special meeting, except upon consent of a
majority of the members of the Village Board present.



   (D)   Suspension of rules. The rules of order, other than those
provided by law, may be suspended at any time by the affirmative vote of a
majority of the members present at any meeting of the Village Board.



   (E)   Robert’s Rules of Order. The current edition of Robert’s
Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the deliberations of the Village
Board, except as is otherwise provided by law or ordinance.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 2.08  RECORDS.



   The Village Clerk or his or her designee shall keep the minutes and
records of the Board proceedings.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 2.09  COMMITTEES.



   (A)   Standing committees. There shall be the following standing
committees of the Board of Trustees:



      (1)   Executive Committee;



      (2)   Public Works Committee;



      (3)   Public Safety Committee;



      (4)   Economic Development Committee; and



      (5)   Finance Committee.



   (B)   Special committees. The Village Board shall establish other
special committees as it deems necessary.



   (C)   Membership in committees.



      (1)   The President shall appoint the members of all standing
and special committees and shall designate the Chairperson thereof.



      (2)   Every committee of the Board shall consist of three
members, including the Chairperson, unless the Board shall approve otherwise.



   (D)   Reports of committees. It shall be the duty of each committee
to comply with the Open Meetings Act, being ILCS Ch. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et
seq.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 10-O-25, passed 9-23-2010; Ord.
15-O-34, passed 10-22-2015)



§ 2.10  DUTIES OF STANDING COMMITTEES.



   (A)   Executive Committee. It shall be the duty of the Executive
Committee to:



      (1)   Review and make recommendations to the Village Board
regarding proposed amendments to text of the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
Ordinance, Watershed Development Ordinance and Comprehensive Plan;



      (2)   Recommend to the Village Board such regulations or
amendments to the ordinances as it deems appropriate;



      (3)   Consider and make recommendations to the Village Board
with regard to personnel policies;



      (4)   Perform such other duties as may be assigned to the
Committee from time to time; and



      (5)   Review and make recommendations to the Village Board
regarding the establishment, update and revision of long-term and short-term
plans for village capital projects and expenditures.



   (B)   Public Works Committee. It shall be the duty of the Public
Works Committee to:



      (1)   Report to the Village Board from time to time on the
operation of the sewer and water systems;



      (2)   Review and make recommendations to the Village Board
with respect to the condition and repair of the streets, alleys and sidewalks
of the village and all appurtenances therein;



      (3)   Recommend to the Village Board with regard to all
transportation planning;



      (4)   Review and report on the condition of all public parks
in the village and recommend to the Village Board such rules and regulations
for the parks as the Committee deems appropriate;



      (5)   Report on the condition of all building and property
owned or leased by the village; and



      (6)   Perform such duties as may be assigned to the Committee
from time to time.



   (C)   Public Safety Committee. It shall be the duty of the Public
Safety Committee to:



      (1)   Make recommendations to the Village Board with respect
to the Police Services and its operations;



      (2)   Review and revise the village’s emergency plans as
necessary;



      (3)   Review and make recommendations to the Village Board on
issues relating to the Police/Emergency Dispatch Services;



      (4)   Review and make recommendations to the Village Board on
issues relating to ETSB (Emergency Telephone System Board) serving the
village;



      (5)   Review and make recommendations to the Village Board on
issues relating Fire Protection Districts serving the village;



      (6)   Review and make recommendations to the Village Board on
issues relating to State and County Health Departments;



      (7)   Make recommendations to the Village Board with respect
to applicants for employment for civilian positions and part-time Police
Officers to the Village Board; and



      (8)   Perform such duties as may be assigned to the Committee
from time to time.



   (D)   Economic Development. It shall be the duty of the Economic
Development Committee to:



      (1)   Make recommendations to the Village Board regarding the
expansion of the industrial/ commercial business base and village sponsored
events; and



      (2)   Perform such other duties as may be assigned to the
Committee from time to time.



   (E)   Finance Committee. It shall be the duty of the Finance
Committee to:



      (1)   Review and have oversight of the monthly Treasurer
reports, monthly accounts payable and accounts receivable;



      (2)   Establish, review and monitor policies for the
management and protection of various funds of the village;



      (3)   Establish, review and monitor municipal utility billing
and collection policies;



      (4)   Prepare and recommend to the Village Board the annual
tax levy ordinance and annual appropriations ordinance;



      (5)   Prepare a draft overall annual budget, considering each
department’s requested expenditures, the provision of quality community
services and the village’s overall needs and recommend final annual budget
to the Village Board;



      (6)   Establish, review and monitor village ordinances related
to licensing requirements in the village; and



      (7)   Perform such other duties as may be assigned to the
Committee from time to time.



   (F)   General. It shall be the function of each committee to make
policy recommendations to the Village Board. The actual administration of a
village department or village activity shall not be the responsibility of the
committee, a committee member or a committee chairperson.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 10-O-25, passed 9-23-2010; Ord.
15-O-34, passed 10-22-2015)



§ 2.11  COMPENSATION OF ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS.



   (A)   The salary of the Village President is hereby set as follows:



      (1)   One thousand dollars per month; plus



      (2)   One hundred fifty dollars for each special meeting of
the Village Board or public hearing of the Village Board or any other board
or commission of the village which the Village President attends.



   (B)   The salary of the Village Clerk is hereby set as follows:



      (1)   One hundred fifty dollars per month; plus



      (2)   One hundred fifty dollars per regular Village Board
meeting attended; plus



      (3)   One hundred fifty dollars for one or more special
meetings of the Village Board or public hearing of the Village Board or any
other board or commission of the village which the Village Clerk attends on
any one date.



   (C)   The salary of a Village Trustee is hereby set as follows:



      (1)   One hundred fifty dollars per regular Village Board
meeting attended; plus



      (2)   One hundred fifty dollars per month for attending one or
more called Village Board Committee Meeting; plus



      (3)   One hundred fifty dollars for each special meeting of
the Village Board attended.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 08-O-20, passed 11-4-2008)



§ 2.12  PUBLIC COMMENT AT VILLAGE MEETINGS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the Open Meetings Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 120, §
2.06(g), any person shall be permitted an opportunity to address public
officials under the rules established and recorded by the public body. Public
participation at meetings of the Village of Lakemoor shall be permitted in
accordance with the provisions of this section.



      (1)   Public comment at the beginning of Village Board
meetings.



         (a)   An individual's desiring to address and/or comment
on an agenda item shall submit a paper to the Village Clerk prior to the
start of the Village Board meeting containing his or her name, and the agenda
item to be discussed.



         (b)   Comment shall be limited to three minutes and
shall be made from the podium.



      (2)   Public comment at the end of the Village Board meeting.



         (a)   Public comment at the end of a Village Board shall
be open to all matters of public concern.



         (b)   Comment should be made into the microphone but the
person need not come to the podium.



      (3)   (a)   Public comment at other village meetings.



         (b)   Public comment, not exceeding three minutes per
person unless otherwise allowed additional time by the presiding officer,
shall be allowed at all Village Committee, Plan and Zoning Board, Police
Commission, Park and Recreation Committee and all other meetings of a public
body of the village.



   (B)   All individuals being called to address and comment before the
Village Board shall speak into the microphone so he or she can be heard.
Prior to speaking, the individual shall state his or her name for the record.
Such comments by any one person shall be limited to three minutes unless an
extension of time is granted at the presiding officer's discretion. Citizens
shall not yield unused time to other speakers. The presiding officer shall
have the right at any time to close comment by that person, when, in the
presiding officer's discretion, such input violates the provisions of these
rules, or is otherwise irrelevant, repetitious or disruptive. After a
reasonable period of time has been devoted to public comments, and all those
desiring to provide comment have not had a change to do so, the public
comment portion of the agenda may be closed upon a motion and second of the
Village Board and a majority vote in favor thereof. Any person who was not
able to address the Village Board will be encouraged to attend a subsequent
meeting to address the Village Board or to provide written comments.



   (C)   If numerous persons wish to comment on a single topic, the
Village Board may recognize a specified number of individuals who wish to
speak in favor of, against or wish to make general comments regarding the
topic. The Village Board shall not be required to allow every person who
wishes to address the issue to do so, but as many views as possible are
encouraged to be heard. Any person who is not able to speak during the time
for public comment shall be allowed and encouraged to present his or her
views to the Village Board in writing.



   (D)   Members of the public, as an alternative to speaking, may
submit written materials to the Village Board regarding any matter of public
concern.



   (E)   Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or
offensive comments at a village meeting and are expected to comply with these
rules. All comments must be civil in nature. Any person who engages in
threatening, slanderous or disorderly behavior when addressing a village
meeting shall be deemed out-of-order by the presiding officer.



(Ord. 17-O-05, passed 1-26-2017)



CHAPTER 3:  VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION



Section



General Provisions



   3.01   The President



   3.02   The Village Clerk



   3.03   The Village Treasurer



   3.04   The Village Attorney



   3.05   Superintendent of Public Works



   3.06   Building Commissioner or Inspector



   3.07   Bonds of officers



   3.08   Officers and employees of village



   3.09   Other provisions pertaining to the village



   3.10   Village Planner



   3.11   Village Administrator



   3.12   Code of conduct



   3.13   Records retention policy



   3.14   Expense reimbursement



Administrative Adjudication



   3.25   Purpose



   3.26   Department established



   3.27   Department Administrator; powers and duties



   3.28   Administrative hearing officer



   3.29   Instituting administrative hearings



   3.30   Violation notice



   3.31   Subpoenas



   3.32   Continuances



   3.33   Hearing and evidence



   3.34   Findings, decision and order



   3.35   Debt due to village



   3.36   Enforcement in the Circuit Court



   3.37   Driver’s license suspension



   3.38   Immobilized and/or impounded vehicles



   3.39   Administrative hearing program procedures not exclusive



   3.40   Judicial review



   3.41   General fine for any other violation



   3.42   Fines for violations concerning standing, parking, compliance
or condition of vehicles other than handicapped parking



   3.43   Fines for violations of handicapped parking restrictions



   3.44   Fines for automatic traffic law violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 3.01  THE PRESIDENT.



   (A)   Election and term. The President shall be elected for a
four-year term, and shall serve until his or her successor is elected and
qualified, as provided by law.



   (B)   Duties. The President shall be the chief executive officer of
the village, and shall perform such duties as may be required by law or by
ordinance. The President shall have general supervision over all executive
officers and employees of the village, and shall have the power and authority
to inspect and examine all books and records kept by all officers and
employees of the village in their official capacities, at any reasonable
time. The President shall keep the Village Board informed of all
investigative and litigation matters involving the village and shall inform
the Village Board of contacts with local, state and federal officials on any
matter involving the village. The President shall present to the Village
Board at a regularly scheduled and open public meeting in April of each year,
a State of Lakemoor Address. At a minimum, the address shall include the
status of all village departments, village accomplishments and shortfalls
through the prior year, the President’s position on major projects and
events that affect the village and the President’s vision for the future.
The President shall act for and on behalf of the village at all occasions and
receptions.



   (C)   Appointment of officers. The President shall have the power
and authority to appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Village
Board, all officers of the village whose election or appointment is not
otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall
be filled in like manner. The President may appoint a temporary officer for a
maximum term of 90 days and the same person may be temporarily appointed to
the same office no more than once in one fiscal year.



   (D)   Designation of duties. The President shall have the power to
delegate to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no
specific officer has otherwise been directed to perform such duty. Whenever
there is a dispute or uncertainty concerning the respective duties or powers
of any appointed officer of the village, such dispute or uncertainty shall be
settled by the President upon consultation with the Village Attorney.



   (E)   President pro tem. During any temporary or permanent absence
or disability of the President, the Village Board shall elect one of its
members to act as President pro tem, who shall possess the powers and
authority of the President, as provided by law and by ordinance.



   (F)   Bond. Before entering upon the duties of office, the President
shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required
by law and by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of the office. The village shall pay the premium on such bond.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 3.02  THE VILLAGE CLERK.



   (A)   Appointment and term. The Village Clerk shall be appointed by
the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees and shall
serve for a four-year term or the duration of the term of office of the
Village President who appointed said Clerk, whichever is shorter. The Village
Clerk shall take his or her oath of office before assuming his or her duties.



   (B)   Duties. The Village Clerk shall perform the following duties.



      (1)   He or she shall seal and attest all contracts, licenses,
permits and such other instruments and documents of the village as are
provided for by law or by ordinance.



      (2)   He or she shall turn over all money received on behalf
of the village to the Village Treasurer promptly upon receipt of same, and
shall furnish the Village Treasurer a statement as to the source thereof.



      (3)   He or she shall maintain accounts showing all funds
received on behalf of the village, the source and disposition thereof and
such other accounts as may be required by law or by ordinance.



      (4)   He or she shall keep a register of all licenses and
permits issued, a record showing all of the officers and regular employees of
the village and such other records as may be required by law or by ordinance.



      (5)   He or she shall be the custodian of all papers,
instruments and documents belonging to the village which are not assigned for
custody to another officer of the village or to the President or Village
Board.



      (6)   He or she shall keep and maintain a proper index of all
documents and records in his or her possession.



      (7)   He or she shall be the custodian of the village seal,
and shall affix its impression upon all papers, instruments and documents as
shall be required by law or by ordinance.



      (8)   He or she shall attend all meetings of the Village Board
and shall accurately record the minutes of all such proceedings of the
Village Board, and shall record and file in separate files all motions,
resolutions, ordinances and other actions passed and approved by the Village
Board.



      (9)   In addition, he or she shall perform such other duties
as may be required by law or by ordinance.



   (C)   Deputy Clerk. The Village Clerk shall hereafter be authorized
to appoint one Deputy Clerk to discharge the functions and duties of the
Village Clerk. The Deputy Clerk need not be a resident of the Village of
Lakemoor. The Deputy Clerk shall receive compensation of $150 per month. If
the Deputy Clerk attends a meeting in the place of the Village Clerk, the
Deputy Clerk shall receive the same compensation as the Village Clerk would
have received if the Village Clerk had attended that meeting.



      (1)   The Deputy Clerk may execute all documents required by
law to be executed by the Village Clerk and may affix the seal of the Clerk
wherever required. In signing any document, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the
name of the Clerk followed by the word “By” and the Deputy Clerk’s own
name and the words “Deputy Clerk”.



      (2)   The powers and duties of the Deputy Clerk shall be
exercised only in the absence of the Clerk from the place where the Clerk’s
office is maintained and only when either written direction has been given by
the Clerk to that Deputy to exercise a power or the corporate authorities
have determined by resolution that the Village Clerk is temporarily or
permanently incapacitated to perform that function.



      (3)   When the Deputy’s signature is duly authorized as
provided in this section and is affixed by the Deputy in the manner
prescribed in this section on any document (including, but not limited to,
contracts, bonds or other obligations of the village) the document shall have
the same effect as if the document had been signed by the Village Clerk in
person.



   (D)   Bond. Before entering upon the duties of office, the Village
Clerk and Deputy Clerk shall execute a bond in such amount and with such
sureties as may be required by law or by ordinance, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of the office. The village shall pay the
premium on such bond.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 08-O-20, passed 10-23-2008)



§ 3.03  THE VILLAGE TREASURER.



   (A)   Creation of office and appointment. There is hereby created
the Office of Village Treasurer, an executive office of the village. The
Village Treasurer shall be appointed by the President, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees, and shall serve at the pleasure of the
President and Board of Trustees.



   (B)   Duties. The Village Treasurer shall perform the following
duties.



      (1)   He or she shall receive all money paid in to the
village, either directly or from other village officers, and personally or
through a designee, shall make out all checks of the village and pay out
village funds only on vouchers, orders or checks properly signed by the
Treasurer and two designees of the Village Treasurer. The Treasurer shall
annually, as of May 1 of each year, present a list of designees to sign
checks for approval by the Board of Trustees.



      (2)   He or she shall deposit the village funds in such legal
depositories as may be designated by the Village Board by resolution or
ordinance, and he or she shall keep the village funds separate and distinct
from his or her own funds and all others, and shall not intermingle his or
her own funds or any others with village funds, and he or she shall not make
private or personal use of village funds.



      (3)   He or she shall keep and maintain accurate books and
records of account showing all monies received by him or her, the source
thereof, and all monies paid out by him or her, and the purpose for which
such money was paid out, and he or she shall keep a record showing at all
times the financial condition of the village, and shall make monthly reports
to the Village Board showing the funds received and disbursed during the
month, and shall make an annual report to the Village Board by June 30 of
each year of the total amount of all receipts and expenditures of the
village, and showing all of his or her transactions as Village Treasurer
during the preceding year.



      (4)   He or she shall keep a register of all warrants, bonds
or orders filed with him or her or paid by him or her, and of all vouchers,
as provided by law or by ordinance.



      (5)   From time to time, the Village Treasurer may invest
village funds not immediately necessary in such depositories or in such
securities as the Village Treasurer may deem in the best interest of the
village; provided, however, that, at the next regular meeting of the Village
Board, the Village Treasurer shall request ratification of his or her action
in making any investments.



      (6)   In addition, he or she shall perform such other duties
as may be required by law or by ordinance.



   (C)   Bond. Before entering upon the duties of office, the Village
Treasurer shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may
be required by law and by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the office, and to indemnify the village against
any loss due to any neglect of duty or wrongful act on the part of the
Village Treasurer. The village shall pay the premium on such bond.



   (D)   Assuming duties. The Village Treasurer may delegate certain
duties, from time to time, to other village employees or consultants;
provided that, the Village Treasurer shall be held responsible for the
fidelity of any designee.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 06-O-21, passed 9-28-2006)



§ 3.04  THE VILLAGE ATTORNEY.



   (A)   Creation of office and appointment. There is hereby created
the Office of Village Attorney, an executive office of the village. The
Village Attorney shall be appointed by the President, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees. The Village Attorney need not be a
resident, nor a qualified elector, of the village.



   (B)   Duties.



      (1)   The Village Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the
village, and shall render advice upon all legal questions affecting the
village whenever requested to do so by any village officer. Upon the request
of the President or the Board of Trustees, the Village Attorney shall reduce
legal advice or opinions to writing. The Village Attorney shall be
responsible to update the Village Board on any changes in laws affecting the
village.



      (2)   The Village Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and
all suits or actions at law or in equity to which the village may be a part,
or in which the village may be interested, or which may be brought against it
or by an officer of the village on behalf of the village or in the capacity
of such person as an officer of the village.



      (3)   The Village Attorney shall act to enforce in full all
judgments, decrees or orders rendered or entered in favor of the village, and
to carry to completion all special assessment and condemnation proceedings.



      (4)   The Village Attorney shall draft or supervise the
drafting of all contracts, leases and other documents or instruments to which
the village may be a party, and upon the request of the President or Board of
Trustees shall draft ordinances or resolutions on any subjects within the
powers of the village.



   (C)   Bond. The Village Attorney shall not be required to furnish
bond before entering upon the duties of the office.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 3.05  SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created the office and position of
Superintendent of Public Works, and such office and position shall be filled
by appointment of the President with the consent and approval of the Board of
Trustees.



   (B)   Term. The term of office of the Superintendent of Public Works
shall be from year to year and shall commence after the annual appointment at
the first meeting of May in each year, and any individual duly appointed as
Superintendent of Public Works shall serve in such position from the date of
annual appointment until the annual appointment in the month of May in the
year following, or until his or her successor shall be otherwise appointed
and qualified. In the event of the resignation, death or inability of the
person so appointed to serve as Superintendent of Public Works, a successor
may be appointed by the President with the consent and approval of the Board
of Trustees to complete the unexpired term and such successor shall serve
until the completion of the unexpired term or until his or her successor is
duly appointed and qualified.



   (C)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public
Works to correlate, control, superintend and otherwise see to the completion
of all work and projects which may be undertaken by the village of ordered
done by the President and/or Board of Trustees.



   (D)   Reports. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be
responsible solely to the President and Board of Trustees for all matters
coming under his or her control and shall regularly render a monthly report
of the progress and condition of such matters to the President and Board of
Trustees.



   (E)   Removal. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be subject
to removal from office upon the sole determination of the President and Board
of Trustees.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 3.06  BUILDING COMMISSIONER OR INSPECTOR.



   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created the office and position of
Building Commissioner, also known as the Building Inspector or Building
Official.



   (B)   Term. The Building Commissioner shall be appointed by the
President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of
one year, and until his or her successor shall be duly appointed and
qualified. The appointment shall be made at the first regular meeting in May
or as soon thereafter as may be practical. The Building Commissioner shall
take his or her oath of office before assuming his or her duties.



   (C)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner to
enforce the Zoning Ordinance and Building Codes of the village and to
supervise the construction and reconstruction and alteration and moving of
all buildings and approve the issuance of all building permits and occupancy
permits. The Building Commissioner shall hold all current licenses and
certifications necessary to perform his or her duties hereunder or cause the
duties to be performed by others holding current licenses and certifications.



   (D)   Assistants. In addition to the Building Commissioner, the
President may appoint with the advice and consent of the Village Board, for a
term of one year, such assistant Building Commissioners as may be deemed
necessary to assist the Building Commissioner in his or her duties.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 3.07  BONDS OF OFFICERS.



   (A)   Every office and employee of the village, as may be required
so to do by law or by ordinance, before entering upon the duties of the
office or position of employment, shall give a bond in such amount and with
such sureties as may be required by law or by the Village Board, and which
shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the
office or position of employment. Unless otherwise provided for by law or by
ordinance, such bonds shall have as surety a company or corporation licensed
to act as surety in the state and to do business in the state. The premiums
on such bonds shall be paid out of the general funds of the village.



   (B)   The penalty of bonds of certain elected and appointed officers
and employees of the village shall be as follows:



 

Building Commissioner
 

$25,000



Chief of Police
 

$25,000



Deputy Clerk
 

$25,000



President
 

$25,000



Superintendent of Public Works
 

$25,000



Village Clerk
 

$25,000



Village Treasurer
 

$500,000




 



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 3.08  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF VILLAGE.



   (A)   Effect of section. The provisions of this section shall apply
alike to all officers and employees of the village, regardless of the time of
the creation of the office or position of employment, and regardless of the
time of the appointment of the officers or employment of the employee.



   (B)   Appointments. The President, with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees, shall make appointments to fill all appointive
offices. The President shall select all employees, fill all positions of
employment of the village and promote or demote employees, all with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



   (C)   Terms of office, vacancies. Every appointed officer and every
employee of the village shall hold office or a position of employment for a
period of one year from the date of appointment, or until his or her
successor is appointed, chosen or selected and has qualified, except as may
otherwise be provided for by ordinance; and, except that, employees shall
serve only so long as their services are desired or as the terms of their
position of employment require and provide.



   (D)   Assignment of duties. The President shall have the power and
authority to assign to any appointed officer any duty which is not assigned
by ordinance or by law to some other specific officer, and the President
shall determine all disputes or questions relating to the respective powers
and duties of such officers upon consultation with the Village Attorney.



   (E)   Records.



      (1)   All records kept or maintained by any officer of the
village shall be open to inspection by the President or any member of the
Board of Trustees at all reasonable times. No village record or records may
be removed from village premises, except for reasonable village purposes;
and, provided that, a permanent written list or log must be maintained by the
Village Clerk, which log shall include a specific description of the record
removed, the date of removal, the signature of the party requesting removal,
the date of return of the record and such other information necessary to
provide notice of the status of the record and secure its return.



      (2)   The Village Clerk shall review said written log on April
1, July 1, October 1 and January 1 of each year, to determine if any records
removed have not been returned.



   (F)   Monies received. Every officer of the village shall at least
once a week turn over all monies received by him or her in his or her
official position to the Village Treasurer, with a statement showing the
source from which the same was received, and shall take the Village
Treasurer’s receipt therefor.



   (G)   Oath. Before entering upon the duties of their respective
offices, all village officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and
subscribe the oath or affirmation as set forth in the State Municipal Code.



   (H)   Salaries and wages. All officers of the village shall receive
such salaries or wages as may be provided from time to time by ordinance. No
officer or employee receiving a salary from the village shall be entitled to
retain any portion of any fees collected or received by him or her in the
performance of his or her duties as a village officer or employee, in the
absence of specific authorization to the contrary as may be provided by law
or by ordinance. Employees are referred to the village’s Personnel Policy
Manual for information on salaries and wages.



   (I)   Termination of office or employment. Every officer and
employee of the village, upon the termination of his or her office or
employment, shall deliver to his or her successor all books and records which
may be the property of the village. If no successor has been elected, chosen
or appointed within seven days after the termination of such office or
position of employment, such property shall be delivered to the Village Clerk
or to the Village Treasurer, and a receipt taken therefor.



   (J)   Bond. Every officer and employee shall, if required by the
Board, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a bond in
such amount as may be determined by the Board and with such sureties as it
may approve, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his
or her office or position.



   (K)   Interfering with officers. It shall be unlawful for any person
to interfere with or hinder any officer or employee of the village, while
engaged in the duties of his or her office. Any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$25, nor more than $750, for each offense.



   (L)   Involuntary termination of employment. Employees of the
village terminated with or without cause by the President may appeal their
termination to the Board of Trustees for reconsideration. Appeals will be
submitted to any member of the Board and to the Chairperson of the Executive
Committee for initial review within three business days of termination. The
Executive Committee Chairperson and two Trustees shall call for a special
Board meeting whereupon the board will meet within a reasonable time of the
notice of appeal to render a decision on the issue of the continuance or
termination of the discharged employee. The termination may be overturned
upon a vote of the majority of the Board. If the termination is not
overturned, the provisions of division (I) above shall apply. The
appellant’s position shall not be filled, temporarily or otherwise, during
the appeal process.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 06-O-21, passed 9-28-2006)



§ 3.09  OTHER PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO THE VILLAGE.



   (A)   Corporate seal. The corporate seal of the village shall be as
follows: a circular disc with the words “Official Seal” inscribed in the
inner circle and “Village of Lakemoor, Illinois” in the outer circle
thereof.



   (B)   Fiscal year. The fiscal year of the village shall begin on May
1 of each year and end on April 30 of the year following.



   (C)   Injury to public property. It shall be unlawful to injure,
deface or interfere with any property belonging to the village without proper
authority from the Village Board. Any person violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $750, for each
offense.



   (D)   Elections. Elections for municipal offices shall be held as is
provided by statute, and at the same time prescribed by statute.



   (E)   Capitalization policy. In relation to the purchase of assets
by the village, the purchases shall be categorized, for accounting purposes,
in conformance with the following policy.



      (1)   For the purpose of this division (E), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         CAPITAL EXPENDITURE. The cost of the asset including the
cost to put it in place. CAPITAL EXPENDITURE for equipment means the net
invoice price of the equipment, including the cost of any initial
modifications, attachments, accessories or auxiliary apparatus necessary to
make it useable for the purpose for which it was acquired. It also includes
the cost of incoming transportation incurred on shipments from external
suppliers.



         EQUIPMENT. An article of non-expendable, tangible, personal
property which stands alone, is complete in itself, does not lose its
identity and has a useful life of more than one year.



            1.   CAPITAL EQUIPMENT. Those items of equipment
which have an acquisition cost of $5,000 or more are capitalized.



            2.   MINOR EQUIPMENT. Those items of equipment
which have an acquisition cost of less than $5,000 are expensed.



         INDIRECT COSTS. Incurred related to an equipment purchase
shall always be expensed and shall never be capitalized.



         REPLACEMENT PARTS. Required to repair an item of capital or
minor equipment and which simply maintain the original function of the
equipment will be expensed.



      (2)   Fabricated Items will be capitalized if the cost of the
material making up the fabrication is $5,000 or greater, the useful life of
the item is more than one year, the item is village owned or government
funded, and the item is identifiable as a discrete item.



      (3)   Expenditures needed to maintain equipment in a proper
operating condition or to restore equipment to a proper operating condition
shall be expensed.



      (4)   All computer software, whether operating systems or
applications, shall be expensed.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 07-O-25, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 3.10  VILLAGE PLANNER.



   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created the office and position of
Village Planner.



   (B)   Term. The Village Planner shall be appointed by the President
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of one year,
and until his or her successor shall be duly appointed and qualified. The
appointment shall be made at the first regular meeting in May or as soon
thereafter as may be practical.



   (C)   General duties. The Village Planner shall have the following
duties.



      (1)   The Village Planner shall assist the Zoning Board and
Plan Commission in the review and approval of all planned unit developments,
all subdivisions of lots, tracts or parcels of land and other zoning or
development matters.



      (2)   The Village Planner shall be responsible for the
implementation of the official comprehensive plan.



      (3)   He or she shall assist in the preparation of amendments
to the official comprehensive plan and supporting data, the official map and
all amendments to the zoning ordinance.



      (4)   He or she shall assist in the preparation and processing
of all grants as directed by the Village Board.



      (5)   In addition to the aforementioned duties, the Village
Planner shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him or her by
the Village President and the Village Board.



      (6)   The Village Planner shall conduct educational training
for all Zoning Board and Plan Commission members on an as-needed basis.



      (7)   The Village Planner shall assist the Village Board in
developing an overall concept design for developments located within the
village limits.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 3.11  VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Village Administrator,
an executive office of the village. The Village Administrator shall not be
required to be a resident of the village.



   (B)   The President and Village Board are hereby authorized to
employ a Village Administrator. Such Administrator shall be appointed by the
President, with the advice and consent of the Village Board, at the annual
meeting at which the President is seated, and shall hold office for a term to
expire not later than the end of the last year in the President’s term and
until a successor is appointed and qualified.



   (C)   The Administrator, under and subject to the direction of the
President and Village Board, shall be the chief administrative officer of the
village, and shall be responsible to the President and Village Board for the
proper direction of the administrative affairs of the village.



   (D)   The Administrator shall execute, on behalf of the Village
Board, its policies, administrative supervision and control of the affairs of
the village and its employees. The Administrator shall attend all meetings of
the President and Village Board and meetings of the Village Board committees,
unless excused.



   (E)   The Administrator shall cooperate with the advisory boards and
commissions created by the Village Board, and those that may be created. The
Administrator shall seek direction from the Village Board as to his or her
attendance at meetings and the degree of staff support he or she is to
furnish the various boards and commissioners.



   (F)   The Administrator shall be notified and receive and have
investigated all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the village, and the services maintained
and provided by the village.



   (G)   The Administrator shall perform such other duties as may be
requested by the President and Village Board, consistent with law and
ordinances of the village.



   (H)   The Administrator shall receive compensation as determined by
the Village Board, after an annual evaluation of his or her performance.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006)



§ 3.12  CODE OF CONDUCT.



   (A)   Conduct of officials. All elected and appointed Trustees shall
adhere, as best as is practicable and while carrying out their duties as
elected representatives, to the following rules of conduct:



      (1)   Shall conduct themselves at public meetings in a manner
consistent with the highest standards of profession conduct, personal
integrity, and honesty;



      (2)   Shall undertake their duties in a fair and impartial
manner, refraining at all times from discrimination or the dispensation of
special privileges;



      (3)   Shall respect that the village maintains a workplace
that facilitates the growth and performance of its officers and employees;



      (4)   Shall insure that the workplace is free from hostility
or harassment in any form and that the workplace is conducive to the
provision of services in an efficient and effective manner;



      (5)   Shall refrain from utilizing, or attempting to utilize
their elected position to threaten or intimate any employee of the village,
officer of the village or resident;



      (6)   Shall conduct themselves in a manner consistent with the
Illinois Open Meetings Act and all other applicable statutory mandates for
elected officials, including refraining from any criminal or quasi-criminal
conduct related to the elected position;



      (7)   Shall refrain from any conduct toward other board
members, residents or village employees which is derogatory or harassing;



      (8)   Shall not take action contrary to the Trustee’s actual
authority and shall refrain from taking action contrary to decisions and
approvals made by the Board of Trustees; and



      (9)   Shall conduct themselves in public, while acting as a
public official, and while at village sponsored events, in a respectful
appropriate manner befitting a public representative.



   (B)   Enforcement and penalty. The Board of Trustees, upon receiving
a written complaint from any resident, employee, officer or other elected or
appointed representative of the village, shall conduct an impromptu
investigation into such allegation. Upon a finding of facts supporting such
allegation, the Board shall allow the accused Trustee an opportunity to
respond to the allegations in written form or at any public meeting of the
Board.



      (1)   First offense. After the response by the accused, the
Board may, after any necessary deliberation, move to publicly censure the
accused trustee with the approval of not less than two-thirds vote of the
Board.



      (2)   Second offense. Any trustee who has been publicly
censured by the Board of Trustees under this section, who then commits a
second violation of this section which is subsequently supported by not less
than two-thirds approval of the Board of Trustees, shall forfeit their
meeting pay for the next following meeting. Upon the event that the Trustees
are paid monthly, said amount equivalent to the pay attributable to one
meeting shall be withheld from the check to said Trustee.



      (3)   Third and subsequent offenses. Upon the approval of
two-thirds vote of the Trustees for a third or subsequent violation of this
section, the Board may, by the same two-thirds vote, approve fines of not
less than $500 nor more than $750 per violation.



   Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Board of Trustees from
seeking the removal of any trustee who habitually violates this section by
order of the Circuit Court.



(Ord. 13-O-01, passed 1-10-2013; Ord. 13-O-18, passed 7-11-2013)



§ 3.13  RECORDS RETENTION POLICY.



   (A)   In compliance with the Local Records Act, ILCS Ch, 50, Act
205, §§ 1 et seq., the village  hereby implements a records retention
policy, and utilizes the records destruction program managed by the Bureau of
Local Records.



   (B)   The schedule attached to Ordinance 16-O-13 as Exhibit A is
hereby incorporated by reference, as if set forth in full herein, and shall
henceforth serve as the village’s official records retention schedule.



   (C)   All records disposal shall first be approved by the Bureau of
Local Records after due application for same.



   (D)   From and after the effective date of this section, the Village
President and the Village Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to do all
things necessary and essential, including the execution of any documents and
certificates to carry out the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 16-O-13, passed 6-23-2016)



§ 3.14  EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT.



   (A)   Policy. It is the policy of the village to encourage employees
and elected officials to participate in business related functions which
serve in the best interest of the village, and to reimburse employees and
officials for such necessary, appropriate and approved expenses.



   (B)   Eligibility. Expenses reimbursement is available to all full
time and part time village employees and elected officials subject to the
limitations described herein. This policy is intended to provide advance
compliance with PA 099-0604, which will become effective January 1, 2017.



   (C)   Purpose.



      (1)   Expenses incurred during the course of out-of-office
business and business travel will be paid by the village, based upon
documented, reasonable and necessary expenses. Upon Village Administrator
approval, reimbursement may occur for expenses such as, but not limited to,
airfare, train fare, car rental, hotel accommodations, mileage, meals,
parking, tolls and equipment.



      (2)   Maximum expenditures are set forth in the schedules
below as required by statute. Additionally, as required by the Act, all
expenditures of any elected official must be approved by roll call vote in
open session, preferably before, but permissibly after the expense is
incurred by the official.



   (D)   Employee procedures.



      (1)   Village employees are expected to show good judgment and
common regard for economy when traveling at the village's expense. It is the
responsibility of the employee to select travel options that are the best
available value. An employee should seek pre-approval from the department
head prior to booking any airfare, rental vehicles or overnight stay
accommodations to ensure that the planned itinerary is eligible for
reimbursement according to this policy.



      (2)   In order to qualify for reimbursement, an employee must
request prior written approval from their immediate supervisor for expenses
and thereafter provide proof that the expenses were incurred on official
village business (e.g., submission of an approved reimbursement form and
other appropriate documentation such as receipts as required by the village).
Expense reimbursement requests must be submitted no later than 12 weeks from
the date the expense was incurred.



      (3)   Mileage reimbursement will be periodically reviewed to
ensure that it is consistent with state/national average rates of mileage
reimbursement. Per diem allowances will consistently reflect the federal rate
as set by the General Services Administration. Discretion for economy is
expected for every expense. Maximum amounts listed are a cap on expenses;
actual expenses are expected to fall below the maximum amounts whenever
possible. A schedule of current maximum allowable per diem amounts for
expenses is set forth below. It will be distributed and updated by the
Finance Department and submitted for approval from time to time by the
Village Board. Only the official maximums set by resolution of the Village
Board as required by statute will be effective. Please direct any questions
to the Finance Department.



 


CATEGORY OF EXPENSES

 
MAXIMUMS




Travel - Auto (privately owned)
 
$0.565 per mile.


Travel - Auto (rental)*
 
100% of cost of least expensive economy rental.


Travel - Train/Taxi/Limo
 
100% of fare of lease expensive mode of available transportation.


Travel - Airplane
 
100% of Best Economy Class Rate**


Travel - Tolls
 
100% of tolls along direct route of travel.


Travel - Parking
 
100% of best economy option


Lodging
 
$173.00 per night


Meals
 
$64 per day overall,  none to exceed the following:

Breakfast: $11.00

Lunch: $18.00

Dinner; $30.00

Incidentals: $5.00


* Only provided when village-owned vehicles are unavailable.


** Only provided when less expensive ground transportation is unavailable.




 



      (4)   The village will not reimburse expenses for the
following: alcoholic beverages; meals, travel, lodging, or any other fees for
friends, family, or other non-village employees; expenses of a personal
nature and incurred for the convenience of the employee, e.g. traveling
indirect routes, upgrading a plane ticket to first class, or upgrading room
accommodations; parking tickets, traffic citations, or other fees that could
be reasonably avoided by following applicable traffic laws; travel or hotel
change/cancellation fees that could have been reasonably avoided; any other
non-work related expenses.



   (E)   Exceptions. The Village Board may make allowances to this
policy as deemed necessary; itinerary and expenses will be reviewed and
approved on a case-by-case basis. All such requests for allowances will
require a motion and a roll call vote of the Village Board for approval.
Expenses that exceed the maximums, and which do not receive a favorable vote
of the Board will be capped at the maximums.



   (F)   Officials' policy. PA 099-0604 requires that all expenditures
for travel, meals and lodging by elected officials be approved by roll call
vote of the Village Board upon a proper motion. While the Act does permit
after-the-fact approvals, it is strongly recommended that officials
anticipating travel, meal or lodging expense bring the matter to the Village
Board in advance of incurring the expense. The maximums set forth in the
foregoing section on employees' expenses are applicable to elected officials,
and again, it is recommended that unnecessary expenses be minimized wherever
possible.



   (G)   Forms. Standardized forms for expense reimbursement requests
are available in the Finance Department. These are required by statute to
include the following information and will be rejected if not complete:



      (1)   An estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging if
expenses have not been incurred or a receipt of the cost of the travel,
meals, or lodging if the expenses have already been incurred;



      (2)   The name of the individual who received or is requesting
the travel, meal, or lodging expense;



      (3)   The job title or office of the individual who received
or is requesting the travel, meal, or lodging expense; and



      (4)   The date or dates and nature of the official business in
which the travel, meal, or lodging expense was or will be expended.



   (H)   No entertainment expenses permitted. Pursuant to § 25 of PA
099-604, the village is prohibited from reimbursing any elected official,
employee, or officer for any entertainment expense.



   (I)   FOIA. All documents and information submitted under this
section are public records subject to disclosure under the Freedom of
Information Act.



(Ord. 16-O-24, passed 11-11-2016)



ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION



§ 3.25  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for fair and efficient
enforcement of Village ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by
ordinances through an administrative adjudication of violation of village
ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority
and procedures for the collection of unpaid fines and penalties. To that end,
the village adopts ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2.2-1 et seq., ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, §§ 11-31.1-1 et seq., and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-208.3, 11-208.6
and 11-1201.1. All authority granted to the village under said statutes is
implemented as provided in the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.26  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a department of the Village of Lakemoor
municipal government to be known as the Village of Lakemoor ordinance
enforcement department and which has the power to enforce compliance with all
municipal ordinances as from time to time are authorized by the corporate
authority, except for any reportable offense under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
6-204 and traffic regulations governing the movement of vehicles and
prohibited from local adjudication under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2.2-5 other
than a notice of violation pursuant to an automated traffic law enforcement
system which shall be enforced pursuant to this subchapter. The establishment
of the ordinance enforcement department does not preclude the village from
using any legal system or other method to enforce ordinances of the village.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.27  DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Village Administrator or his/her designee shall be in charge of the
Village of Lakemoor ordinance enforcement department and is authorized and
directed to:



   (A)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication
of village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by
ordinance;



   (B)   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required
under this subchapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the
purpose of this subchapter;



   (C)   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
final determination of liability;



   (D)   Certify copies of final determination of an ordinance
violation adjudicated pursuant to this subchapter, and any factual reports
verifying the final determination of any violation liability which was issued
in accordance with this subchapter and the laws of the state of Illinois
including ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3 as from time to time amended;



   (E)   Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning
initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter as hereinafter set forth, and those of ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 6-306.5;



   (F)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to
operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created;
and



   (G)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection
agencies and pursue all postjudgment remedies available by current law.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.28    ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.



   (A)   Creation and qualifications. The position of administrative
hearing officer is hereby created. The administrative hearing officer shall
be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the Village Board. The term of
the administrative hearing officer shall be one year. The number of
administrative hearing officer positions and compensation shall be approved
by the Village Board. The administrative hearing officer shall be an attorney
admitted to the practice of law in the state of Illinois with at least six
years of active practice experience.



   (B)   Powers. The administrative hearing officer shall have all
powers necessary to conduct fair and impartial hearings including, but not
limited to, the power to:



      (1)   Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of
the issues;



      (2)   Administer oaths and affirmations;



      (3)   Hear testimony;



      (4)   Issue subpoenas;



      (5)   Rule upon motions, objections, and the admissibility of
evidence;



      (6)   At the request of any party or on the administrative
hearing officer’s own motion, subpoena the attendance of relevant witnesses
and the production of relevant books, records, or other information;



      (7)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;



      (8)   Regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with
this subchapter, or other applicable law;



      (9)   Issue a final order which includes findings of fact and
conclusions of law;



      (10)   Impose penalties and fines and issue orders that are
consistent with applicable code provisions and assess costs and fees upon
finding a party liable for the charged violation. In no event shall an
administrative hearing officer have the authority to impose a penalty of
imprisonment.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.29  INSTITUTING ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.



   All sworn police personnel, all community service officers, all village
inspectors, code officers and fire prevention officers are hereby authorized
to institute an administrative adjudication hearing by issuing a violation
notice specifying the date, time and place of violation, the ordinance or
ordinances violated, and the identification and signature of the person
issuing the violation notice. In addition, the notice shall include the date
and location of the hearing, the legal authority and jurisdiction under which
the hearing is to be held, and the penalties for failure to appear at the
hearing.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.30  VIOLATION NOTICE.



   (A)   Violation notices for all violations except automated traffic
law violations (chapter 8 of this title) shall contain, but shall not be
limited to, the following information:



      (1)   The name of the party violating the ordinance, if known;



      (2)   The date and time of the violation (date of issuance);



      (3)   The type and nature of the violation and the ordinance
violated;



      (4)   Vehicle make and state registration number (if
applicable);



      (5)   The address or location where the violation has occurred;



      (6)   The names of any witnesses to the violation;



      (7)   The signature and identification number of the person
issuing the notice; and



      (8)   The date and location of the adjudicating hearing of the
ordinance violations which date shall be not less than 30 nor more than 40
days after the date of the violation notice and the legal authority and
jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held and the penalties for
failure to appear at the hearing or shall provide instructions to the alleged
violator that a fine may be paid or the violator may request a hearing date
on the violation.



   (B)   Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance
herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie evidence of the
correctness of the facts shown on the notice.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.31  SUBPOENAS.



   (A)   Issuance. All subpoenas shall be issued only upon application
and approval by the administrative hearing officer after a determination by
the administrative hearing officer as to whether the requested testimony of
the witnesses or the documents or items sought by the subpoena are necessary
to present evidence that is relevant to the case and relates to a contested
issue in the case.



   (B)   Content. A subpoena issued under this subchapter shall
identify:



      (1)   The person to whom it is directed;



      (2)   The documents or other items sought by the subpoena, if
any;



      (3)   The date for the appearance of the witness and the
production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena;



      (4)   The time for the appearance of the witness and the
production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena; and



      (5)   The place for the appearance of the witness and the
production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena.



   (C)   Appearance. In no event shall the date identified for the
appearance of a witness or the production of documents or other items be less
than seven days after service of the subpoena.



   (D)   Contesting the subpoena. Within three business days of being
served with a subpoena issued in accordance with this subchapter, the
recipient of the subpoena may contest the order authorizing the issuance of
the subpoena to the administrative hearing officer, setting forth in detail
the recipient’s objections to the subpoena. Upon receipt of the contest to
the subpoena, the administrative hearing officer shall review the objections
and, upon review, enter the appropriated order.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.32  CONTINUANCES.



   No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in
proceedings under this subchapter except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the alleged violator. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Inconvenience or
nonattendance at work shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
authorized by a hearing officer under this subchapter shall not exceed the
next scheduled date for the hearing officer to hear village cases.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.33  HEARING AND EVIDENCE.



   (A)   At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear
testimony and shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or
nonexistence of a village code violation. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by
this subchapter.



   (B)   The case for the village may be presented by an attorney
designated by the Village Mayor or by any other village employee, except that
the case for the village shall not be presented by an employee of the
ordinance enforcement department. The case for the alleged violator may be
presented by the alleged violator, his or her attorney or any other agent or
representative of the defendant.



   (C)   Nonresidents of the Village of Lakemoor may in lieu of
presenting testimony in person provide written testimony under oath and duly
notarized which testimony shall be accepted by the hearing officer if
received before the hearing date.



   (D)   If on the date set for hearing the alleged violator or his or
her attorney fails to appear or present evidence, the hearing officer may
find the alleged violator in default and shall proceed with the hearing and
accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.



   (E)   Upon finding the alleged violator in default, the ordinance
enforcement administrator shall send or cause to be sent notices by first
class mail, postage prepaid to the violator who received the notice of an
ordinance violation; or, in the case of a violation of the automated traffic
control system, the registered owner or operator of the cited vehicle at the
address as recorded with the secretary of state, and shall be sent to the
lessee of the cited vehicle at the address last known to the lessor of the
cited vehicle at the time of the lease. Service of notices sent in accordance
herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States
mail.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.34  FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER.



   (A)   Determination by hearing officer. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the
evidence presented at the hearing as to whether or not a code violation
exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as the
findings, decision and order. The findings, decision and order shall include:



      (1)   The hearing officer’s findings of fact;



      (2)   A decision of whether or not a code violation exists
based upon the findings of fact;



      (3)   An order that states the sanction or dismisses the case
if a violation is not proven; and



      (4)   A monetary sanction and/or any other sanction for a
violation under this subchapter including fees and costs.



   (B)   Copy of findings. A copy of the findings, decision and order
shall be served on the violator within five days after it is issued. Service
of the findings, decision and order shall be by first class mail as provided
for instituting code hearing proceedings. Payment of any penalty or fine and
the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in
this code.



   (C)   Debt due to village. The fines, penalties, fees and costs
contained in this order are a debt due and owing the Village of Lakemoor and
said total must be paid within 30 days of the date the order is issued by the
administrative hearing officer.



   (D)   Final orders. The order of the administrative hearing officer
becomes final 30 days following entry of the order or 30 days from a denial
of a timely filed petition to set aside the hearing officer’s decision,
whichever occurs last. All fines and other monies paid to the village in
accordance with this section shall be remitted to the village and deposited
in the appropriate village account as designated by the director of finance.



   (E)   Petition to set aside determination.



      (1)   A petition to set aside the order of the administrative
hearing officer must be filed within 30 days of entry of the administrative
hearing officer’s order. The petition shall be filed in the Village
Administrator’s office. The administrative hearing officer shall set a
briefing schedule and hearing date. The grounds for the petition are limited
to the following:



         (a)   Lack of proper service;



         (b)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of
the property cited on the date the violation notice was issued;



         (c)   The order is against the manifest weight of the
evidence, or that new evidence unknown to and unavailable to a party on the
date of the hearing will materially affect the order of the hearing officer;
or 4. Excusable failure to appear at the hearing or request a new date for a
hearing.



      (2)   In the event the determination is set aside upon a
showing of just cause, the administrator shall set a hearing on the merits
for that violation at the earliest available date convenient to all parties.



   (F)   Violations of orders. Any person, having received notice and
an opportunity for a hearing as provided in this subchapter who knowingly
fails to comply with an order issued by an administrative hearing officer
under this subchapter, including the issuance of a subpoena, shall, if the
order is not stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction prior to its
effective date, be guilty of contempt. Contempt shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $250. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered
a separate and distinct offense. In a prosecution under this section, it
shall not be a defense that a person came into compliance with an order,
sought judicial review of it or made efforts to comply with an order,
subsequent to its effective date.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.35  DEBT DUE TO VILLAGE.



   Any order to comply, or for a fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or
part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid or
uncompleted after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial
review procedures under the administrative review law shall be a debt due and
owing the village and, as such may be collected and enforced in accordance
with applicable law.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.36  ENFORCEMENT IN THE CIRCUIT COURT.



   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, upon authorization of the Village Board, the Village Attorney may
commence a proceeding in the nineteenth judicial circuit court of Lake
County, Illinois, for purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings,
decision and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from
consolidating multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in
such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a
certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be
accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the
findings, decision and order was issued in accordance with state law and the
applicable village ordinances. Service of the summons and a copy of the
petition may be by any method provided for by § 2-203 of the code of civil
procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that the
total amount of fines, other sanctions, fees and costs imposed by the
findings, decision and order does not exceed $2,500. If the court is
satisfied that the findings, decision and order was entered in accordance
with the requirements of state law and the applicable village ordinance and
that the violator had an opportunity for a hearing and for judicial review:



   (A)   The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and
against the violator for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus fees and costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may
be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.



   (B)   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that
are requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to
correct a code violation.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.37  DRIVER’S LICENSE SUSPENSION.



   A notice of impending suspension of a person’s driver’s license
shall be sent to any violator determined to be liable for the payment of any
fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten or more vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violations of five or more automated traffic
law violations:



   (A)   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or
penalty, fees and costs owed within 45 days of the date of the notice will
result in the village notifying the secretary of state that the person is
eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 6-306.5, incorporated herein by reference.



   (B)   The notice of impending driver’s license suspension shall be
sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
secretary of state.



   (C)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and/or penalty, fees
and costs due and owing the village within the time specified may result in
proceeding with collection procedures in the same manner as a judgment
entered by any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.38  IMMOBILIZED AND/OR IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.



   Vehicles owned by the person and located within the village may be
immobilized and impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or
more vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violations or five
or more automated traffic law violations. Procedures regarding the
immobilization and/or impounding of motor vehicles and request for an
administrative hearing are set forth in Section    of the Village of
Lakemoor Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.39  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROGRAM PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, the
authority of the administrative hearing division to conduct administrative
hearings in accordance with this subchapter shall not preclude the village
from seeking any remedies for code or ordinance violations through  the 
use  of any  other  administrative  procedure . or  court proceeding.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall affect the jurisdiction of the
liquor control commissioner, the plan commission, the zoning board of
appeals, firefighter’s pension fund, police pension fund, the civil service
commission or any other commission or board established by this code.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.40  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be
subject to review in the nineteenth judicial circuit court of Lake County,
Illinois. The provisions of the Illinois administrative review law, as
amended, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, as amended, shall apply to
and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision and
order of the hearing officer under this subchapter.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.41  GENERAL FINE FOR ANY OTHER VIOLATION.



   For violation of any village ordinance other than a violation
concerning the standing, parking, compliance or condition of vehicles or
automated traffic law violations and other than for violation of regulations
designating and regulating spaces for handicapped parking, fines and
penalties shall be no more than $750 per violation.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.42  FINES FOR VIOLATIONS CONCERNING STANDING, PARKING, COMPLIANCE OR
CONDITION OF VEHICLES OTHER THAN HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   Under this subchapter for violation of any provision of an ordinance
concerning the standing, parking or condition of vehicles; or any compliance
violation; or violation of any other village ordinance regulating,
restricting or prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles along
the streets, byways, alleyways, regulated parking lots or such other
locations as may be controlled by off street parking agreements, located
within the geographical boundaries of this Village, other than for
handicapped parking, the fine shall be a maximum of $250 for each violation.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.43  FINES FOR VIOLATIONS OF HANDICAPPED PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   For violation of any village ordinance regulating, restricting or
prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles specifically designated
for handicapped parking, the fine shall be the maximum fine established by
village ordinance regulating handicapped parking areas.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



§ 3.44  FINES FOR AUTOMATIC TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATIONS.



   For any automatic traffic law violation the fine shall be $100. Failure
to pay the fine and/or fee or complete a required traffic education program
within 30 days of issuance of the notice of final determination shall result
in an additional $100 late payment fine.



(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 6-9-11)



CHAPTER 4:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



Police Department



   4.01   Creation of Department



   4.02   Duties of the Chief of Police



   4.03   Deputy Chief



   4.04   Sergeant



   4.05   Conduct and duties of members



   4.06   Witness fees



   4.07   Rules and regulations



   4.08   Stolen property; custody of



   4.09   Salaries



   4.10   Oath



   4.11   Executive oversight of the Police Department



Board of Police Commissioners



   4.20   Creation and authority of Commission



   4.21   Selection and qualifications of Commissioners



   4.22   Term of Commissioners



   4.23   Termination of position



   4.24   Rules of the Commission



   4.25   Attorney for Commission



   4.26   Budget for Commission



   4.27   Annual report



   4.28   Officers of Commission



   4.29   Meetings



   4.30   Filing



   4.31   Amendments



   4.32   Emergency actions



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 4.01  CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.



   There is hereby created a Police Department, referred to in the chapter
as the “Department”, which is an executive department of the village. The
Department shall consist of a Chief of Police, also known as the Village
Marshal, who shall be appointed annually by and serve at the discretion of
the Mayor. Additionally, there shall be one Deputy Chief and as many
sergeants and patrolers as the Village Board deems necessary. The Chief’s
removal from the position prior to the expiration of the annual appointment
shall only occur with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012)



§ 4.02  DUTIES OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police (“Chief”) shall be the keeper of the
village jail and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He
or she shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the
activities of his or her Department as may be required by statute or by the
Village Board. The Chief shall be responsible for the performance of the
Department and for all persons who are members of the Department. The Chief
is hereby authorized to appoint one Deputy Chief, who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Chief and at the rate of pay set by the Board from time to
time. The Deputy Chief shall be the second highest ranking officer with the
Sergeant being the rank next below that of the Deputy Chief.



   (B)   All other officers of the Department shall be patrol officers
and subject to the command of the Chief, Deputy Chief and Sergeant(s). The
Board of Trustees shall set the number of patrol officers for the Department
based upon the advice of the Chief.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012)



§ 4.03  DEPUTY CHIEF.



   The Deputy Chief position shall be filled by appointment made by the
Chief and shall serve at the discretion of the Chief. Such Deputy Chief shall
be duly qualified and have not less than ten years of applicable leadership
experience in law enforcement. If removed by the Chief, the Deputy Chief
shall revert back to the rank held previously in the Department, if
applicable. The Deputy Chief shall be allowed to take any and all promotional
examinations that may be held during his or her appointment.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012)



§ 4.04  SERGEANT.



   There shall be two sergeant positions hereby created which shall be
filled by the Police Commission of the village. The Village Board may
authorize the appointment of additional sergeants from time to time and shall
set the salaries of such positions in a manner not inconsistent with any
applicable union or collective bargaining agreements.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012; Ord.
18-O-25, passed 9-4-2018)



§ 4.05  CONDUCT AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every member of the Department to
conduct himself or herself in a proper and law abiding manner at all times,
to ensure that his or her conduct and appearance is fitting of a village
police officer and to avoid the use of unnecessary force in carrying out the
duties of his or her position.



   (B)   (1)   The members of the police force of the village shall
have power and authority, and it shall be their duty within the village and
outside of same, when necessary and lawful, to serve and execute warrants and
other process for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with a
violation of any of the village ordinances or any crime or misdemeanor or
offense against the laws of the village or the state, or held for examination
or trial, or taken in execution for the commission of any crime or
misdemeanor or violation of any law or ordinance of the village; and they
shall have the power and authority, and it shall be their duty, to serve and
execute any civil process issued on behalf of the village by any court of
proper jurisdiction.



      (2)   They shall have the power, and it shall be their duty,
to arrest all persons in the village who they have reasonable grounds to
believe have violated any law or ordinance, or aiding or abetting in such
violations, and to cause such persons to appear before a court of proper
jurisdiction, to be dealt with according to law.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012)



§ 4.06  WITNESS FEES.



   Every member of the Department shall appear as a witness whenever this
is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a village ordinance or any
state or federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service
as a witness in any action or suit which to which the village is a party; any
fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the Chief of Police who
shall deposit same with the Village Treasurer.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012)



§ 4.07  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of the Police Department may make or prescribe such rules and
regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the Department as
he or she shall deem advisable; such rules, when approved by the Village
Board, shall be binding on such members of the Department. The respective
rank and grade of the members, as to superiority within the Department, may
be proscribed by regulation.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012)



§ 4.08  STOLEN PROPERTY; CUSTODY OF.



   The Chief shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen
property recovered in the village. Additionally, the Chief shall be charged
with the safe keeping and proper handling of all evidence related to any case
in the village.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012)



§ 4.09  SALARIES.



   The Board of Trustees shall, consistent with any applicable union or
collective bargaining agreements, set the salaries of the officers of the
Department and for all incoming members of the Department.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012; Ord.
18-O-24, passed 8-7-2018)



§ 4.10  OATH.



   (A)   All officers, members and employees of the Police Department,
before entering their duties as a member of the Department, shall take and
subscribe to the following oath or affirmation:



      “I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Illinois,
and the ordinances of the Village of Lakemoor, and that I will faithfully
discharge the duties of                     of the Village of
Lakemoor, according to the best of my abilities.”



   (B)   This oath or affirmation, so subscribed, shall be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012)



§ 4.11  EXECUTIVE OVERSIGHT OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   Subject to all of the foregoing, the Police Department and the members
thereof shall be subject to the order and direction of the President through
the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 06-O-11, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. 12-O-18, passed 12-13-2012)



BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 4.20  CREATION AND AUTHORITY OF COMMISSION.



   There is hereby created the Village of Lakemoor Board of Police
Commissioners. The Police Commission shall appoint all officers and members
of the Police Department, except for the Chief, who is appointed by and may
only be terminated and disciplined by the President with the advice and
consent of the Village Board of Trustees. The Board shall make all promotions
within the Police Department, which shall, whenever practicable, be made from
the rank next below that to which the appointment is made. The Board shall
also handle all matters related to the discipline and discharge of officers
from the Police Department.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.21  SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF COMMISSIONERS.



   The Board shall consist of three residents of the Village who shall be
selected by the President with the approval of the Board of Trustees. The
Commissioners shall be at least 21 years of age and shall not be related to
any elected village official. There shall be no more than two Commissioners
at any given time who are members of the same political party. Political
affiliation shall be ascertained by affidavit submitted by each Commissioner.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.22  TERM OF COMMISSIONERS.



   The Commissioners shall service three-year terms which shall be
staggered so that only one Commissioner comes up for reappointment in any
given year. However, upon creation and first appointments, one Commissioner
shall serve a one-year term, one shall serve a two-year term and the last
shall serve a three-year term. Once appointed, the Commissioners shall
decide, by odd lot, the terms of each.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.23  TERMINATION OF POSITION.



   Commissioners may resign by giving written notice to the Board of
Trustees. The President shall, as soon as is practical, make a new
appointment to finish the remainder of the term of the resigning
Commissioner. In such case, it is not necessary for the Board of Trustees to
approve the appointment of the interim Commissioner, however, the Board’s
consent shall be required to reappoint such Commissioner at the end of his or
her interim term. Commissioners shall be automatically reappointed at the end
of their terms if no further action is taken by the Board. However, the Board
of Trustees may replace any Commissioner for any reason at the end of the
Commissioner’s term. In addition, a Commissioner may be removed at any time
by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.24  RULES OF THE COMMISSION.



   The Commission shall adopt and maintain its own rules of conduct and
order for their meetings as well as for disciplinary hearings. Such orders
shall be in substantial compliance with Robert’s Rules of Order and any
hearings shall, at minimum, loosely conform with Illinois rules of civil
procedure and conduct for administrative hearings and be structured to allow
adequate due process and the right to be heard for any officer subject to
such hearings. The Commission shall abide by the Illinois Open Meetings Act
and shall keep and maintain minutes of every meeting and hearing held.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.25  ATTORNEY FOR COMMISSION.



   The Commission is hereby authorized to select legal representation to
advise and guide the Commission in the adoption of its rules of procedure,
standards for hearing and subsequent operation.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.26  BUDGET FOR COMMISSION.



   Annually, the Commission shall adopt an operating budget, which shall
be submitted to the Village Administrator not later than May 1. The Board of
Trustees shall appropriate such amounts and they may deem necessary and
proper for the annual operation of the Commission, including such amounts as
may be necessary to cover the legal expenses for the Commission.
Additionally, the Board shall approve and appropriate a stipend for
Commissioners.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.27  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Commission shall submit to the Board of Trustees an annual report
of the activities and actions taken by the Commission, and may make
recommendations to the Board of Trustees regarding changes to policy and
procedure which would result in greater efficiency or safety in the Police
Department.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.28  OFFICERS OF COMMISSION.



   The Commission annually shall elect a Chairperson and a Secretary
during the first meeting in January, or the first meeting after being
established by this subchapter. Those persons shall hold office until their
successors are duly elected and qualified. The Chairperson shall be the
presiding officer at all meetings. The Secretary shall assist the Commission
by preparing all correspondence, keeping records, assisting in the testing
process and performing other duties as assigned by the Commission. The
Secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, the minutes of all meetings of the
Commission in a permanent record book and shall be the custodian of all the
forms, papers, books, records and completed examinations of the Commission,
and shall perform all other duties the Commission prescribes.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.29  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular meetings. Meetings of the Commission shall be held as
determined to be necessary by the members of the Commission or as
circumstances may determine. Meetings shall be held at the Village Hall.



   (B)   Special meetings. Special meetings shall be open, and notice
thereof shall be posted 48 hours prior to convening, called by the filing of
a notice in writing with the Secretary of the Commission, and signed either
by the Chairperson of the Commission, or any Commissioner thereof. This
notice shall contain a brief statement of the business to be submitted for
the consideration of the Commission and shall set forth the time and place of
such special meeting.



   (C)   Closed sessions. During any regular, special meeting, or
meeting for the purpose of interviewing scheduled by the Commission, a closed
session may be held for any purpose permitted by law as set forth in ILCS Ch.
5, Act 120,  2. Closed sessions may be limited to Commissioners and such
invited persons as the Commission may deem necessary. The Secretary will
record the motion to close the meeting, record the roll call vote of the
Commissioners on the motion, and keep a verbatim recording of the closed
session and written minutes thereof.



   (D)   Quorum. A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the conduct of all business.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.30  FILING.



   Any document filed with the Village Clerk or Chief of Police which is
addressed to the Commission or to the Secretary of the Commission shall be
deemed filed with the Commission.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.31  AMENDMENTS.



   The Board of Trustees may amend these rules from time to time as may be
necessary to carry out the intent of the law.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 4.32  EMERGENCY ACTIONS.



   In the event that more than one Commissioner has resigned, been
removed, or not been reappointed, and there are two or more vacancies on the
Commission, and a new Commissioner cannot be qualified and appointed by the
Board in a manner which is timely enough to prevent violating due process
rights of an aggrieved police officer, the Board of Trustees may act as the
hearing body for any such hearing requested by such police officer. In such a
case, the attorney for the Commission shall provide advice to the Village
Board during the course of such hearing and the Board shall conduct the
hearings by applying the rules of procedure that the Commission has adopted.
Additionally, the Board of Trustees may hire new officers in cases where a
bona fide emergency exists and there are insufficient members on the
Commission to accomplish such a hiring. In any such case, the Board shall use
the hiring list established by the Commission, or in such cases where a
hiring list has been exhausted, by any means necessary and appropriate to
address such a bona fide emergency.



(Ord. 11-O-15, passed 8-25-2011)



CHAPTER 5:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY



Section



   5.01   Establishment; purpose



   5.02   Functions; duties



   5.03   Members



   5.04   Coordinator; responsibilities



   5.05   Emergency Operations Plan



   5.06   Disaster declaration



   5.07   Mobile support teams



   5.08   Mutual aid agreements



   5.09   Cooperation with state agency



   5.10   Compensation



   5.11   Funding



   5.12   Oath; required



   5.13   Emergency Operations Center; location



   5.14   Disaster warning devices



   5.15   Sheltering; liability



   5.16   Immunity



§ 5.01  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.



   There is hereby created the Emergency Management Agency (EMA) to
prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from
disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from
natural or man-made disaster, in accordance with the Emergency Management
Agency Act (ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.) and FEMA CPG 101, V.2
(2010).



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.02  FUNCTIONS; DUTIES.



   The EMA shall perform such emergency management functions within the
village as shall be prescribed in and by the state EMA plan and program
prepared by the Governor of the state, and such orders, rules and regulations
as may be promulgated by the Governor. In addition, the village EMA shall
perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required,
availability of manpower permitting, pursuant to any mutual aid agreement
with any other municipalities, quasi-municipalities or political subdivisions
of the state as provided in the Emergency Management Agency Act, being ILCS
Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.03  MEMBERS.



   (A)   The EMA shall consist of the Coordinator, Assistant
Coordinator and such other members as may be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the Emergency Management Agency
Act, being ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.



   (B)   The Village Administrator shall serve as the Coordinator and
the Director of Public Works shall serve as the Assistant Coordinator. Other
members of the EMA shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
Village Board of Trustees for one-year terms expiring on April 30, 2015 and
April 30 of each year thereafter, provided that a member whose term has
expired shall continue to serve until his or her successor is appointed. EMA
members may be village employees, elected officials or members of the
community with knowledge of emergency management operations.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.04  COORDINATOR; RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Coordinator and Assistant Coordinator shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, training, and operation
of the EMA subject to the direction and control of the Mayor as provided by
the Emergency Management Agency Act, being ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et
seq.



   (B)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability
to serve of the Coordinator, the Mayor or any person designated by him or her
shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided
in this chapter.



   (C)   The Coordinator shall execute the orders, rules and
regulations as may be made by the Governor or the Director of the Emergency
Management Agency under the authority of the Emergency Management Agency Act,
being ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.



   (D)   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the
Coordinator of the EMA, upon approval of the Mayor is authorized on behalf of
the village to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may
be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to
the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining
to village contracts or obligations, as authorized by the Emergency
Management Agency Act, being ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.05  EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.



   The village shall maintain and update as necessary an emergency
operations plan which describes the functions of the village and supporting
services for responding to and recovering from disasters and shall take into
account the needs of those individuals with household pets and service
animals following a major disaster or emergency in accordance with the
Emergency Management Agency Act, being ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.06  DISASTER DECLARATION.



   A local disaster may be declared in the village only by the Mayor or
his or her interim emergency successor as provided in § 7 of the Emergency
Interim Executive Succession Act. It shall not be continued or renewed for a
period in excess of seven days except by the consent of the Board of
Trustees. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a
local disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly with the Village Clerk in accordance with the Emergency Management
Agency Act, being ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq. The effect of the
declaration of a local disaster is to activate the emergency operations plan
and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance to mitigate said
disaster.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.07  MOBILE SUPPORT TEAMS.



   The Governor or Director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency
(IEMA) may cause to be created mobile support teams to aid and to reinforce
IEMA and emergency management agencies in areas stricken by disaster. Members
of the EMA may be designated to serve as members of a statewide mobile
support team and will be coordinated through the EMA Coordinator for the
village. Provisions for compensation, expenses and injury coverage are
provided for within the Emergency Management Agency Act, being ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.08  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.



   The Coordinator of the EMA, by direction of the Mayor, may negotiate
mutual aid agreements with other municipalities, quasi-municipalities or
political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective
until it has been approved by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.09  COOPERATION WITH STATE AGENCY.



   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event
of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the
state of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the EMA
to cooperate fully with the Illinois EMA and with the Governor in the
exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.10  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the EMA who are paid employees or officers of the village,
if called for training by the State Coordinator, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to his or her
employment or office with the EMA. Those members, who are not village
employees or officers, shall receive for such training time such compensation
as may be established by the Mayor with the approval of the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.11  FUNDING.



   The Village Treasurer shall receive and allocate to the appropriate
fund any reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incidental to
training members of the EMA as prescribed by the State Coordinator,
compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team
while serving outside the village in response to a call by the Governor or
State Coordinator, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by
the state incidental to EMA activities as provided by law.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.12  OATH; REQUIRED.



   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the village EMA
organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:



      “I, _________________________ solemnly swear (or affirm) that I
will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both
public and private against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take
this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion;
and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am
about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate,
nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this
State by force or violence; and during such time as I am affiliated with the
Village of Lakemoor EMA, I will not advocate nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force or violence”.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.13  EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER; LOCATION.



   The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a village building, or
elsewhere, for the village Emergency Operations Center (EOC).



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.14  DISASTER WARNING DEVICES.



   Testing of “outdoor warning devices” shall be held only on the
first Tuesday of each month at 10:00 a.m. or during exercises that are
specifically and expressly approved in advance by the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.15  SHELTERING; LIABILITY.



   Any person owning or controlling real estate of other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or
otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of
such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an
actual or impending disaster or an exercise together with his or her
successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly liable for negligently
causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate
or premises under such license, privilege or other permit, or for negligently
causing loss of, or damage to, the property of such person except in the
event of willful misconduct.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



§ 5.16  IMMUNITY.



   The village, except in cases of gross negligence or willful misconduct
while engaged in any emergency management response or recovery activities,
while complying with or attempting to comply with the Emergency Management
Agency Act, being ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq. or any rule or
regulations promulgated pursuant to the Emergency Management Agency Act,
being ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq. shall not be liable for the death
of or any injury to persons, damage to property, as a result of such activity.



(Ord. 14-O-22, passed 6-12-2014)



CHAPTER 6:  STREETS



Section



   6.01   Names of streets



   6.02   Numbering buildings



   6.03   Damage to streets



   6.04   Encroachments on street



   6.05   Obstructing streets



   6.06   Materials in streets



   6.07   Advertising on streets



   6.08   Debris in streets



   6.09   Excavations in streets



   6.10   Protection of work in streets



   6.11   Moving structures



   6.12   Trees



   6.13   Snow on sidewalks



   6.14   Burning rubbish



   6.15   Driveways



   6.16   Parkway grass maintenance



§ 6.01  NAMES OF STREETS.



   All streets of the village shall be known and designated by the names
applied hereto, respectively, on the map of the village kept on file in the
Office of the Village Clerk and the street names designated on such map shall
continue to be the names of streets unless and until changed by ordinance of
the Village Board.



§ 6.02  NUMBERING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   All buildings on streets of the village shall be numbered in
accordance with the village map prepared by the Village Engineer, which map
shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk.



   (B)   Property owners shall, within 30 days from the passage of this
chapter, ascertain the number assigned or allotted to the frontage of their
property on the map plan. After the expiration of 30 days and as soon
thereafter as is practical, the Village Board shall assign numbers to all
property owners.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every
house in the village to have placed thereon or on the property, in a place
visible from the street, in Arabic numerals (script not permitted) at least
two and one-half inches high, showing the number of the house; any person,
firm or corporation failing to so number any house, building or other
structure occupied by him or her, who after receiving notice to do so from
the Police Department shall continue in his or her failure to so number such
house, building or structure shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than
$500, for each day during or on which a failure to so number continues.



§ 6.03  DAMAGE TO STREETS.



   No person shall damage or deface any street, alley, sidewalk, public
way, park or other village or public property, or any post, wire, lamp,
street sign, traffic sign, tree, grass, vegetation, gutter, drain, manhole or
any other appurtenance thereon, except as may be authorized by the village.



§ 6.04  ENCROACHMENTS ON STREET.



   (A)   No person shall erect or maintain any structure or thing on,
over or under any street, alley, sidewalk or public way, except by permit
from the Board of Trustees. Application for such permit shall describe the
nature of the encroachment in such detail as the Board of Trustees shall
require. The Board, in its discretion, may issue or deny the permit, and may
impose any conditions to such permit as it deems appropriate.



   (B)   Awnings made of pliable substance attached to a building and
extending not less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk may be
erected and maintained without a permit.



   (C)   Any encroachment on any street, alley, sidewalk or public way
shall be maintained so that it does not endanger or obstruct the public.



   (D)   Any encroachment maintained in violation of this section is
declared a nuisance and may be abated by the village.



§ 6.05  OBSTRUCTING STREETS.



   (A)   No person shall obstruct or endanger the free passage or
proper use of the public on any street, sidewalk, alley or public place,
except as may be permitted by this chapter.



   (B)   Goods, wares and merchandise may be placed on sidewalks for
such reasonable time as may be necessary while loading and unloading,
provided pedestrian traffic is not totally obstructed.



§ 6.06  MATERIALS IN STREETS.



   (A)   No person shall place any materials on or over any street,
sidewalk or public place without a permit therefor from the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   The permittee shall conform to all conditions the village may
impose upon granting of the permit.



§ 6.07  ADVERTISING ON STREETS.



   No person shall paint or post any signs or bills on any streets, poles
or other structures in any street or on the surface of any street or sidewalk.



§ 6.08  DEBRIS IN STREETS.



   (A)   No person shall litter or deposit any foreign matter on any
street, alley, sidewalk, park or public place, except building materials and
merchandise as permitted under this chapter, or as may be permitted by the
Village Marshal.



   (B)   Any person violating this section shall be liable for the cost
of removal of the foreign matter in addition to the penalty provided for
violation of this code.



§ 6.09  EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS.



   (A)   No person shall excavate in or tunnel under any street in the
village without first securing a permit at least 24 hours in advance of such
work from the Building Inspector.



   (B)   The applicant for such permit shall deposit, in cash or bond,
with the Village Clerk such amount as determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works necessary, as security for the repair, of the street. The
deposit shall be held by the Clerk until the Chief of Police or
Superintendent of Public Works certifies to him or her that the street has
been properly repaired.



   (C)   The person securing such permit shall restore the surface of
the street to its original condition under such directions as the village may
issue within five days after completing the work for which the excavation was
made. Upon restoration of the surface to its former condition, the Village
Clerk shall return the cash deposit or bond to the permit holder less $25
which shall be retained by the village as a permit fee. If the permit holder
does not restore the street to its original condition, the village shall have
such work done and retain the cost thereof out of the deposit.



   (D)   Any public utility or other person may deposit a standing bond
with the village to insure the proper repair of village streets whenever work
is done in the village, but shall secure a permit as required by this section.



§ 6.10  PROTECTION OF WORK IN STREETS.



   (A)   Any person constructing or repairing, or making any excavation
in or tunnel under, or placing any material on or over any street, sidewalk
or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades and other protective
devices as shall properly prevent injury to any person or property. Suitable
lights shall be maintained during the nighttime to warn the public. No
unauthorized person shall interfere with or disturb any such protective
devices.



   (B)   A permit shall be secured from the Supervisor of Public Works
at least 24 hours in advance of placing any barricades in the street.



§ 6.11  MOVING STRUCTURES.



   No person shall move any building or structure on any street without a
permit from the Building Inspector. The Inspector may impose such conditions
as he or she deems appropriate to protect the village and the public, upon
granting such permit. The applicant for such permit shall deposit $500 in
cash with the Village Clerk as security for the protection of the streets and
other village property.



§ 6.12  TREES.



   (A)   No person shall plant, trim or remove any tree or shrub in any
street or parkway or other public place without a permit therefor from the
Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall approve the species of tree
to be planted.



   (B)   No person shall injure any tree or shrub planted in any
street, parkway or public place. No person shall attach any sign or wire to
any such tree or shrub without permission of the Building Inspector.



   (C)   No person shall permit any tree or shrub on his or her
property to overhang any street, sidewalk or other public place so as to
interfere with the public use of such ways, or to obstruct the vision of
drivers of vehicles at intersections. Any dead limb of a tree overhanging a
public way shall be removed by the owner of the tree.



§ 6.13  SNOW ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   The person occupying the ground floor of any building, the
user of any lot without a structure thereon, and the owner of any vacant
building or other premises shall remove the snow and ice accumulating on the
abutting sidewalks within 24 hours after any snowfall has ceased.



   (B)   If snow or ice cannot be removed, the surface shall be sanded
or otherwise treated to lessen the hazard for pedestrians until the climate
permits removal.



§ 6.14  BURNING RUBBISH.



   No person shall burn any rubbish or other substances upon any street,
sidewalk or alley.



§ 6.15  DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   No person shall construct a driveway entering any street
without a permit therefor from the Building Inspector. The fee for such
permit shall be as determined by the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   Culverts shall be required at the point of the entrance of the
driveway to the public road. The length and width of the culvert shall be in
accordance with good engineering standards and subject to the approval of the
Village Engineer. In the event driveways are altered where there have been no
previous culverts or the previous culverts are inadequate, according to good
engineering standards, new culverts shall be installed by the owner of the
property. The culverts shall be of a length and width determined by good
engineering standards and subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.



   (C)   If, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, culverts are
needed to remove any obstructions to the drainage ditches, the village shall
install a culvert of the size and length determined according to good
engineering standards set by the Village Engineer. Only the cost of such
culvert shall be borne by the owner of the property. The village shall bear
the cost of installation and regraveling or repaving of that portion of any
driveway that may be affected by the installation of such culvert.



§ 6.16  PARKWAY GRASS MAINTENANCE.



   Every property owner within the village shall maintain the parkway
adjoining their property by mowing same, and ensuring that such parkway
remains free of any obstacles, objects or structures. In the event that
damage to the parkway occurs as the result of village activities or incidents
outside of the control of any such property owner, the village shall restore
the parkway to its pre-incident condition. Maintenance, trimming or removal
of parkway trees and plantings shall be conducted by the village.



(Ord. 18-O-17, passed 7-17-2018)



CHAPTER 7:  LICENSES AND PERMITS



Section



   7.01   Purpose and jurisdiction



   7.02   Definitions



   7.03   License/registration required



   7.04   Application



   7.05   Investigations and inspections



   7.06   Issuance or denial of license



   7.07   License term; expiration: renewal



   7.08   Licenses not assignable; unlawful use



   7.09   License fees



   7.10   Food establishments



   7.11   Coin-operated vending machines



   7.12   Food refrigeration plants



   7.13   Hotels, motels and rooming houses



   7.14   Flammable and combustible materials



   7.15   Contractors



   7.16   Building and premises



   7.17   Location



   7.18   Nuisances prohibited



   7.19   Working conditions



   7.20   Businesses open to public



   7.21   Appeal



   7.22   License to be posted; destruction; removal of license



   7.23   Business vehicles



   7.24   Compliance with ordinances and statutes



   7.25   Enforcement



   7.26   Suspension and revocation of license



   7.27   Penalty; enforcement



   7.28   Tobacco dealers



§ 7.01  PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION.



   (A)   Because each business located in the village is a basic part
of and affects the physical and economic well-being of the village,
necessitating special services from the village in the form of health and
police inspections and services, such businesses shall in all respects be in
full compliance with the provisions hereinafter contained in this chapter.



   (B)   This chapter is designed to provide for the means whereby the
village may render the necessary inspections and services to businesses in
order to promote, protect and safeguard the public safety, health and welfare
of the citizens of the village and to enable the maintenance of an accurate
record of businesses located and carrying on commercial activities or
commerce within the village.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS. Any vocation, occupation, profession, enterprise,
establishment, concern or any other type of activity, together with all
devices, machines, equipment, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, as set
forth in § 7.09 of this chapter.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
trust or any other legal entity, except for such person or persons as may be
organized as a state not-for-profit corporation or governmental bodies
properly organized under the law of the state.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.03  LICENSE/REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in,
maintain, operate, carry on or manage any business, either by himself,
herself or itself, or through an agent, employee or partner, without first
having obtained a license for such business. A license is required when any
person, by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, is held forth as
being engaged in the business, or if he or she solicits patronage therefor,
actively or passively, or if he or she performs or attempts to perform any
part of such business in the village.



   (B)   If any business falls into more than one of the categories
requiring a license under this chapter, a separate license shall be obtained
for each category.



   (C)   A license shall not be required for any amusement,
entertainment or exhibition given by residents of the village who are not
engaged therein as a business for personal profit or gain and the proceeds of
which are exclusively for the benefit of a charitable organization registered
with the State Attorney General pursuant to the Solicitation for Charity Act
(ILCS Ch. 225, Act 460, §§ 0.01 et seq.).



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014; Ord.
19-O-11, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 7.04  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Applications for all licenses required by this chapter shall
be made in writing to the Village Administrator, except as may otherwise be
provided by this chapter. If the applicant is an individual, the application
shall contain the individual’s name, residential address and residential
telephone number. If the applicant is a partnership or other non-corporate
business entity, the application shall contain the name and residential
address and residential telephone number of each partner, principal or member
thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the
name, residential address and residential telephone number of each principal
officer and the registered agent thereof.



   (B)   Each application shall also contain such information as may be
prescribed by the Village Administrator, including, but not limited to:



      (1)   The license desired;



      (2)   The location to be used;



      (3)   The license period;



      (4)   The fee to be paid;



      (5)    The number of the certificate of registration required
under the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act being ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, §§ 1
et seq., Service Occupation Tax Act being ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115, §§ 1 et
seq. and/or Use Tax Act being ILCS Ch. 35, Act 105, §§ 1 et seq., if
applicable;



      (6)   Such additional information as may be needed for the
evaluation of the application;



      (7)   Emergency contact information;



      (8)   Scope of business operations;



      (9)   Hazardous or flammable materials stored in the business;
and



      (10)   Health Department certificate for all businesses
serving food.



   (C)   Forms for all licenses and applications therefor shall be
prepared and kept on file by the Village Clerk. Each license issued shall
bear the signature of the Mayor and the Village Clerk, except as may
otherwise be provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014; Ord.
19-O-11, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 7.05  INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Investigation of applicant.



      (1)   Upon the receipt of an application for a license, where
an investigation or inspection is required by this chapter before the
issuance of such license, or where an inspection or investigation shall be
deemed reasonably necessary or appropriate, the Village Administrator shall
make such an investigation.



      (2)   If it shall appear to the Village Administrator that the
matters and circumstances relating to an application require further
information before a proper determination can be made, such application shall
be returned to the applicant for the inclusion of such additional information
as may be specified by the Village Administrator.



   (B)   Inspection officials. The Building Inspector of the village,
in consultation with the County Health Department, shall make or cause to be
made inspections regarding such permits and licenses as relate to the care
and handling of food, the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease
and the protection of the health of the public. The Building Inspector shall
make or cause to be made any inspections, which relate to compliance with the
Building Code, Zoning Ordinance and other related regulations. All other
investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by any
officer, employee or agent designated by the Village Administrator.



   (C)   Inspections; analyses.



      (1)   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in
connection with the operation of a licensed business are provided for or
required by this chapter or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance
with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the village or to
detect violation thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person
in charge of the premises to admit thereto, for the purpose of making the
inspection, any officer or employee of the village who is duly authorized to
make such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is
requested.



      (2)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is
reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any
ordinance or regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the
duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any
duly authorized officer or employee of the village requesting the same
sufficient samples of such material or commodity as requested.



      (3)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided,
the Mayor may revoke the license of any owner or operator of a licensed
business in the village who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or
employee to make such inspection or to take an adequate sample of said
commodity or material, or who interferes with such officer or employee while
in the performance of his or her duties; provided, however, that, no license
shall be subject to revocation for such cause unless such officer or employee
has been refused permission to enter upon the premises in the name of the
village after first having presented a warrant issued by the appropriate
circuit court authorizing such entry.



      (4)   In order to facilitate proper inspection in keeping with
the provisions of this division (C), any official, sanitarian, inspector or
other employee or person designated to make such inspections under the
supervision of the County Health Department shall be considered to be an
officer or official of the village for such purpose and for any purpose
relative to the provision of this chapter, but for no other purpose unless so
designated by this chapter.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014; Ord.
19-O-11, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 7.06  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   If, after due consideration of the information contained
within the application and the related investigative report, the Village
Administrator determines that the applicant does not meet the standards set
forth in this chapter, such license shall be denied. Thereupon, the Village
Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant that no license will be
issued, indicating the reasons therefor.



   (B)   If, after due consideration of the information contained
within the application and the related investigative report, the Village
Administrator determines that the applicant meets the standards set forth in
this chapter, such license shall be granted and the Village Administrator
shall notify the applicant thereof.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.07  LICENSE TERM: EXPIRATION; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Each license shall indicate its term. All annual licenses
shall be operative, and the license year for the village shall commence, on
July 1 each year. No license shall be granted for a period longer than one
year. Except where otherwise provided herein, every license shall expire on
June 30 following the date of issuance.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be
renewed upon proper application and payment of the required fee. The
requirements and procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall
be the same as the requirements and procedures for granting a new license.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.08  LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE.



   No license may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as
collateral or otherwise encumbered. No person shall use or display any
license that has been improperly acquired. No person shall alter, deface,
forge or counterfeit any license issued by the village.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.09  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Payment of license fees.



      (1)   In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees
and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time
application therefor is made to the Village Administrator in the amounts
prescribed in this section. Except as otherwise provided, all license fees
shall become a part of the General Corporate Fund to reimburse said Fund for
the costs incurred in investigations and processing applications for the
licenses required herein, and for the costs of regulating the subject
businesses.



      (2)   In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any
license fee, or part thereof, by reason of death or departure of the
licensee; nor shall any rebate or refund be made by reason of non-use of the
license or discontinuance of the operation or conduct of the licensed
establishment, business or activity.



   (B)   Fee schedule.  License fees under the terms of this chapter
for the businesses set forth shall be as follows:



 



 

Category
 
Annual Fee




Advertising agency
 
$120


Advertising benches (per bench)
 
$120


Alarms
 
$120


Ambulances (per vehicle)
 
$120


Amusements:
 
 


Amusement park
 
$500


Video gambling machine (per machine)   
 
$25


Billiards, pool and/or pocket billiards (per table per six-month license)
 
$120


Bowling alley (per alley)
 
$60


Carnivals (per day)
 
$120


Coin-operated machines for amusement only (each)
 
$75


Coin-operated compact disc player/juke box   
 
$75


Miniature golf
 
$120



Table games, except billiards, pool and/or pocket billiards (each)

 
$75


Aquatic fish sales
 
$120


Art galleries/supplies/studios
 
$120


Auctioneer (per day)
 
$120


Automatic vending machines including automatic food vending machines(each):
 
$75


Automobile accessories/parts
 
$120


Automobile filling stations
 
$25


Automobile filling stations (per dispenser)
 
$25


Automobile/trailer/camper sales dealer
 
$120


Automobile storage or towing
 
$120


Automobile repair shop
 
$120


Automobile maintenance shop (oil change and lube)
 
$120


Automobile rental
 
$120


Bakeries (wholesale)
 
$120


Bakeries (retail)
 
$120


Banks and savings & loans
 
$250


Banquet halls
 
$120


Beauty shops/barbers
 
$120


Beauty aids (shampoo, make-up  etc.)
 
$120


Bicycle shops (sales and repair)
 
$120


Boats (sales and service)
 
$120


Books and stationery
 
$120


Building material sales
 
$120


Camera sales (video or conventional)
 
$120


Car wash - self-service (per stall)
 
$200


Car wash - automatic conveyor
 
$300


Car wash and detailing service
 
$300


Cash advance
 
$250


Catalogue stores and redemption center
 
$120    


Ceramics (including tile)
 
$120



Cigar, cigarette sales

 
$120


Cigar, cigarette vending machines (per machine)
 
$300


Cleaning service
 
$120


Clothing stores or wearing apparel
 
$120


Computer retailer
 
$120


Currency exchanges
 
$250


Dancing school or musical instruction
 
$120


Dating service
 
$120


Detective agency
 
$120


Drive up - bank services
 
$250


Driving school
 
$120


Drugstore/pharmaceuticals
 
$120


Dry cleaning store
 
$120


Electrical appliances (sales and service)
 
$120


Electronic devices (sales and service)
 
$120


Electrical fixtures
 
$120


Expressmen or delivery companies (per vehicle)
 
$120


Exterminators
 
$120


Fabric store
 
$120


Fitness center
 
$120


Fire extinguishers (sales and service)
 
$120


Florist
 
$120


Food and drink dealers:
 
 


Candy sales
 
$120


Delicatessen
 
$120


Fish sales
 
$120


Produce sales
 
$120


Grocery store
 
$120


Health foods (sales and agency)
 
$120


Ice cream parlor (no seats)
 
$120


Meat market
 
$120



Milk and dairy sales

 
$120


Food deliveries:
 
 


Delivery of any food or drink
 
$120


Mobile food dispenser(per day)
 
$25


Mobile food dispenser(per year)
 
$120


Farm feed store
 
$120


Frozen foods
 
$120


Furniture store
 
$120


Garage (public), plus bond
 
$200


General rental (tools, clothing, etc.)
 
$120


Glass (mirrors or related products)
 
$120


Greenhouse (nursery stock)
 
$120


Greeting cards
 
$120


Hardware or paint store
 
$120


Health center/therapeutic massage or reducing salon
 
$120


Health supplies
 
$120


Hearing aid (sales and service)
 
$120


Home for the aged and/or retirement homes
 
$1,000


HVAC shop
 
$120


Ice dealer
 
$120


Itinerant merchants (per day)
 
$120


Jewelry sales (novelty or costume)
 
$120


Jewelry store (fine jewelry)
 
$120


Kennels
 
$120


Kiosks (carts)
 
$75


Laundromat (coin-operated machines, washer or dryer)
 
$120


Plus each machine
 
$25


Lawn and garden supplies
 
$120


Linoleum, plastic tile or carpets
 
$120


Limo service - up to 7 cars
 
$120


Lumber and wood dealers
 
$120



Locksmith

 
$120


Machine shops
 
$120


Marketing/surveys
 
$120


Millinery store
 
$120


Miscellaneous office
 
$120


Model or hobby shop
 
$100


Monument sales
 
$100


Motel/hotel(per room)
 
$50


Motion picture theater:
 
 


Seating capacity 750 or less
 
$1,250


Seating capacity over 750
 
$1,500


Motorcycles (sales and service)
 
$120


Motor repair (overhaul and tune-up)
 
$120


Movers - household goods
 
$120


Music store
 
$120


Nail bar
 
$120


Novelty or gift shop
 
$120


Nursery (day) playschool
 
$120


Office supplies
 
$120


Optical sales, glasses, frames, lenses
 
$120


Pet shop or pet grooming
 
$120


Photographic developing or printing
 
$120


Photography studio or supplies
 
$120


Printing or printing supplies
 
$120


Sporting facilities
 
$120


Restaurant and food dispenser:
 
 


Caterers - take-out
 
$120


Seating capacity 0 to 50
 
$120


Seating capacity 51-100
 
$220


Seating capacity over 100
 
$320


Restaurants (drive-in)
 
$120


Scavengers
 
$500



Security service

 
$120


Seed and feed store
 
$120


Sewing machines (sales and service)
 
$120


Shades (drapery and blinds)
 
$120


Sheet metal shop
 
$125


Shoes and accessories
 
$120


Shoe repair shop
 
$120


Sign painting
 
$120


Sporting goods store
 
$120


Stationery and books
 
$120


Storage yard
 
$120


Tailor shop
 
$120


Tanning salon
 
$120


Temporary holiday store
 
$120


Theater (other than motion picture) seating capacity:
 
 


0-200
 
$200


201-500
 
$400


501-1,000
 
$600


Over 1,000
 
$800


Therapist (except massage)
 
$120


Toys
 
$120


Travel agency
 
$120


Undertaking establishment/funeral director
 
$120


Upholstering shop
 
$120


Used merchandise
 
$120


Variety sales
 
$120


Vehicle for hire:
 
 


Carter, truckers
 
$120


Taxicabs and livery (each)
 
$120


Veterinary hospital
 
$120



Video sales/rentals

 
$120


Warehouse or storage
 
$120


Weapons, guns, firearms
 
$120


Wellness centers/yoga studio
 
$120


Woodwork shop/millwork
 
$120


Wreckers (demolish and/or remove buildings)
 
$120




 



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014; Ord.
19-O-11, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 7.10  FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   All food and beverages prepared, stored, sold or offered for
sale in any food establishment licensed hereunder shall at all times be
wholesome, free from spoilage and safe for human consumption.



   (B)   All employees of such food establishments shall wear clean
outer garments and shall keep their hands clean at all times while handling
food or beverages.



   (C)   All dishware, silverware, glassware and other multi-use
utensils used in food establishment shall be thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected after each use.



   (D)   Kitchens and other places where food and beverages are
prepared and stored, together with all equipment used therein, shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (E)    Must comply with all health code regulations set forth by the
County Health Department in their respective jurisdiction.



   (F)   County Health Department certification must be attached to all
license applications for businesses serving food.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014; Ord.
19-O-11, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 7.11  COIN-OPERATED VENDING MACHINES.



   All food, beverages, candy and confections sold or offered for sale in
coin-operated automatic vending machines shall at all times be wholesome,
free from spoilage and safe for human consumption and such machines shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. All employees handling such
food, beverages, candy and confections shall conform to the requirements set
forth above in § 7.10 of this chapter for employees of food establishments.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.12  FOOD REFRIGERATION PLANTS.



   The lockers in food refrigeration plants shall be maintained in a
clean, sanitary condition and the temperatures maintained therein shall be
adequate to keep the food stored therein free from storage.



(Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.13  HOTELS, MOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES.



   Sleeping rooms in hotels, motels and rooming houses, together with
furniture, furnishings, fixtures, mattresses and linens used therein, shall
be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.14  FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.



   (A)   All gasoline, flammable liquids and gases, dry cleaning
chemicals, and other highly volatile, flammable or hazardous substances
stored in any business shall be compliant with all building and fire codes.



   (B)   All businesses shall adhere to all fire codes adopted in their
respective fire protection district and any other local, state and federal
regulations regulating the storage of all gasoline, flammable liquids and
gases, dry cleaning chemicals, and other highly volatile or flammable
substances stored within their business.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014; Ord.
19-O-11, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 7.15  CONTRACTORS.



   Contractors licensed hereunder shall maintain their equipment and work
areas in a safe condition. All debris shall be contained on the site and
disposed of routinely. All openings and excavations shall be well marked or
covered. Curbs and sidewalks shall be planked sufficiently to prevent damage
before any heavy equipment is moved across them. Dirt or mud that is dragged
into public streets must be cleaned daily. All contractors licensed hereunder
must show proof of licensure before a building permit is issued.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.16  BUILDING AND PREMISES.



   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business if the
premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the village and the state.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.17  LOCATION.



   (A)   No license for the operation of a business in the village
shall be construed to permit the operation of a licensed business in more
than one location in the village; a separate license shall be required for
each location of a licensed establishment. For the purposes of this chapter,
the existence of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact that all
buildings containing the principal or accessory uses shall be connected or
shall be located on the same lot or parcel, shall be operated and managed by
the same person or owner, and shall be an establishment with the same
classification.



   (B)   The location of any licensed business may be changed; provided
that, ten-days’ notice thereof is given to the Village Administrator in the
absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, however, that, all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the village shall be complied with.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.18  NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall
be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof shall be
used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health. Any charge of conducting or operating a nuisance
may be made under this chapter or under the provisions of any other village
ordinance prohibiting nuisances generally.



   (B)   No building or structure utilized, constructed, or maintained
in connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe, or dangerous condition.



   (C)   No substance, matter, or thing of any kind whatever that shall
be dangerous or detrimental to health shall be allowed to exist in connection
with any business or occupation or be used in any work or labor performed in
the village.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building,
structure, or premises used or maintained in connection with any business to
cause to be removed at his or her own cost and expense at least once each
week all refuse produced therein; provided, however, that such removal shall
occur more frequently as necessary to prevent nuisances from odor, vermin,
and/or litter.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.19  WORKING CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Health requirements.



      (1)   No owner, lessee, manager or superintendent of any
store, factory, workshop or other place where persons are employed shall
cause or permit such place, or any room or part thereof, to be overcrowded or
inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat or cleanliness.



      (2)   All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean
condition, free from the effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable or other
nuisances; also as far as practicable, such premises shall be free from all
gases, vapors, dust or other impurities generated by manufacturing processes
or otherwise which are injurious to health. Sufficient washroom facilities
for male and female employees shall be provided and such facilities shall be
properly ventilated.



   (B)   Heating requirements.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of every person owning or
controlling the heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory or
workshop, to maintain a temperature within such factory or workshop of not
less than 68°F without such undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere
with proper sanitary conditions therein at such times as employees are
required to be on the premises from October 1 of each year to June 1 of the
succeeding year, Sundays and holidays excepted; provided, however, that, this
requirement shall not apply to any factory or workshop where the business
conducted therein is of such a nature that a higher or lower temperature than
68°F is necessary or expedient for the work or manufacturing process of such
business.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling
the heating plant which furnishes heat to any office, store or other place of
employment to maintain a temperature therein of not less than 68°F without
such undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary
conditions therein, at such times as employees are required to be on the
premises from October 1 of each year to June 1 of the succeeding year,
Sundays and legal holidays excepted.



   (C)   Inspections. The Building Inspector shall visit or cause to be
visited all such places of employment in the village as often as he or she
shall deem necessary to ensure compliance with the provision of this chapter,
and to have such arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for the health
and safety of the employees.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.20  BUSINESSES OPEN TO PUBLIC.



   (A)   All businesses licensed under this chapter that invite the
public generally into their establishments for the purpose of conducting
business, shall be subject to the following regulations in addition to all
other ordinances and regulations of the village.



   (B)   All areas within the licensed premises where the public may
enter shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition.



   (C)   All businesses subject to this section shall refrain from all
deceptive trade practices as defined by state or federal law or regulation
and shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations regarding consumer
protection and deceptive trade practices. In the event of any such violation,
the business license of the establishment may be revoked pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   All businesses wherein there are bowling alleys, billiard or
pool tables or ten or more coin-operated amusement machines or jukeboxes
shall have a supervisor present at all times when open to the public.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.21  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village Administrator in
regard to the denial of an application for a business license, as provided in
this chapter, or the Mayor in connection with the suspension or revocation of
a license, or the closing of an establishment dangerous to the public, as
provided in this chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the Board of
Trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village
Administrator, within ten days after the notice of a denial of an application
or a revocation of a license, a written statement under oath setting forth
specifically the grounds for appeal. The Board of Trustees shall thereupon
set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such
hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee in the same manner as
provided in § 7.26 of this chapter. The decision of the Board of Trustees on
such appeal shall be by a vote of a majority of the Trustees then holding
office and shall be final.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014; Ord.
19-O-11, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 7.22  LICENSE TO BE POSTED; DESTRUCTION; REMOVAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   License certificate. It shall be the duty of any person
conducting a licensed business in the village to keep his or her license
certificate displayed at all times in a prominent place on the premises,
machine, or vehicle used for such business.



   (B)   License decal. It shall always be the duty of any person
conducting a licensed business in the village to keep his or her license
decal displayed in a prominent visible location at the main entrance area of
the business.



   (C)   Destruction or removal. No person shall destroy, obliterate,
take, remove or carry away without the consent of the owner any license,
certificate, plate or sticker that has been issued by the village, except
when such license, certificate, plate or sticker has been discontinued or the
licensed premises have been abandoned. Nothing herein shall prevent the Mayor
or his or her duly authorized representative from removing any license,
certificate, plate or sticker from the possession of a former licensee, his
or her premises, any vehicle or any machine when said license has been
revoked under the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014; Ord.
19-O-11, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 7.23  BUSINESS VEHICLES.



   Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis, in whole or in part,
for a license fee, the Village Clerk shall furnish the licensee with a tag or
sticker for each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker
shall be posted or affixed in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle.



(Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.24  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCES AND STATUTES.



   The building and premises used in any business licensed hereunder shall
comply with all Village Zoning, Building, Fire and Health Codes, and
ordinances, as well as all other applicable village codes, ordinances, rules
and regulations and shall be maintained in good repair, free of litter and
debris and kept in a safe condition for employees, customers and other
persons present therein or thereon. In addition, any business licensed
hereunder shall comply with all statutes of the state. No gambling, raffle,
lottery or chance gift distribution of money or articles of value shall be
permitted on any premises wherein a business is licensed hereunder.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.25  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Village Administrator shall take all necessary and appropriate
action to compel compliance with the regulatory provisions of this chapter.
All municipal employees duly authorized and acting as license inspectors
shall be conservators of the peace with police powers for the purpose of
enforcing the provision of this chapter and other village ordinances relating
to the licensing of businesses and occupations and their regulation.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.26  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Suspension of business operation. When the conduct or
operation of any business shall constitute a nuisance in fact and a clear and
present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the Mayor
shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the closing
of the premises and the suspension of any license for a period not to exceed
ten days. Within eight days after he or she has so acted, the Mayor shall
call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
should be suspended for an additional period of time or revoked.



   (B)   Revocation of license.



      (1)   Licenses issued under the ordinances of the village,
unless otherwise provided, may be suspended for up to 30 days or revoked by
the Mayor after notice and hearing as provided below for any of the following
causes:



         (a)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement
contained in the application for the license;



         (b)   Any violation by the licensee of ordinance
provisions relating to the license, the subject matter of the license or the
premises occupied;



         (c)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor when such conviction indicates his or her inability to operate a
safe, honest or legitimate business operation within the village;



         (d)   Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the village;



         (e)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or
any interference with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in
the performance of his or her duties in making such inspections, as provided
in this chapter; or



         (f)   Any other violation of any village ordinances,
resolutions or regulations.



      (2)   Such suspension or revocation, if ordered, shall not
preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the
violation of other applicable ordinances of the village.



   (C)   Hearing.



      (1)   Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a
license shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of
the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be
sent by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee at his or
her last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the
hearing.



      (2)   At the hearing, the Village Attorney shall present the
complaint and shall represent the village. The licensee shall be permitted
counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross- examine
witnesses. A stenographic or electronically recorded record of the hearing
shall be kept. The Mayor shall preside and shall render the decision with in
a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing, but not later than 30
days after such conclusion. The decision shall be in writing and shall
summarize the evidence and state the reasons for the decision.



      (3)   Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked shall
pay to the village the costs of the hearing before the Mayor. The Mayor shall
determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but
not limited to, court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records,
attorneys’ fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders, and
all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum
as the Mayor may allow.



      (4)   The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within
30 days of notification of the costs by the Mayor. Failure to pay said costs
within 30 days of notification is a violation of this section and may be
cause for license suspension or revocation or the levy of a fine.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 7.27  PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   (1)    In addition to the suspension and revocation
provisions above, any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50
and not more than $750.



      (2)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



   (B)   Whenever a person, firm or corporation violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, the village may cause appropriate legal actions
and proceedings, in law or in equity, to be instituted and maintained to
enforce compliance herewith.



(Ord. 01-O-07, passed 5-10-2001; Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014; Ord.
19-O-11, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 7.28  TOBACCO DEALERS.



   See § 43.23.



(Ord. 14-O-11, passed 5-22-2014)



CHAPTER 8:  PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS



Section



   8.01   Protection of park property



   8.02   Operating policy



   8.03   Use of park areas



   8.04   Advertising and signs



   8.05   Penalties



   8.06   Enforcement of regulations



   8.07   No swimming



   8.08   Trees and vegetation



   8.09   Parking



   8.10   Park and Recreation Advisory Board



§ 8.01  PROTECTION OF PARK PROPERTY.



   (A)   Damaging. No person in a park in the village shall wilfully
mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any
building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving
material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances
thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent,
monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or
equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either
real or personal.



   (B)   Rest rooms and washrooms. No person in a park shall fail to
cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary
condition. No person over the age of five years shall use the rest rooms and
washrooms designated for the opposite sex.



   (C)   Sanitation. No person in a park shall throw, discharge or
otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond,
lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any
tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the
pollution of said waters.



   (D)   Refuse. No person shall bring in, have brought in to a park,
or dump, deposit or leave in a park any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper,
boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse, or other trash. No such
refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park,
or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided,
all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.



§ 8.02  OPERATING POLICY.



   (A)   Hours.



      (1)   The village parks shall be open daily to the public
during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. of any day; and it shall be
unlawful for any person other than village personnel conducting village
business therein to occupy or be present in the park during any hours in
which the park is not open to the public, except as amended by the Village
Board upon issuing an application as prescribed in division (B) below.



      (2)   Any section, or part of the park, may be declared closed
to the public by the President of the Board of Trustees at any time and for
any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals.



   (B)   Group activity.



      (1)   Whenever any group, association or organization desires
to use the party facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics,
campouts, parties or theatrical or entertainment performances, a
representative of the group, association or organization shall first obtain
an application from the Village Clerk for such purpose. The rules and
regulations to be followed are attached to Ord. 95-O-11 as Exhibit A. The
form application to be utilized for this purpose is attached to Ord. 95-O-11
as Exhibit B.



      (2)   The village shall grant the applications on a first
come, first serve basis, if it appears that the group, association or
organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by the
individual members of the public and if the group, association or
organization meets all other conditions contained in the application. The
application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the
village from any liability of any kind or character and to protect village
property from damage. The Village Clerk shall issue a permit upon meeting all
requirements of the current village codes.



(Ord. 95-O-11, passed 6-22-1995)



§ 8.03  USE OF PARK AREAS.



   (A)   Regulated. No person in a park shall picnic, lunch or camp in
a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have
the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to
prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and
convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to
achieve this end.



   (B)   Non-exclusive use. Except as provided in § 8.02 of this
chapter, no person shall use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the
buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities
for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.



   (C)   Duties of picnickers. No person shall build a fire in any
place other than a fireplace or a grill as affixed to the property by the
village or in a portable grill constructed of a suitable fireproof substance,
or other area designated by the village. No person shall leave a picnic area
before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature
of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the
disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by
the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.



   (D)   Motorized vehicles. No person shall drive or park any
motorized vehicle in any park in the village unless special permission for
such activity is granted in advance by the President and Board of Trustees.



   (E)   Alcoholic beverages. No person shall possess or consume any
alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquor in any park in the village unless a
special license for such activity is granted in advance by the President and
Board of Trustees upon application and then only to groups, associations and
organizations so requesting.



(Ord. 95-O-11, passed 6-22-1995)



§ 8.04  ADVERTISING AND SIGNS.



   (A)   Advertising. No person in a park shall announce, advertise or
call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or
hire.



   (B)   Signs. No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any
sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person
erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or
highways or roads adjacent to a park, except as approved by the Board of
Trustees.



§ 8.05  PENALTIES.



   Any person who violates this chapter shall be fined not less than $25,
nor more than $500, for each offense. The violation of this chapter is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance to be abated in the manner provided by law.



§ 8.06  ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.



   The Village Marshal and Deputy Village Marshal shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



§ 8.07  NO SWIMMING.



   No person shall swim or wade in any stream, creek or pond located in
the village park.



§ 8.08  TREES AND VEGETATION.



   No person shall disturb the trees and vegetation located in the village
park unless authorized to do so by the President and Board of Trustees of the
village and then only under the supervision of the Village Board.



§ 8.09  PARKING.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this chapter, it
shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle in the village parking area on
Route 120 adjacent to Morrison Park, for a continuous period in excess of two
hours; except that, any motor vehicle may be parked for a continuous period
in excess of two hours between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m. on the
second and fourth Thursday of every month.



(Ord. 96-O-17, passed 10-10-1996)



§ 8.10  PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   Establishment.



      (1)   The village has previously established the Village Park
and Recreation Advisory Board (“Advisory Board”), consisting of five
members. It was the intention of the village that the members shall serve
staggered terms, so that there was continuity of goals and objectives of the
Advisory Board. The members of Advisory the Board, as of 5-1-2008, shall have
terms expiring as follows:



         (a)   Two for a term expiring 4-30-2009;



         (b)   Two for a term expiring 4-30-2010; and



         (c)   One for a term expiring 4-30-2011.



      (2)   The successor to each Advisory Board member shall serve
for a term of three years. The Advisory Board shall elect a Secretary from
its members.



   (B)   Appointment. The members shall be appointed by the Village
President and with advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, both as to
annual appointments and as to appointments to fill a vacancy. The Chairperson
and Vice-Chairperson of the Advisory Board shall be appointed annually by the
Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



   (C)   Officers.



      (1)   The Chairperson of the Advisory Board shall have general
supervision over the agenda of the Advisory Board, shall preside over the
meetings of the Board and shall run the meetings fairly and efficiently and
shall, upon consensus of the Advisory Board, communicate with outside groups
and agencies concerning use of the village park facilities. The Vice-
Chairperson shall act in the place and stead of the Chairperson, in the event
of the Chairperson’s absence, inability or refusal to act.



      (2)   The Secretary shall record the notes and keep the
minutes of all meetings of the Advisory Board, shall serve notice of meetings
of the Advisory Board or shall coordinate such notice with village staff and
shall keep appropriate current records showing the members of the Advisory
Board together with their addresses and telephone numbers.



   (D)   Duties. The Advisory Board shall organize and oversee approved
village sponsored events, such as festivals, picnics, parties or any other
activity or event deemed worthy by the President and Board of Trustees. In
addition, the Advisory Board shall establish and manage sports and activities
leagues to be conducted at village park facilities.



   (E)   Mission. The Advisory Board shall recommend acceptance and
facilitate execution of events sponsored by individuals or groups largely
composed of village residents, such as recreational, sporting, educational or
other similar activities.



   (F)   Reporting. The Chairperson shall submit all minutes of
meetings and functions to the Chairperson of the Public Works Committee and
action on any recommendations may thereafter be taken by the Village Board.
Annually, the Advisory Board shall, prior to the end of the village’s
fiscal year, submit a report of its activities to the President and Board of
Trustees.



   (G)   Meetings. The Advisory Board shall hold regular meetings at
7:00 p.m. on a date chosen by the Advisory Board, but in no event shall the
Board meet less frequently than quarterly. Three of the five members of the
Board shall constitute a quorum and must be present for the Advisory Board to
take any formal action. Special meetings of the Advisory Board may be called
by the Chairperson or two members and a minimum of 72 hours’ advance notice
of a special meeting is required. The failure of a member to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Advisory Board, without good cause shown, shall
result in that member’s removal from the Advisory Board, which removal
shall be considered by the Village Board, within a reasonable time of the
member’s failure to attend the three consecutive meetings.



   (H)   Compensation. Each Board member shall be compensated at a rate
of $50 for each meeting attended by that Board member, but in no event will a
Board member be paid for greater than three meetings per month.



(Ord. 09-O-02, passed 2-26-2009; Ord. 15-O-32, passed 9-10-2015)



CHAPTER 9:  LIQUOR CONTROL AND LIQUOR LICENSING



Section



   9.01   Definitions



   9.02   License required



   9.03   Applications



   9.04   Restrictions of licenses



   9.05   Classification; fees



   9.06   Number of licenses



   9.07   Bond



   9.08   Insurance required



   9.09   Disposition of fees



   9.10   Records



   9.11   Enforcement



   9.12   Duration and transfer of license



   9.13   Change of location



   9.14   Peddling



   9.15   Sanitary conditions



   9.16   Employees



   9.17   Location restrictions



   9.18   Sales prohibited



   9.19   View from street



   9.20   Closing hours



   9.21   Fine or suspension or revocation



   9.22   Use of premises for year after revocation



   9.23   Complaint of violation



   9.24   Acts of agent or employee; liability of licensee



   9.25   Liquor Control Commissioner



   9.26   Penalty



§ 9.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the original thereof and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood
alcohol.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol spirits, wine and beer, and every
liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer
and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions
of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of
denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and
regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing
0.5%, or less, of alcohol by volume.



   BOWLING ALLEY. Any establishment or building, or part of an
establishment or building, as the case may be, wherein the game of bowling,
played with composition balls and ten wooden pins, is played.



   BILLIARDS PARLOR. Any establishment or building, or part of an
establishment or building, as the case may be, wherein the game of billiards,
played on an oblong table by driving small balls against one another or into
pockets with a cue, is played.



   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of the state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors which conforms to the definition
of a club, as provided by ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-3.24 et seq., commonly
known as the Liquor Control Act of 1934, as amended.



   COUNTRY CLUB. A recreational area with buildings or structures used in
conjunction therewith for the primary use of members and their guests as the
case may be, all of which is established for recreational and entertainment
purposes and used in conjunction with recreational pursuits or games (e.g.,
golf, tennis and the like).



   GOLF COURSE. A recreational area with or without club house facilities
primarily for the use of members and their guests or the general public as
the case may be, engaging in a form of recreation or game commonly known as
golf.



   HOTEL, MOTEL, MOTOR LODGE, MOTOR INN, MOTOR HOTEL. Every building or
other structure, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the
public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping
accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether
transient, permanent or residential, in which ten or more rooms are used for
sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building
and such building structure being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen
and dining room equipment and capacity.



   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg,
hogshead or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or
capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to
contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.



   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used and maintained, advertised and
held out to the public as a place where meals actually are served and
regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests.



   RETAIL SALE. The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.



   SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates and means all
sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or
employee.



   TO SELL. Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Lakemoor, an Illinois municipal corporation.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the village
any alcoholic liquor unless the person selling or offering for sale has a
valid current liquor license in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, or in the event the person has a valid current license in effect in
violation of the terms of such license.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.03  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant, or corporation,
verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following information
and statements:



   (A)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation for profit, or a club,
the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names
and addresses of the officers and directors, owned by one person or his or
her nominees, the name and address of such person;



   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth,
and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization;



   (C)   The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed;



   (D)   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of
that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its
charter was issued;



   (E)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under such license;



   (F)   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for
a similar other license on premises other than described in this application,
and the disposition of such application;



   (G)   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a
felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter
or thing contained in this chapter, laws of the state or the ordinances of
this village;



   (H)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons
therefor;



   (I)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the
laws of the state or of the United States or any ordinance of the village in
the conduct of his or her place of business.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.04  RESTRICTIONS OF LICENSES.



   No such license shall be issued to:



   (A)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



   (B)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal
or state law;



   (C)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is
keeping a house of ill fame;



   (D)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;



   (E)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been
revoked for cause;



   (F)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;



   (G)   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such
co-partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license hereunder, except for
the requirement of residence within the political subdivision, except that at
least one partner of a co-partnership shall be a resident of the village;



   (H)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or
any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate, more than 5% of the
stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than residence within the village;



   (I)   A corporation whose registered agent is not a resident of the
village;



   (J)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or
agent, unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications
required of the licensee;



   (K)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal
or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic
liquor, subsequent to the passage of this chapter, or shall have forfeited
his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;



   (L)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is
sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued;



   (M)   Any law enforcing public official, any Village Manager, any
President, Trustee or member of the Village Board, or any President or member
of a county board and no such official shall be interested in any way, either
directly or indirectly in the manufacture for sale, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquor;



   (N)   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a
state retail liquor dealer’s license;



   (O)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee;



   (P)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as
prescribed by any part of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1(a)(3) through (a)(10)
of the Crim. Code of 2012, as heretofore or hereafter amended as contained in
ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 28-1 and 28-3 or as prescribed by a statute
replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;



   (Q)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period;



   (R)   A person to whom federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period;



   (S)   A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a
federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government fo the
current tax period;



   (T)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or
any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of this stock of such
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp for the current tax period;



   (U)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a
federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period; and/or



   (V)   A person who does not have an established place of business in
which to use the license.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 10-O-22, passed 9-9-2010; Ord. 13-O-22,
passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.05  CLASSIFICATION; FEES.



   (A)   There shall be 11 classes of licenses:



      (1)   Class A license which shall authorize the retail sale,
on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor, for consumption, on the
premises. The annual fee for such license shall be the sum of $1,500;



      (2)   Class B license which shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises specified in the
license where sold, and shall be issued to a regularly organized club, as
hereinbefore defined, which has been established for at least ten years prior
to making application for such license, and said license shall authorize the
licensee to sell liquor in the club quarters only. No Class B license shall
be issued until the local Liquor Control Commissioner and the President and
Board of Trustees satisfied themselves that the club applying for the license
was actually and in fact organized for some purposes or object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor. The annual license fee for a club
license as hereinbefore set forth shall be the sum of $800;



      (3)   Class BB license which shall authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises specified in the license
where sold. The license shall be issued to a special occasion facility
organized for the purposes of providing banquets, wedding and other
receptions, meetings, parties or other special events upon a contractual
engagement. The special occasion facility shall not be open to the general
public and shall be limited to the contracting party and his or her invited
guests. No Class BB license shall be issued until the local Liquor Control
Commissioner and the President and Board of Trustees have established the
hours for operation of the Class BB license. No Class BB license shall be
open for business, except during the hours established by this section;
provided, however, that, the President and Board of Trustees may in their
discretion extend said hours upon request. The annual license fee for a
special occasion facility, as hereinbefore set forth, shall be the sum of
$1,500;



      (4)   Class C license which shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquors on the premises specified in the license in packages only,
but not for consumption on the premises where sold. Food for consumption on
the premises shall not be sold by any Class C license holder. The annual fee
for such a license shall be $1,250;



      (5)   Class D license which shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine for consumption only on the premises specified in the license
where sold. The annual fee for such a license shall be $1,250;



      (6)   Class DP license which shall authorize the sale of beer
and wine in packages only, but not for consumption on the premises where
sold. Food for consumption on the premises shall not be sold by any Class DD
license holder. The annual fee for such a license shall be $750;



      (7)   (a)   Class E license which shall authorize the
retail sale of beer and wine for consumption upon the premises specified in
the license where sold. The license shall be issued to not-for-profit
corporations qualified to do business in the state. The license shall be for
a period not to exceed three days and shall be issued only for special events
sponsored by the not-for-profit corporation requesting the license.



         (b)   No Class E license shall be issued until the local
Liquor Control Commissioner and the President and Board of Trustees have:



            1.   Established the location upon the premises
where beer and wine is to be sold;



            2.   The hours of operation which shall not be
extended beyond those provided in this code of ordinances;



            3.   The manner in which the licensee will manage
crowd control and refuse pickup;



            4.   Proof of insurance as required by this
chapter or the laws of the state;



            5.   A list of members of the corporation who will
be selling beer and wine at the location pursuant to the license; and



            6.   Proof of permission from the owner of the
premises authorizing the sale of beer and wine during the time requested in
the permit and such other requirements as the President and Board of Trustees
or Liquor Control Commissioner deem appropriate in the case of each
particular permit.



         (c)   The license fee for each Class E license permit as
hereinbefore set forth, shall be the sum of $20. The President and Board of
Trustees may approve such other fees or deposits as they deem appropriate to
ensure compliance with the terms and provisions of the permit.



      (8)   A Class F License shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package for consumption on premises other
than licensee’s licensed premises. The annual fee for such licenses shall
be the sum of $200;



      (9)   A Class G license shall authorize a daily permit to the
village, an Illinois municipal corporation, authorizing the sale of alcoholic
liquor at the village’s annual festival and any other village- sponsored
events. The Village Administrator or Public Works Director shall be the
registered agent for purposes of application for a daily permit. Unless
specifically provided otherwise, all requirements of the this chapter shall
apply to permits granted under this section;



      (10)   A Class H license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises where sold, and not for
resale in any form, to be issued to a regularly organized golf club, country
club, bowling alley or billiards parlor. The annual fee for such licenses
shall be the sum of $1,500;



      (11)   Class I Liquor license shall authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor for consumption either on or off the premises where sold.
However, no retail sale of alcoholic liquor shall take place hereunder
unless: (1) the main classification of the business for such retail sale is
the selling of food for consumption on or off the premises; (2) there is a
minimum store area of at least 3,300 square feet (excluding any basement
area); and (3) a minimum of 1,500 square feet of store area is accessible to
customers. The fee for the issuance of such license, if so available, shall
be $2,000 per year.



      (12)   Class J License. Arts and Entertainment Studio: A Class
J license shall entitle the licensee, an arts and entertainment studio, to
permit consumption of beer or wine only brought onto the premises of the arts
and entertainment studio by a patron 21 years of age or older for personal
consumption or for consumption of other patrons who are 21 years of age or
older. The consumption of beer and wine is restricted to the licensed
premises. Such consumption shall be limited to members of a group assembled
on the premises for the purpose of attending arts or crafts classes offered
by an art studio, arts and crafts school, or similar leisure/entertainment
business while the licensee is conducting classes. No more than one 750 ml
bottle of wine per patron or no more than 36 ounces of beer per patron
(unopened) shall be permitted to be brought into the premises. The sale of
beer, wine, spirits and all other types of alcoholic liquor to patrons of the
licensed premises shall be prohibited. No package sales shall be permitted.
The sale of beer, wine, spirits or other alcoholic beverages (e.g., wine
coolers, spirits, prepared mixed drinks, etc.) in single cans or bottles,
kegs or pitchers or any other form is prohibited. The license fee for a Class
J license shall be $250 per annum. No licenses of this class shall be issued.



      (13)   Auxiliary license. The Liquor Control Commissioner may
grant an auxiliary license for the sale, dispensing and consumption of
alcoholic liquor in an outdoor area adjacent to the licensed building. Except
as provided herein, the area for which an auxiliary license is issued shall
be subject to the review of the Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be of a
secure, permanent nature, shall facilitate access into the area only through
the licensed premises and the use of the outdoor area shall not have any
adverse effects on any adjacent premises. Additional exits may be required to
facilitate emergency egress from the licensed premise. Said additional exits
shall be self-closing lockable gates or doors, approved by the village, with
signs stating "emergency exit only." Entertainment or music in said area
shall be by a separate license or permit issued by the village and in
accordance with village ordinance and regulations. The annual fee for such
licenses shall be the sum of $500. The Liquor Commissioner may add conditions
to the issuance of any such auxiliary license including, but not limited to,
restricted hours of operation for such outdoor use, establishment of written
policies by the licensee to address safety and security, and the
establishment of additional security features to guard the public health and
safety;



      (14)   Temporary license. The Liquor Control Commissioner may
issue a temporary liquor license to a duly registered not-for-profit
organization or business that would otherwise qualify for a liquor license
under this code. Said license shall authorize the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages exclusively at the location specified in such
application, for use and consumption on the premises, and only for the day(s)
specified in the license. Said license shall not exceed five days and the fee
for such license shall be $25; and



      (15)   Ancillary license. Available to any business, or
not-for-profit organization, whose business does not derive more than 20% of
its annual revenue from the sale of alcohol. Said revenue qualification shall
be filed with the village on an annual basis. Any document required to be
filed with the state regarding revenue apportionment shall be satisfactory
evidence of compliance and qualification for this license. The annual fee for
such license shall be $1,500.



   (B)   All persons making application for a license shall first
deposit the total license fee amount with the Village Clerk. All persons
desiring licenses shall be required to pay the full amount of the license fee
whether the license is to be issued for a full year or a part of the year.
There shall be no rebate of any portion of the license fee due to the fact
the application is made after the beginning of the fiscal year. Failure to
pay the license fee or any portion thereof shall result in the immediate
revocation of the license. In the event an application is not accepted, the
license fee shall be refunded.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 09-O-08, passed 5-28-2009; Ord.
13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 14-O-10, passed 5-8-2014; Ord. 15-O-38,
passed 11-12-2015; Ord. 18-O-23, passed 8-7-2018)



§ 9.06  NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   (A)   The Village Board shall allow for licenses of the following
nature and in the following quantities.



      (1)   The Village Board will from time to time will determine
the number of Class A licenses in the corporate limits of the village with
the advice of the Liquor Control Commissioner;



      (2)   The Village Board will from time to time will determine
the number of Class BB licenses in the corporate limits of the village with
the advice of the Liquor Control Commissioner;



      (3)   The Village Board will from time to time will determine
the number of Class C licenses in the corporate limits of the village with
the advice of the Liquor Control Commissioner;



      (4)   The Village Board will from time to time will determine
the number of Class D licenses in the corporate limits of the village with
the advice of the Liquor Control Commissioner;



      (5)   The Village Board will from time to time will determine
the number of Class DD licenses in the corporate limits of the village with
the advice of the Liquor Control Commissioner;



      (6)   The Village Board will from time to time will determine
the number of Class F licenses in the corporate limits of the village with
the advice of the Liquor Control Commissioner;



      (7)   The Village Board will from time to time determine the
number of Class H licenses in the corporate limits of the village with the
advice of the Liquor Control Commissioner; and



      (8)   The Village Board will from time to time determine the
number of ancillary licenses available in the corporate limits of the village
with the advice of the Liquor Control Commissioner. There shall be one
license created under this section.



   (B)   In the event that any person, firm or corporation holding a
local license in the county of McHenry or the county of Lake shall be annexed
to the village, the village shall issue a license upon annexation of the
property to the village in compliance with this section regardless of the
numerical limitation on licenses. The license issued shall be of the same
type and nature that was issued by said county. Any license issued as a
result of annexation of property to the village shall be considered in
computing the number of licenses and limitations thereon.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 07-O-28, passed 8-23-2007; Ord.
09-O-08, passed 5-28-2009; Ord. 10-O-22, passed 9-9-2010; Ord. 12-O-14,
passed 8-30-2012; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 14-O-10, passed
5-8-2014)



§ 9.07  BOND.



   (A)   In no case shall any retail license be issued for the sale of
alcoholic liquor, unless the applicant therefore shall first give to the
village, a bond payable to the village, which bond shall be in the penal sum
of $1,000 for all classes of liquor licenses. That said bond shall be signed
by two good sureties or responsible surety companies, licensed to do business
in the state; said bond shall be conditioned that any such applicant for the
license and any and all persons in his or her employ or such as are under his
or her control comply with every and all resolutions, laws, regulations and
ordinances of the village, in force at the time of the approval of such bond,
or that may be adopted by the Village Board during the continuance of such
license, which relate in any manner to the sale of alcoholic beverages, or
for the general good government or the village, and said bond shall be
further conditioned that such applicant shall pay or cause to be paid, all
fines, penalties and costs which may be legally imposed upon him or her or
imposed upon his or her employee or employees, servant or servants, agent or
agents, or any other person or persons under his or her control, for any
violation or breach of such resolution, rule, regulation or ordinance
aforesaid.



   (B)   In addition to the foregoing bond, every such applicant for an
alcoholic liquor license shall also file with the Village Clerk, any bonds
which may be required by any act passed by the legislature of the state, or
by the Congress of the United States.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.08  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant shall file
with the application, a certificate by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state, certifying that the applicant has in force and effect
the insurance required by state statutes.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.09  DISPOSITION OF FEES.



   All such fees paid to the Liquor Control Commissioner at the time
application is made shall be forthwith turned over to the Village Clerk. In
the event the license applied for has been denied, the fee shall be returned
to the applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited
in the general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been
designated by the Board, by proper action.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.10  RECORDS.



   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a
complete record of all such licenses issued and shall furnish the Clerk and
Finance Director and Chief of Police each with a copy thereof upon the
issuance of any new license, or the revocation of any old license.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.11  ENFORCEMENT.



   The President and the Village Board of Trustees hereby authorize any
law enforcing officer of the village to enter at any time upon any premises
licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of this chapter
or whether any of the rules and regulations adopted by the President and the
Village Board of Trustees or the state have been or are being violated and at
such time to examine the premises of said licensee in connection therewith.
Further, the President and the Village Board of Trustees authorize any law
enforcing officer of the village to receive complaints from any citizen
within the jurisdiction of the village that any of the provisions of this
chapter or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to, have been or are
being violated, and to act upon complaints in the manner provided.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.12  DURATION AND TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   (A)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for no
longer than one year after the issuance; provided that, this provision shall
not apply to a Class E license or a Class G license. The one-year period
shall be from July 1 of each year to June 30 of each year unless sooner
revoked or suspended as in this chapter provided. Licenses issued after July
1 of any year shall pay the full license fee as provided. A license shall not
constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment of
execution, nor shall it be alienable or encumbered or hypothecated. Such
license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but
it shall cease upon the death of the licensee; provided that, the executor or
administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any
insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of
alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of
alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death
of such decedent, or any insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of
such license; but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee. In no event shall there be any refund of any
portion of any license fee paid.



   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration
thereof; provided, he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such
purpose; and, provided further that, the renewal privilege herein provided
for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent
the President and Village Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within their jurisdiction.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.13  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   A retail dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only in the premises described in the application and license. Such location
may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the
President and Village Board of Trustees. No change of location shall be
permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one, for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor, under the law of the state and the ordinances of
the village.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.14  PEDDLING.



   It shall be unlawful to peddle beer and alcoholic liquor in the village.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.15  SANITARY CONDITIONS.



   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinance regulating
the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.16  EMPLOYEES.



   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor any minor to work in or about any premises or to engage
in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. In
addition, all bartenders and servers in any bar or restaurant shall take a
Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) course
and have such certification available for village inspections at all times
while serving alcohol.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 09-O-08, passed 5-28-2009; Ord.
13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 14-O-10, passed 5-8-2014)



§ 9.17  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, homes for aged,
indigent persons, veterans, their wives or children, or any military or naval
station; provided that, this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops
or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal
business. Such places of business so exempted shall have been established for
such purposes prior to the taking effect of this chapter; and, further
provided that, this section shall not apply to not-for-profit corporations
requesting Class E licenses.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.18  SALES PROHIBITED.



   No licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall sell, give or in
any other manner deliver alcoholic liquor to any minor, intoxicated person,
habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, feebleminded or distracted person, or
harbor or permit any intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises described
in the license or permit any conduct which shall tend to disturb the peace or
quiet of the neighborhood or the premises. Any such sale shall be cause for
suspension of the license.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.19  VIEW FROM STREET.



   In the premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
upon the premises is licensed (other than as a restaurant, hotel or club), no
screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the
window or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises,
which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises
from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen,
partition or other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting
shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises from the street,
road or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the
premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light
or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises
shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed premises
required by the foregoing provisions shall be willfully obscured by the
licensee or by him or her willfully suffered to be obscured or in any manner
obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner
herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the
President shall have the right to require the filing with him of plans,
drawings and photographs showing the clearance of the views as above required.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.20  CLOSING HOURS.



   (A)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall
be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the
village on Saturday and Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
and on weekdays between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., with the
following exceptions:



         (a)   On January 1, on which day Class A, Class B, Class
BB, Class D, Class F and Class H license holders may remain open until 4:00
a.m.; provided that, they notify the Police Department in writing on or
before December 29 of the preceding year;



         (b)   For Class F liquor license holders, the sale or
offer for sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor may be permitted beginning
at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays;



         (c)   For Class C and Class DD liquor license holders,
the sale or offer for sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor may be permitted
beginning at 7:00 a.m. on Sundays; and



         (d)   The President and Board of Trustees may, in their
discretion, modify the opening hour or the closing hour upon written request
for good cause. It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit
the public at any premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail
during the hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited; provided
that, in the case of restaurants, hotels, clubs, drug stores and Class C and
Class DD license holders and other license holders whose main business is
other than the sale of alcohol, such establishments may be kept open, but no
alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the public during the hours
when sales are prohibited.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 09-O-12, passed 7-9-2009; Ord. 13-O-22,
passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 15-O-21, passed 5-14-2015)



§ 9.21  FINE OR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Liquor Control Commissioner may render a fine on any
liquor license holder, suspend a liquor license for not more than 30 days or
revoke any liquor license issued by it, if it is determined that the licensee
has violated sections of the village code or sections of the code applicable
to the licensee’s business or conduct therein, any provision of this
section, or for any violation of state law pertaining to the sale of
alcoholic liquor. However no fine shall be imposed nor shall such license be
suspended or revoked except after a public hearing by said Liquor Control
Commissioner, with a three-day written notice to the licensee affording the
licensee the opportunity to appear and be heard. If the Liquor Control
Commissioner, or in his or her absence, an Assistant Liquor Control
Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
village, he or she may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the
reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing order the licensed
premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an
opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee
shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the
licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business
or businesses. The Liquor Control Commissioner shall within five days after
such hearing if he or she determines after such hearing that a fine shall be
imposed or the license should be suspended or revoked, state the reason or
reasons for such determination in a written order of suspension or revocation
and shall serve a copy of such order within five days upon the licensee. All
hearings conducted before the Liquor Control Commissioner shall be recorded.
Upon any request for administrative review it shall be the responsibility of
the person requesting the review/appeal to pay for the cost of producing the
record of proceedings at the original hearing.



   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall, for a first offense
other than a violation of § 9.02, impose a fine of not more than $1,000. The
fine shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by the Liquor Control
Commissioner. If the licensee is convicted of another offense within seven
years of the conviction for the prior offense, the Liquor Control
Commissioner shall impose a fine of not more than $1,500, which shall be in
addition to any other penalty imposed by the Liquor Control Commissioner; and
for any subsequent offense convictions of the licensee for offenses committed
during the seven-year period, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall impose a
fine of not more than $2,500, which shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed by the Liquor Control Commissioner.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013; Ord.
14-O-10, passed 5-8-2014)



§ 9.22  USE OF PREMISES FOR YEAR AFTER REVOCATION.



   When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license
shall be granted to any person for the period of one year thereafter for the
conduct of the business of manufacturing, distributing or selling alcoholic
liquor in the premises described in such revoked license.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.23  COMPLAINT OF VIOLATION.



   Any five residents of said village shall have the right to file a
complaint with the Liquor Control Commissioner stating that any licensee
subject to the jurisdiction of the Commissioner has been or is violating the
provisions of this chapter. Such complaint shall be in wiling and shall be
signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the
particular provision believed to have been violated and the facts in detail
upon which belief is based. If the Commissioner is satisfied that the
complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged
there is reasonable cause for such belief, he or she shall set the matter for
hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of
such hearing and of the particular charge in the complaint.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.24  ACTS OF AGENT OR EMPLOYEE; LIABILITY OF LICENSEE.



   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager or
other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the
act of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or
omitted by him or her personally.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.25  LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.



   The President of the village shall act as Liquor Control Commissioner
of the village. The Trustees of the village shall act, collectively, as
Assistant Liquor Control Commissioners of the village.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



§ 9.26  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
chapter may, in addition to any penalty imposed under § 1.06 of this code of
ordinances, suffer the penalty of having his or her license revoked for any
such violation. Revocation shall be in writing signed by the President.



(Ord. 07-O-17, passed 5-24-2007; Ord. 13-O-22, passed 9-12-2013)



CHAPTER 10:  SOLICITORS



Section



   10.01   Itinerant merchants



   10.02   Junk dealers



   10.03   Peddlers and solicitors



   10.04   Outdoor advertisers



§ 10.01  ITINERANT MERCHANTS.



   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful to do business in the
village as an itinerant merchant without having first secured a license as is
herein provided. For the purpose of this section, any merchant engaging or
intending to engage in business as a merchant in the village for a period of
time not to exceed 100 days shall be considered itinerant merchant; provided
that, peddlers shall not be considered itinerant merchants.



   (B)   Applications. Every application for such a license shall set
forth the commodities to be sold, and the place intended to be occupied or
used for the business.



   (C)   Fees. The fees for licenses shall be $20 for one month and $5
for one day.



   (D)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than
$500, for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



§ 10.02  JUNK DEALERS.



   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on
the business of junk dealer or to keep any junk shop, store or place for the
purchase or sale of junk, rags, paper and the like, old iron, brass, copper
or empty bottles, without having obtained a license therefor as is
hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Applications. Applications for such licenses shall be made in
conformance with the provisions of the ordinance relating to licenses.



   (C)   Fees. The fee to be paid for such licenses, for an annual
license, shall be $500; an additional fee of $10 for each vehicle used in the
conduct of such business; provided that, a junk dealer not maintaining a
store or yard in the village shall pay $10 per vehicle used.



   (D)   Stolen goods. Every keeper of a junk shop who shall receive or
be in possession of any goods, article or things of value which may have been
lost or stolen shall upon demand produce such articles or things to any
member of the Police Department for examination.



   (E)   Vehicles. Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct
of his or her business shall bear therein in legible characters the name and
address of the owner and proprietor thereof.



   (F)   Location; frontage consents. No person, firm or corporation
shall locate, build, construct, operate or maintain any junk yard or store
junk for sale after purchasing the same anywhere in the village.



   (G)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this section shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than
$500, for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each and every day or on which a violation occurs or continues.



§ 10.03  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.



   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to sell or attempt to sell any goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, or services of any kind and nature, being carried on or
transported for immediate delivery or performance from house to house,
building to building, or upon any street, highway or sidewalk within the
Village of Lakemoor without first having obtained a license therefor.



   (B)   Applications. Applications for such license shall be made to
the Village Clerk, and shall state thereon the number of vehicles, if any
intended to be operated; the kind of article or merchandise to be peddled;
and the permanent address of the peddler.



   (C)   Fees. The fee for such license shall be: $45 per solicitor and
will expire on 100 calendar days from the date of the license approval.



   (D)   Exceptions. The following are exempt from the licensing and
fee requirement in provisions of divisions (A) - (C) of this section but
shall otherwise be required to register with the village and comply with all
other provisions in this section.



      (1)   Religious, non-profit, philanthropic and/or charitable
organizations including, but not limited to, public or private schools;



      (2)   Any individual selling newspapers or magazines, or
distributing free samples from his or her person.



      (3)   Any individual that sells goods and services on the
property or a parking lot of a existing business open to the general public
during business hours of the business. Provided the individual has filed an
application with the village and provides documentation authorizing the
individual to sell goods and services on the property.



   (E)   Hours. All license are valid only between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.



   (F)   Fraud. Any licensed peddler who shall be guilty of any fraud,
cheating or misrepresentation, whether through himself, herself or through an
employee, while acting as a peddler in the municipality or who shall barter,
sell or peddle any goods, wares or merchandise other than those specified in
his or her application for a license shall be fined not less than $50, nor
more than $750, for each offense and the President may revoke his or her
license for such offense.



   (G)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this section shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than
$750, for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 17-O-03, passed 1-12-2017; Ord. 17-O-08, passed 2-23-2017)



§ 10.04  OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS.



   (A)   Definition. The term OUTDOOR ADVERTISER, as used in this
section, is hereby defined to mean any person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of placing, posting or painting any advertisements, notices or
displays in or on any place for the purpose of outdoor advertising so that
the resultant display is visible from any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public place in the village.



   (B)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any outdoor
advertiser to do business as such in this village without having first
secured a license therefor as is hereby required; provided that, no license
issued under this section shall be construed so as to permit the use of any
structures, natural or artificial, which are located in any public place for
advertising purposes.



   (C)   Application. Application for such licenses shall be
accompanied by a list of all places, including billboards or natural
structures, to be used, on which it is intended to place signs or
advertisements. This list shall be added to from time to time by the licensee
as the right to post or place advertisements or signs on additional places as
required.



   (D)   Fees. The annual fee for such licenses shall be $25.



   (E)   Use of billboards. No person shall post or maintain any
advertisements or signs on any billboard or signboard which does not fully
conform to the ordinances of the village.



   (F)   Consent of owners. It shall be unlawful to post any
advertisement on any premises without the consent of the owner or occupant of
such premises. Such consent must be in writing and filed with the Village
Clerk.



   (G)   Refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the
business of outdoor advertising to permit any refuse resulting from this work
to accumulate anywhere in the village, excepting by placing it in properly
established refuse receptacles. It shall be unlawful to permit any loose or
flapping combustible materials to hang from or be attached to any billboard
or signboard or other place used for display or advertising purposes. All
refuse resulting from the operation of the business must be carefully
gathered up and properly disposed of.



   (H)   Weeds at base of billboards. It shall be the duty of every
outdoor advertiser to keep all grass and weeds and other growths excepting
trees and ornamental shrubbery cut down so that the same shall not grow to a
greater height than ten inches within six feet of any billboard or signboard
used by him, her or it; provided that, this obligation shall extend on the
property controlled by the advertiser.



   (I)   Unlawful advertising. It shall be unlawful for any outdoor
advertiser to post or display any advertisement of an obscene or immoral
character or any advertisement tending to promote or cause a riot or breach
of the peace, or any advertisement for an unlawful gathering, or
advertisement for unlawful sales.



   (J)   Disfiguring signs. It shall be unlawful to mutilate or
disfigure any lawful sign or advertisement in the village.



   (K)   Name of advertiser. It shall be unlawful for any outdoor
advertiser to carry on his or her business unless the name of such advertiser
is attached, displayed or printed on all billboards, or signboards used by
him, her or it, in such lettering as to be visible from a distance of at
least five feet from the notice of advertisement.



   (L)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not be
construed to apply to the posting of signs or notices by order of any court
or by any public officer on the performance of his or her duties.



   (M)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this section shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than
$500, for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day a violation occurs or continues.



CHAPTER 11:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



   11.01   Municipal amusement tax



   11.02   Billiards and pool halls



§ 11.01  MUNICIPAL AMUSEMENT TAX



   (A)   Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the
“Village of Lakemoor Municipal Amusement Tax Ordinance”. The tax herein
imposed is in addition to all other taxes imposed by the village, state or
any municipal corporation or political subdivision of any of the foregoing.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AMUSEMENT.



         (a)   Any and all spectator and exhibitor entertainment,
including, but not limited to, the following activities: any movie,
theatrical, dramatic musical, or spectator performance, promotional show,
motion picture show, antique, gun, flower, poultry or animal show; carnival;
circus; rodeo; animal act; amusement ride; amusement attraction; any tour,
whether guided or by listening device; whether in a vehicle or walking;
events where spectators pay fee to watch an athletic contest, sport, game or
similar exhibition such as boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing, swimming,
racing or riding on animals or vehicles; baseball, basketball, softball,
soccer, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games; any
entertainment or recreational activity offered for public participation, or
on a membership or other basis including, but not limited to, events where
spectators pay a fee to watch games, bowling, billiards, bingo or pool.
Exceptions to this definition include events sponsored by tax exempt
organizations with approved I.R.C. § 501(c) status, the village, any local
school districts or regularly sponsored non-profit youth activities.



         (b)   For purposes of this section, AMUSEMENT shall not
mean raffles, as defined in the ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15.



      OWNER.



         (a)   With respect to the owner of a place where an
amusement is being held, any person who has an ownership or leasehold
interest in a building, structure, vehicle, boat, area or other place who
presents, conducts or operates an amusement in such place or who allows, by
agreement or otherwise, another person to present, conduct or operate an
amusement in such place.



         (b)   With respect to the owner of an amusement, any
person who has an ownership or leasehold interest in such amusement or any
person who has a proprietary interest in the amusement so as to entitled such
person to all or a portion of the proceeds, after payment of reasonable
expenses, from the operation, conduct or presentation of such amusement,
excluding proceeds from non-amusement services and from sales of tangible
personal property.



      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, society, foundation,
institution, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, receiver, executor,
trustee or other representative appointed by the order of any court, or any
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The
masculine, feminine, singular and plural are included in any circumstance.



   (C)   License. Every person, entity or organization that operates,
organizes, conducts or presents a permanent place of amusement shall obtain
an amusement license from the Village Clerk. All permanent places of
amusement shall be licensed no later than 7-1-2009 or, thereafter, prior to
opening for business. For any one time or temporary place of amusement, an
amusement license must be obtained at least seven days prior to the beginning
of the amusement event or activity. Any person, entity or organization need
obtain only one such license even if that person, entity or organization
holds events in more than one location at various times. Any such license,
permanent or temporary, upon issuance is valid until rescinded by the village
and is not transferable from the original applicant to any other party. Any
individual, entity, organization or persons responsible for organizing,
operating or presenting a place of amusement, permanent or temporary, that
fails to obtain a license is in violation of this section.



   (D)   Tax imposed. A municipal amusement tax is imposed upon the
cost of admission received from spectators or patrons of any amusements
within the village, of an amount equal to 3% of the admission fees or other
charges paid for the privilege to enter or otherwise gain access to the
amusement.



   (E)   Collection, payment and accounting of municipal amusement tax.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of every owner, manager or operator
of an amusement, or of a place where an amusement is being held, to secure
said tax applied to the cost of admission from the spectator or patron and
remit said tax to the village not later than 30 days after the receipt of
amusement revenues and taxes. There shall not be a tax applied to costs or
fees paid by actual participants in any athletic contest, sport, game or
similar exhibition such as boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing, swimming,
racing or riding on animals or vehicles; nor shall there be a tax applied to
the costs or fees paid by actual participants in any games, bowling,
billiards, bingo or pool. A verified statement of such amusement fees and
taxation and amusement taxes in the form prescribed from time to time by the
village shall accompany the remittance. Acceptance by the village of any
amount tendered in payment of the tax shall be without prejudice to any
claim, demand or right to account for any deficiency of taxes paid and/or
owed by the owner, manager or operator.



      (2)   Cancelled admission tickets and complete accurate
records, books and accounts in detail of all such receipts shall be kept at
the place of amusement or at such other place within the village limits as
may be designated in writing by the person liable for the collection of the
municipal amusement tax. The village shall have access to the place of
amusement and to the cancelled admission tickets, records, books and accounts
at all reasonable times for an audit. Every owner, manager or operator
referred to herein, which is required to collect the tax imposed by this
section, shall be considered a tax collector for the village. All municipal
amusement taxes collected shall be held by such tax collector as trustee for
and on behalf of the village. Failure of the Tax Collector to collect the tax
herein imposed shall not excuse or release the patron and/or the owner,
manager or operator from obligation to pay the municipal amusement tax.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in
order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, no person
shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, the tax imposed by this
section based on an error in the calculation of the tax unless the person
files a claim for refund or credit within six months after the date on which
the tax was paid or remitted to the village.



   (F)   Reporting; transmittal; delinquency; penalty.



      (1)   Monthly reporting. The owner or owners of each amusement
within the village shall file monthly tax returns showing the total sales and
the tax receipts received with respect to each amusement during each month.
The returns shall be due on or before the last day of the month for the
preceding calendar month.



      (2)   Transmittal of tax. The tax shall be due on the day the
monthly return is due as provided herein. At the time of filing such return,
the owner shall pay to the Treasurer all taxes, interest and penalties, if
any, due for the period to which the return applies.



      (3)   Failure to pay tax. If for any reason any tax is not
paid when due, a penalty and interest, as set by division (E) above, on the
amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever any
person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the Village Attorney
upon the request of the Village Board shall bring or cause to be brought an
action to enforce the payment of the tax on behalf of the village in any
court of competent jurisdiction.



      (4)   Schedule of certain rates. The following rates are
hereby set for purposes of this section; provided that, the Treasurer may
from time to time increase or decrease any rate hereunder in order to equal
those rates that may be set forth from time to time by levy and collection of
taxes statute for municipalities (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-3 et seq.):



         (a)   Penalty: 7.5% added to the amount of tax unpaid
and uncollected; and



         (b)   Interest: 1.25% added per month to the amount of
tax unpaid and uncollected.



   (G)   Violation; penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this section shall be fined not less than $200 and not more than $750 for
each offense. Each day such violation occurs shall be regarded as a separate
offense. Any enforcement action by the village related to this section shall
not relieve the violator from paying any tax due under the terms of this
section.



   (H)   Enforcement. Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax
imposed by this section, the Village Attorney shall, upon request of the
Village Board, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment
of said tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (I)   Suspension of licenses. If the village, after a hearing held
by the President or for him or her by his or her designee, shall find that
any owner has willfully avoided the payment of any tax imposed by this
section, he or she may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by such
tax evader. The owner shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing
to be held not less than ten days after being mailed notice of the time when
and the place where the hearing is to be held, addressed to him or her at
last known place of business. Any suspension or revocation of any license(s)
shall not release or discharge the owner from his or her civil liability for
the payment of the tax, nor from prosecution for such offense.



(Ord. 09-O-05, passed 4-9-2009)



§ 11.02  BILLIARDS AND POOL HALLS.



   (A)   License required. No person, firm or corporation shall
operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool, bagatelle or pigeon hole table
open to the public without first having obtained a license therefor as herein
provided. Applications for such a license shall be made in writing to the
Village Clerk and shall state thereon the intended location of the place of
business and the number of tables to be used therein.



   (B)   Minors. Minors under the age of 18 years shall under no
circumstances frequent, loiter, go or remain in any hall licensed hereunder
at any time, unless it be upon some lawful errand and sent by the direction
and with the consent and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other person
having the lawful custody of said minor; and it shall be unlawful to permit
such minor to frequent, loiter or remain within the hall in violation of this
chapter.



   (C)   Fee. The annual license fee for any such license shall be $10
for each table used.



   (D)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than
$500, for each offense.



CHAPTER 12:  NUISANCES



Section



   12.01   Public nuisances prohibited



   12.02   Public nuisances defined



   12.03   Abatement of public nuisances



   12.04   Cost of abatement



   12.05   Abandoned motor vehicles



   12.06   Parking mobile homes, trailers, boats



   12.07   Noxious plants and weeds



   12.08   Burning of materials



   12.09   Roller skating and skateboarding



   12.10   Inoperable motor vehicles



   12.11   Liens for property maintenance activities for vacant
buildings



   12.12   Unsafe or dangerous buildings



§ 12.01  PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to
exist any public nuisance within the village or within the police
jurisdiction of the village.



§ 12.02  PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.



   (A)   Generally. A PUBLIC NUISANCE is a thing, act, occupation,
condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as
to:



      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort,
health, repose or safety of the public;



      (2)   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the
use of property;



      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; and/or



      (4)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or
tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway,
navigable body of water or other public way.



   (B)   Public nuisances affecting health. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to
be public health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other
health nuisances coming within the definition of division (A) above:



      (1)   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food
or drink sold or offered for sale to the public;



      (2)   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or
otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;



      (3)   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter,
trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, abandoned vehicles
or machinery, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes,
disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed; or which may
constitute a fire hazard;



      (4)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other
insects can multiply;



      (5)   Garbage cans which are not fly-tight;



      (6)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids,
fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the village limits in such
quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or
to threaten or cause substantial injury to property;



      (7)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream,
lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or
other substances;



      (8)   Any use of property, substances or things within the
village emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious
or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the
physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or
inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the
village;



      (9)   All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from
public use;



      (10)   Any barn, stable or shed used for keeping animals;



      (11)   Any obstruction in or across any water course, drainage
ditch or ravine;



      (12)   Any open burning contrary to the regulations of the
State Pollution Control Board;



      (13)   The deposit of garbage, rubbish, or any offensive
substance on any street, sidewalk or public place, or on any private
property, except as may be permitted by ordinance; and



      (14)   Any noxious weeds on private property as defined by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes.



   (C)   Public nuisances offending morals and decency. The following
acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically
declared to be pubic nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending
public morals and decency coming within the definition of division (A) above:



      (1)   All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame,
gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the
purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling;



      (2)   All gambling devices and slot machines;



      (3)   All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or
rectified without a permit or license as provided for by this code; and



      (4)   Any place or premises within the village where
ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or
welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.



   (D)   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following
acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be
public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not
be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety
coming within the provisions of division (A) above:



      (1)   All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation
of the provisions of the ordinances of the village relating to materials and
manner of construction of buildings and structures;



      (2)   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices
which purport to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices
placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway
crossing;



      (3)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions
which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways
from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk;



      (4)   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk
less than eight feet above the surface thereof or less than ten feet above
the surface of a public street;



      (5)   All use or display of fireworks, except as provided by
the laws of the state and ordinances of the village;



      (6)   All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out
of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
use;



      (7)   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which
are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground;



      (8)   All loud and discordant noises or vibrations of any kind;



      (9)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or
crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by
the ordinances of the village or which, although made in accordance with such
ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after
the purpose thereof has been accomplished;



      (10)   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or
unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk;



      (11)   All abandoned refrigerators or ice boxes;



      (12)   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting
on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or
sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic
and free use of the streets or sidewalks;



      (13)   Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building,
wall, fence, sidewalk, street or other private or public property without
permission of the owner thereof;



      (14)   Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe
condition, or which overhangs any roadway, or which overhangs any sidewalk
less than eight feet above the sidewalk surface;



      (15)   Any condition or practice constituting a fire hazard;



      (16)   Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes;



      (17)   All unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped,
junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of
any other vehicles, machinery, implements and/or equipment and personal
property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for
which it was manufactured, within the corporate limits of the village;



      (18)   All unsheltered storage of unlicensed automobiles for a
period of ten days or more within the corporate limits of the village; and



      (19)   All signs advertising garage sales, yard sales, house
sales or other similar sales other than those located on the property on
which the sale is being conducted.



   (E)   Landlord liability for public nuisances.



      (1)   Definitions.



         CRIMINAL ENTERPRISE. Any group of six or more people, where
one of the six occupies a position of organizer, a supervisory position, or
any other position of management with respect to the other five, and which
generates substantial income or resources, and is engaged in a continuing
series of violations of subchapters I and II of Chapter 13 of Title 21 of the
United States Code, or such groups that may be declared as such by the FBI,
DOJ, or the Illinois State Police (ISP) from time to time.



         LANDLORD. For the purposes of this division, any person,
corporation, owner, manager or other such entity which takes part in an
agreement to allow the leasing, use, rental or other occupation of real
property within the village, be it through an oral agreement or written lease
or contract, and which has the primary responsibility for enforcement of such
agreement and/or is entitled to receipt of proceeds paid under such agreement.



         LEASE. Any agreement, be it verbal or written, establishing
terms for the use, renting, loan and/or occupation of real property within
the village. Monetary consideration for such use or occupancy is not required
to establish a lease for the purposes of this division.



      (2)   That any person, firm, corporation or other entity that
knowingly leases, rents, loans, or otherwise allows any organization which is
a known criminal enterprise, as identified on the publically available
database maintained by both the FBI and the DOJ, such person, firm, shall be
guilty of committing and maintaining a public nuisance.



      (3)   Upon notice of such nuisance and demand to abate such
nuisance delivered by an officer or authorized agent of the village to such
landlord by U.S. Mail or personal service, such landlord shall immediately
act to terminate such lease and prevent further possession of such space by a
person, group or other entity who qualifies under the terms herein as a
criminal enterprise. In additional to all other rights of civil action to
compel compliance with this division, the village may take any of the
following actions:



         (a)   After the passage of ten days from the date of
service of written notice, the village may assess a daily fine not to exceed
$750 per day for every day the nuisance continues; and



         (b)   After the passage of 30 days from the date of
service of written notice, the village may revoke any and all village issued
permits associated with the leased premises; and



         (c)   After the passage of 30 days from the date of
service of written notice, the village shall have the right to seek a
mandatory injunction from a court of competent jurisdiction ordering the
abatement of such nuisance; and



         (d)   After the passage of 60 days, the village shall
have the right to seek eminent domain and/or demolition of a public safety
hazard for any such property being leased or rented in violation of this
division;



         (e)   Any action instituted by the village to abate any
of the nuisances contemplated in this division shall be reported to the FBI,
DOJ, the ISP as well as the local State's Attorney's Office.



   The Landlord and the record property owner shall be jointly and
severally liable for all costs associated with enforcement of this division
(E). Any costs not recovered by the village shall be filed as a lien against
the property in question and may be foreclosed upon consistent with Illinois
Statute. In addition to any civil penalties delineated in this chapter for
maintaining a public nuisance, the entry into or continued participation in
any such lease in violation of this division shall be subject to civil or
criminal prosecution at the federal, state and/or local level.



(Ord. 15-O-27, passed 6-25-2015)



§ 12.03  ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   (A)   Inspection of premises. Whenever complaint is made to the
Village President that a public nuisance exists, or has existed, within the
village, he or she shall promptly notify the Village Marshal, or some other
village official whom the President shall designate, who shall forthwith
inspect or cause to be inspected the premises and shall make a written report
of his or her findings to the President. Whenever practicable, the inspecting
officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises and shall file the
same in the office of the Village Clerk.



   (B)   Summary abatement.



      (1)   Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer shall
determine that a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is
great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, the Village President may direct the Village Marshal, or a Deputy
Sheriff, to serve a notice on the owner, or, if the owner cannot be found, on
the occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance and
to post a copy of the notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the
owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to
abate or remove such nuisance within 24 hours.



      (2)   Abatement by village. If the nuisance is not abated
within the time provided or if the owner, occupant or person causing the
nuisance cannot be found, the Village Marshal, the Superintendent of Public
Works, or some other village official whom the President shall designate, may
cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.



   (C)   Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer shall
determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the
nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger
to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he or she shall file
a written report of his or her findings with the President, who shall cause
an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the name of the village.



   (D)   Penalty. If the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance
within 24 hours of receiving notice pursuant to division (B) above, he or
she, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than
$500, for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which such nuisance is permitted to exist.



   (E)   Abatement of certain nuisances and recovery of costs. After
reasonable notice to the property owner and the failure of the property owner
to abate the public nuisance as described in said written notice, the village
is authorized to perform or provide for property maintenance activities to
abate certain public nuisances defined in this chapter or in the State
Municipal Code in accordance with the village’s Municipal Code and/or the
following provisions of the State Municipal Code, as amended:



      (1)   Pest control activities, as may be authorized by ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-8;



      (2)   Removal of infected trees, as may be authorized by ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-12; and



      (3)   Removal of garbage, debris and graffiti and related
activities as authorized by of this chapter 12 and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-20-13.



   (F)   Charges for nuisance abatement. The village shall have the
authority to collect from the property owner the costs incurred in performing
the property maintenance activities to abate the nuisance as described in
division (E) above. The village shall send a bill for the cost to the
property owner, his agent, legal representative or occupant in legal
possession or control of the premises and request immediate payment.



   (G)   Traditional lien procedure. If a bill sent pursuant to
division (F) above is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of the
bill, the village shall have the authority to file and record a lien against
the property, pursuant to § 11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-15. If, for anyone property, the village engaged in
any nuisance abatement activity described in division (E) above on more than
one occasion during the course of one year, then the village may combine any
or all of the costs of those activities into a single notice of lien. The
lien must be filed in accordance with the lien procedure established by the
specific code provision of which the property is alleged to be in violation
or, if no such procedure exists, then the following procedure shall apply.



      (1)   Notice of lien.



         (a)   The village or the person performing the service
by authority of the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice
of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the county in which the
property is located.



         (b)   The notice of lien shall be filed within one year
after the cost and expense is incurred.



The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth:



            1.   A description of the real estate that
sufficiently describes the parcel;



            2.   The amount of the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the activities; and



            3.   The date or dates when such cost and expense
was incurred by the village or someone working on behalf of the village.



         (c)   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent
by certified mail to the property owner, his or her agent, or legal
representative or occupant in legal possession or control of the premises
and, if different, to the person who received the tax bill for the proceeding
year.



      (2)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the
notice of lien has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released
by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the
release shall be recorded of record in the same manner as recording the
notice of lien.



      (3)   Foreclosure of lien. Subsequent to the filing of the
above-described lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for
foreclosure of such lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit
affecting the premises or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the
nature of an intervening petition or cross-complaint the village may proceed
in its corporate name to foreclose such lien. An action to foreclose a lien
under this section must be commenced within two years after the date of
filing notice of lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this
section shall be sold for non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of such
sale shall be applied to pay the monies owing the village.



(Ord. 10-O-26, passed 10-14-2010)



§ 12.04  COST OF ABATEMENT.



   In addition to the penalty imposed by this code for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance and, if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as other special taxes.



§ 12.05  ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ABANDONED VEHICLE. For purposes of this section an abandoned
vehicle shall be as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-101.05, as amended
from time to time.



      ANTIQUE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or other vehicle 25 years of
age or older.



      HIGHWAY. Any street, alley or public way within the village.



   (B)   Abandonment prohibited. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or
other vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in the village is unlawful
and subject to penalties as set forth herein. The abandonment of a motor
vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on public or private property,
other than a highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in the village
is unlawful. A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so
abandoned may be authorized for removal by or upon the order of the Chief of
Police after a waiting period of seven days or more has expired or may be
removed immediately if determined to be a hazardous dilapidated vehicle under
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-3.1.



   (C)   Notice to police. When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed
motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody
of a person in the state, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall
immediately notify the Police Department when the vehicle is within the
corporate limits of the village. Upon receipt of such notification, the
Village Marshal shall authorize a towing service to remove and take
possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its
contents, maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the
owner, or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until
it is disposed of as provided in this section.



   (D)   Removal of vehicles.



      (1)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a
highway in the village ten hours or more, its removal by a towing service may
be authorized by order of the Village Marshal.



      (2)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or
partially dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic
hazard because of its position in relation to the highway or its physical
appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the
highway by a towing service may be authorized by order of the Village Marshal.



      (3)   When a vehicle removed from either public or private
property is authorized by order of the Village Marshal, the owner of the
vehicle will be responsible for all towing costs.



   (E)   Records of vehicles removed. When a motor vehicle or other
vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the Police Department shall keep and
maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of
manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name, manufacturer’s series name, body
style, vehicle identification number and license plate year and number
displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of
tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name
of the officer authorizing the tow.



   (F)   Search for owner.



      (1)   When the Police Department does not know the identity of
the registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause the
motor vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by a directed
communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.



      (2)   The Police Department shall cause the stolen vehicle
files of the State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the
State Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the State
Police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in
the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the
State Police. The information determined from these record searches will be
used by the Police Department in sending a notification by certified mail to
the owner or legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is held,
requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale information.



   (G)   Notice to state police. When the registered owner or other
person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle
cannot be identified from the registration files of the state or from the
registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the Police Department
shall notify the State Police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle1s
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The
information obtained by the State Police will be immediately forwarded to the
law enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of
owner.



   (H)   Reclaiming vehicles. Any time before a motor vehicle or other
vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein, the owner
or other person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by
presenting to the Police Department proof of ownership or proof of the right
to possession of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or
other person under this section until all towing and storage charges have
been paid.



   (I)   Sale of vehicle.



      (1)   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor
vehicle or other vehicle, seven years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by
the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a
period of 30 days after notice has been given as provided herein, the Police
Department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at
public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale
shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten days prior to the
sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten days
prior to the sale, the Police Department shall cause a notice of the time and
place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or
other person known by the Police Department or towing service to be legally
entitled to the possession of the vehicle.



      (2)   Such notice shall contain a complete description of the
vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled
person to reclaim the vehicle.



      (3)   In those instances where the certified notification
specified herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police
Department due to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address
obtained from the registration records of the state, the sending of a second
certified notice will not be required.



   (J)   Older vehicles.



      (1)   When the identity of the registered owner or other
person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed
vehicle of seven years of age, or newer cannot be determined by any means
provided for in this section, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or
disposed of in the manner authorized by this section without notice to the
registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the
vehicle.



      (2)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of
age is impounded as specified by this section, it will be kept in custody for
a minimum of ten days from the purpose of determining ownership, the
contacting of the registered owner by the United States mail, public service
or in person for a determination of disposition, and an examination of the
State Police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information.



      (3)   At the expiration of the ten day period, without the
benefit of disposition information being received from the registered owner,
the Village Marshal will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.



      (4)   A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an
antique vehicle is excluded from this section.



   (K)   Records. When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody
of the Police Department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other
legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or
otherwise disposed of as provided in this section, a record of the
transaction shall be maintained by the Police Department for a period of one
year from the date of the sale or disposal.



   (L)   Disposition of sale proceeds. When a vehicle located within
the corporate limits of the village is authorized to be towed away by the
Village Marshal and disposed of as set forth in this section, the proceeds of
the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing, storage and
processing charges shall be deposited in the municipal treasury.



   (M)   Liability of officers. Any police officer, towing service
owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for
damages in any action brought by the registered owner, former registered
owner, or his or her legal representative, or any other person legally
entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when the
vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this section.



   (N)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200
and not more than $750 and be responsible for the village’s cost of
prosecution, including reasonable attorneys fees, and payment of all towing,
storage and processing charges and collection costs. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 10-O-04, passed 1-28-2010)



§ 12.06  PARKING MOBILE HOMES, TRAILERS, BOATS.



   (A)   No person shall park or store on any property owned or
occupied by him or her any mobile home, camper vehicle, trailer, truck or
boat which is not owned by him or her or a member of his or her family. Any
such item shall be parked or stored only in a rear yard.



   (B)   Persons owning mobile homes, parked on their property within
the village shall register the mobile home with the Village Marshal. No
mobile home shall be used for sleeping purposes while parked or stored in the
village, except as provided in this section.



   (C)   Guests of any owner or occupant of any dwelling in the village
may park a mobile home in the rear yard of such dwelling for not more than
five days; provided, the mobile home is used for sleeping purposes only
during such period.



§ 12.07  NOXIOUS PLANTS AND WEEDS.



   (A)   Noxious plants and weeds declared nuisance. Any weeds such as
or known as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburr or other weeds of
like kind, and plants or bushes of the species of tall, common or European
Barberry, otherwise known as Barberis Vulgaris, or its horticultural
varieties, found growing in any place or location within the corporate limits
of the village, are declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cause or permit any such weeds, plants or bushes to grow or remain
in any place or location within the corporate limits of the village to a
height in excess of eight inches. It is also hereby declared to be a nuisance
and shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit grass to grow or
remain in any place or location within the corporate limits of the village to
a height in excess of eight inches.



   (B)   Notice and removal of noxious plants and weeds. It shall be
the duty of every owner or occupant of every lot or tract of land within the
corporate limits of the village to cut, destroy or remove, or cause to be
cut, destroyed or removed, every such weed, plant or bush or cut any grass as
hereinabove described upon every such lot or tract of land in such manner and
on or before such time as such weeds, bushes, plants or grass reach or exceed
the height of eight inches. Upon the failure of any such owner or occupant so
to do, it shall be the duty of the Village Administrator or a designee to
serve or cause to be served a notice, via first class mail or by posting the
property with a door tag, upon any such owner or occupant of any premises
upon which any such weeds, plants, bushes or grass are caused or permitted to
grow in violation of the provisions of this section, demanding the abatement
of such growth as a nuisance, within a period of seven days from the date of
such service. Failure of any owner or occupant to comply with the provisions
and demands of such notice shall constitute a violation of the provisions of
this section. All days for notice purposes shall be calendar days.



   (C)   Abatement. If upon the expiration of the seven-day period
provided in the notice, any owner or occupant of any premises in the village
upon which any such weeds, plants, bushes or grass are caused or permitted to
grow in violation of the provisions of this section, it shall be the duty of
the Village Administrator or a designee to proceed to the nuisance by
cutting, destroying or otherwise removing the weeds, plants, bushes or grass
and to keep an account of the expense thereof, and such expense shall be
charged to the owner, or the owner and occupant jointly, of the premises, and
it shall be the duty of the owner or the owner and occupant jointly to pay
such expense.



   (D)   Recovery cost. The village may record a lien against the
property, may exercise any and all civil remedies to recover said costs for
removal, including, but not limited to, pursuing collection with civil
actions, collection agencies, liens, or other civil remedies.



(Ord. 13-O-05, passed 6-6-2013)



§ 12.08  BURNING OF MATERIALS.



   (A)   General provisions; intent and purpose. Whereas, open burning
creates a risk of losses due to fire and impairs air quality, regulation of
open burning is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BRUSH. Tree trunks, limbs, branches and twigs.



      CEREMONIAL FIRE (BONFIRE). An outdoor fire larger than three feet
by three feet by three feet which is used for entertainment purposes as part
of a specifically scheduled public or private event and excludes leaves,
grass or shrubbery clippings or cuttings.



      GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



      HABITABLE STRUCTURE. Any structure with electric and heat
intended to be used for living, sleeping, eating or assembly purposes
including, but not limited to, residences, multi-family dwellings, churches,
schools, food facilities and industrial buildings.



      LANDSCAPE WASTE. All accumulation of grass or shrubbery cuttings,
leaves, flowers and weeds.



      LITTER. Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste.
LITTER may include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper
containers or other packaging construction material, motor vehicle parts,
furniture, oil, carcass of dead animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of
any kind, any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard,
potentially infectious medical waste, or anything else of an unsightly or
unsanitary nature, which has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed
of improperly.



      MANURE. The fecal and urinary defecation of livestock and
poultry. MANURE may often contain some spilled feed, bedding or litter.



      NON-HABITABLE STRUCTURE. Any structure not identified as
habitable as defined and would include, but is not limited to, garages,
sheds, barns and swimming pools.



      OPEN BURNING. The combustion of any matter in such a way that the
products of the combustion are emitted to the open air without originating in
or passing through equipment for which a permit could be issued under the
provisions of the Environmental Protection Act, being ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §
1.



      RECREATIONAL FIRE. A temporary outdoor fire for warmth, cooking
for human consumption or for non-ceremonial purposes where the fire is not
larger than three feet by three feet by three feet and excludes leaves, grass
or shrubbery clippings or cuttings.



      STRUCTURE. The results of a man-made change to the land
constructed on or below the ground, including the construction,
reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building;
installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured
home or installing a recreational vehicle or travel trailer on a site for
more than 180 consecutive days.



   (C)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Divisions (D)(1), (D)(2), (E)(2) and (F)(2) below shall
not apply to prescribed burns associated with ecologic restoration or natural
landscape management, any burning of landscape waste for purposes of habitat
reclamation, or firefighter training.



      (2)   Divisions (D)(1), (D)(2), (E)(2) and (F)(2) below shall
not apply to the burning of brush for purposes of domestic fireplaces or
cooking or external fire-places, or to self-contained outdoor wood-burning
devices or fireplaces.



      (3)   Divisions (D)(1), (D)(2), (E)(2) and (F)(2) below shall
not apply to the open burning of brush for purposes of recreational fires.



      (4)   Divisions (D)(1), (D)(2), (E)(2) and (F)(2) below shall
not apply to the open burning of brush for purposes of ceremonial fires or
bonfires; provided that, notice of any ceremonial fire or bonfire has been
given to the fire protection district or fire department serving the area
where the fire is to take place and a permit has been obtained from the
village. Failure to obtain a permit from the village prior to conducting a
ceremonial fire utilizing brush shall be deemed a violation of this section.
Failure to notify the applicable fire protection district or fire department
and obtain permission prior to conducting a ceremonial fire utilizing brush
shall be deemed a violation of this article.



      (5)   Division (E)(2) below shall not apply where the fire is
located 500 feet or greater from a habitable structure.



   (D)   Prohibition.



      (1)   Open burning of landscape waste shall not take place
within 100 feet of a habitable structure.



      (2)   Open burning of landscape waste shall not take place
less than 50 feet from any structure that is not habitable.



      (3)   The burning of manure, garbage, litter or any materials
other than landscape waste and/or brush is prohibited on any property in the
village.



      (4)   The Village President shall have the authority to
prohibit all open burning of landscape waste in the event of emergencies
which require shifting of staff priorities or conditions that may represent
significant potential for fire safety issues.



   (E)   Restrictions. Any open burning in the village shall be in
accordance with the restrictions enumerated below.



      (1)   The open burning of landscape waste shall only occur on
the property upon which the landscape waste was generated. The burning of any
materials other than landscape waste is prohibited.



      (2)   The following restrictions upon the open burning of
landscape waste on the property upon which it was generated shall prevail.



         (a)   Burning is permitted only on weekends, between
dawn and dusk, during the months of October, November, April and May.



         (b)   Burning is not permitted when the wind is in
excess of ten mph.



         (c)   Burning is not permitted of any material other
than dry landscape waste and/or brush.



         (d)   Burning is not permitted on public or private
roads, alleys, sidewalks or easements.



         (e)   Burning is not permitted when it is a visibility
hazard on roadways, railroad tracks or air fields.



   (F)   Conditions and limitations of open burning.



      (1)   All open burning must be supervised by an individual at
least 18 years of age until the fire is extinguished.



      (2)   A fire extinguisher or garden hose or water source shall
be available at the burning site.



      (3)   It is the responsibility of the individual conducting
the burning and the owner of the property to satisfactorily determine that
all conditions upon burning as noted above are complied with during any
burning.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow
any open or uncontrolled burning of landscape waste and/or other materials in
violation of the above regulations and restrictions.



      (5)   Any ceremonial fire (bonfire) or recreational fire must
be supervised by an individual at least 18 years of age or older.



      (6)   The Village President shall have the authority to waive
all or part of the requirements of this section in the event of emergencies
resulting from natural phenomenon or civil strife.



   (G)   Enforcement; violations and penalties.



      (1)   The Village Police Department shall be primarily
responsible for the enforcement of this section.



      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of this section
shall be punished by a fine of $100 for a first time offense and a fine of up
to $1,000 for offenses subsequent to the first offense. The burning of any
toxic material and any prior convictions under this section shall be
considered factors in aggravation for purposes of the assessment of any fines.



(Ord. 08-O-07, passed 5-8-2008)



§ 12.09  ROLLER SKATING AND SKATEBOARDING.



   (A)   All persons roller skating, roller blading, in-line skating or
skateboarding upon the public streets of the village not prohibited by this
section shall do so in a safe and prudent manner, shall do so in a manner so
as not to interfere with normal flow of vehicle or pedestrian traffic, and
not to endanger any person or animal.



   (B)   Roller skating, roller blading, in-line skating or
skateboarding shall be prohibited on any public or private property where
signs are posted prohibiting such activity.



   (C)   Law enforcement officers engaged in the performance of their
duties shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to those persons participating in
parades or other special events for which a permit has been issued by the
village.



   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this section shall suffer the penalty imposed under § 1.06 of the municipal
code.



(Ord. 02-O-06, passed 5-9-2002)



§ 12.10  INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AUTHORIZED PLACE FOR STORAGE. Any garage or building that a motor
vehicle is kept in when not in use, a place of business engaged in the
wrecking or junking of motor vehicles or a place of business of a state
licensed automobile dealer.



      INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a
period of at least seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been
removed or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered,
damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own motor power.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any automobile, bus, truck, motorcycle, motorbike,
motor scooter, go-cart or any home-made or custom-made vehicle capable of
being driven under its own motor power upon streets, roads or highways.



   (B)   Exceptions. This section will not apply to the following motor
vehicles:



      (1)   A motor vehicle which is kept within a building when not
in use;



      (2)   An operable antique vehicle over 25 years of age;



      (3)   A motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business
engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles, or on the premises of a
place of business engaged in the sale of new or used automobiles; or



      (4)   A motor vehicle that has been rendered temporarily
incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform
ordinary service or repair operations for a period of not more than 14 days
from the date said vehicle become inoperable.



   (C)   Duty to dispose of inoperable motor vehicle.



      (1)   Any person not exempted under division (B) above shall
dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle owned by him or her or under his or
her control or located upon property owned or occupied by him or her upon
written notice received from the Village Clerk commanding the disposition of
the inoperable motor vehicle.



      (2)   All inoperable vehicles on public or private property
are hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful to maintain or
permit the existence of inoperable motor vehicles whether on public or
private property within the municipal limits of the village.



      (3)   This section shall not apply to authorized places of
storage.



   (D)   Notice.



      (1)   Whenever the Village Administrator, the Chief of Police
or any police officer shall, in accordance with this section, determine that
any motor vehicle is an inoperable motor vehicle, they shall, if the
inoperable motor vehicle displays current license or registration plates or
decals from which the last known owner may be determined in a reasonable
expeditious manner, notice as set forth below shall be sent to the last
registered owner of such inoperable motor vehicle and to the owner or
occupant of the property upon which such inoperable motor vehicle is located.



      (2)   (a)   All notices provided by this section shall be
sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, postage
prepaid.



         (b)   Notice to one owner of said vehicle or one owner
or occupant of said property shall be considered notice to all owners or
occupants.



         (c)   Refusal to accept delivery of said notice shall be
deemed acceptance for purposes of this section.



         (d)   The date of notice for purposes of this section,
shall be the day after the date said notice was deposited with the United
States postal service.



         (e)   Instead of notice by mail, notice provided herein
may be personally served by a police officer of the village upon said person
or an occupant of the same house hold above the age of 14 years old, in which
case the date of notice shall be the date of said sendee.



      (3)   Said notice shall inform the owner and operator of the
motor vehicle or the owner or occupant of the said real estate that they
shall remove said motor vehicle from the village or to an authorized place of
storage within ten days after receipt thereof, and the terms of said notice
shall be substantially as follows:



 


NOTICE TO REMOVE INOPERABLE VEHICLE


 

To: (owner of motor vehicle or of real estate motor vehicle is located upon).

 

Date:                                                
         

 

You are hereby notified that an inoperable vehicle described as        
                                    (make, year, color,
description of motor vehicle) with registration plates number          
                    is registered in the name(s) of          
                      with the State of                  
            . This vehicle is located on the following premises    
                                                   
      (legal description or street address) within the limits of the
Village of Lakemoor outside of an enclosed building. Said motor vehicle is
deemed to be an inoperable motor vehicle under the terms of the Village of
Lakemoor Municipal Code Ch. 12, § 12.10. You are hereby notified that such
inoperable motor vehicle must be removed, disposed of, repaired or placed in
an enclosed building within ten days from the date of this notice as
indicated above. You may request a hearing on the matter of whether the above
described vehicle is an inoperable motor vehicle in violation of the
ordinance by submitting a written request for such a hearing to the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Lakemoor, addresses as set forth below, within ten
days of the date of this notice. In the event that you submit such a request
for a hearing, a hearing date will be set and you will be advised of the
time, date and place of such hearing at least three days in advance of the
date of such hearing. Pursuant to the ordinance, you may request an extension
period at any such hearing. The Board of Trustees shall, upon good cause
being shown, grant an extension of not more than 30 days if the owner of the
vehicle or the owner or occupant of the property upon which such inoperable
motor vehicle is located submits to the Board of Trustees an affidavit that
the inoperable motor vehicle is being held for sale or expeditious repair as
defined by § 12.10(E)(2). To request a hearing, deliver or mail by
registered mail, return receipt requested, a request for such a hearing in
writing to the Village of Lakemoor, 234 W. Rand Road, Lakemoor, Illinois
60051. If you fail to request a hearing within ten days of the date of this
notice, and you do not remove, dispose of, place the inoperable motor vehicle
in an enclosed building, or provide documentation to the Village of Lakemoor
of repairs within the specified period, or within any extension granted by
the Board of Trustees after a hearing, such inoperable motor vehicle is
subject to being towed and impounded and you may be charged with a violation
of the ordinance and subject to a fine of not less than $200 and not more
than $1,000 for such violation. In addition, the costs of towing and storage
will be assessed against you.



 



      (4)   For the purposes of this section, a person who last paid
real estate taxes on the real estate on which said motor vehicle is located
shall be deemed to be the owner of the real estate and the person to whom the
vehicle was last licensed shall be deemed to be an owner of said vehicle.
Nothing in this section shall require the village to serve notice on both the
owner of the motor vehicle and the property owner in the event the village is
unable to determine who owns said motor vehicle by examination of the license
plates.



   (E)   Hearing.



      (1)   The person or persons, or the designated agent thereof,
to whom the notice as specified by this section is directed, shall have the
right to a hearing before the Board of Trustees of the village on the matter
of whether the motor vehicle cited in such notice is an inoperable motor
vehicle in violation of this section. To obtain such a hearing, any such
person must first submit a written request for such a hearing, by hand
delivery or by registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the
Village of Lakemoor, 234 W. Rand Road, Lakemoor, IL 60051, within ten days of
the date of any such notice. In the event that a hearing is so requested, the
Village Clerk shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, set a time, date and
place for the hearing before the Board of Trustees and shall cause the person
or persons so requesting the hearing to be provided with written notice of
the time, date and place of the hearing at least three days in advance of the
date thereof. All enforcement of this section shall be stayed pending said
hearing and determination by the Board of Trustees.



      (2)   The owner of the vehicle or the owner or occupant of the
property where the vehicle is located may apply for an extension of time by
making a written request for a hearing as provided in division (E)(1) above.



Upon receipt of any such application for an extension of time, the Board of
Trustees shall, upon good cause being shown, grant an extension of not more
that 30 days, if such person submits to the Board of Trustees and affidavit
that the inoperable motor vehicle is being held for sale or expeditious
repair. As used in this section, EXPEDITIOUS REPAIR shall mean:



         (a)   The necessary parts for repair have been ordered
but are not available for installation in the inoperable motor vehicle for
reasons not within the control of the owner of said inoperable motor vehicle;



         (b)   The inoperable motor vehicle is scheduled to be
repaired by a person whose regular course of business includes the repair of
vehicles and the scheduled repair date is within 30 days; or



         (c)   The inoperable motor vehicle is in such condition
of being inoperable as a result of a vehicular accident, and the owner of
said vehicle or any third party to whom or from whom a claim for damages
sustained in such accident is anticipated is investigating or preparing a
claim for such damages, but in no event shall any such extension period
exceed 30 days.



   (F)   Towing.



      (1)   In the event the owner receiving notice provided for in
this section does not comply with the terms of this section, and except as
provided in the following division (G) below, the Police Department of the
village shall cause the towing or removal of the inoperable vehicle from
private property ten days or thereafter following said notice to the owner of
the vehicle and the owner or occupant of the premises where the vehicle is
located.



      (2)   In the event a request for hearing before the Board of
Trustees was properly made and the Board of Trustees determined by majority
vote that the said vehicle is an inoperable motor vehicle for the purposes of
this section, then the Board of Trustees shall set a reasonable date by which
said vehicle shall be disposed of or enclosed within a building. Said date
shall be no less than ten days after the date of hearing. In the event said
vehicle is not disposed of or enclosed within a building by the said date set
by the Board of Trustees, then the Police Department of the village shall
cause the towing or removal of the inoperable motor vehicle without further,
prior notice thereof. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
vehicle to deliver a written notice to the Village Clerk and to provide
documentation and/or demonstration of operability if said vehicle has been
put into operable condition prior to towing or removal of said vehicle. In
the event no such written notice is received by the Village Clerk prior to
towing or removal, it shall be presumed that said vehicle remains inoperable
and may be towed or removed in accordance herewith.



      (3)   Whenever an inoperable motor vehicle is towed or removed
by a towing service pursuant to the provisions of this section, the owner of
the inoperable motor vehicle and the owner or occupant of the property upon
which such inoperable motor vehicle is located shall be jointly and severally
responsible for all towing and storage charges unless otherwise determined by
the Board of Trustees pursuant to hearing as provided in this section.



      (4)   Within 48 hours of the removal of such vehicle, the
Village Clerk shall send notice to the registered owner of the vehicle and
lien holder, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private
property from which the vehicle was removed that said vehicle(s) has been
impounded and stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the
location of where the vehicle(s) is towed and the costs incurred by the
village for removal.



      (5)   Any inoperable motor vehicle towed or removed pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall be stored and claimed or disposed of
in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-201), as amended, entitled Abandoned, Lost, Stolen
or Unclaimed Vehicles.



   (G)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200
and not more than $750 and be responsible for the village’s cost of
prosecution, including reasonable attorneys fees, and payment of all towing,
storage and processing charges and collection costs. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 10-O-04, passed 1-28-2010)



§ 12.11  LIENS FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES FOR VACANT BUILDINGS.



   (A)   “Vacant building” defined. A VACANT BUILDING is a building
or portion of a building as defined in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-15.1, as
an “abandoned residential property”, being a residential dwelling unit
that has been unoccupied by any lawful occupant or occupants for at least 90
days, and for which after such 90-day period the village has made good faith
efforts to contact the legal owner or owners of the property or, if known,
the agent of the owner, and no contact has been made.



   (B)   Nuisance declared. Vacant buildings which are indefinitely
vacant and in a state of disrepair or boarded are public nuisances in that
they contribute to the decrease in value of surrounding properties,
precipitate disinvestment by neighboring owners, provide a location for
criminal activity, undermine the aesthetic character of the neighborhood and
village, and have other undesirable effects.



   (C)   Nuisance abatement. The village is authorized to perform or
provide for property maintenance activities to abate the nuisance caused by a
vacant building, including the following:



      (1)   Cutting or removal of neglected weeds, grass, trees, and
bushes as authorized by § 12.07 of this code and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-20-7;



      (2)   Pest control activities, as may be authorized by this
code and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-8;



      (3)   Removal of infected trees as may be authorized by this
code and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-12;



      (4)   Removal of garbage, debris and graffiti and related
activities, as authorized by this chapter and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-20-13; and



      (5)   Removal, securing and enclosing of abandoned residential
properties, as may be authorized by this code and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-31-1.01.



   (D)   Charges for nuisance abatement. The village shall have the
authority to collect from the property owner the costs incurred in performing
the property maintenance activities to abate the nuisances described in this
section. The village shall send a bill for the cost to the property owner,
his or her agent, legal representative or occupant in legal possession or
control of the premises.



   (E)   Traditional lien procedure. If a bill sent pursuant to
division (D) above is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of the
bill, the village shall have the authority to file and record a lien against
the property, pursuant to § 11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-15). If, for any one property, the village engaged in
any nuisance abatement activity described in division (C) above on more than
one occasion during the course of one year, then the village may combine any
or all of the costs of those activities into a single notice of lien. The
lien must be filed in accordance with the lien procedure established by the
specific code provision of which the property is alleged to be in violation
or, if no such procedure exists, then the following procedure shall apply.



      (1)   Notice of lien.



         (a)   The village or the person performing the service
by authority of the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice
of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the county in which the
property is located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one year after
the cost and expense is incurred.



         (b)   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn
statement setting forth:



            1.   A description of the real estate that
sufficiently describes the parcel;



            2.   The amount of the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the activities; and



            3.   The date or dates when such cost and expense
was incurred by the village or someone working on behalf of the village.



         (c)   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent
by certified mail to the property owner, his or her agent, or legal
representative or occupant in legal possession or control of the premises
and, if different, to the person who received the tax bill for the proceeding
year.



      (2)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the
notice of lien has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released
by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the
release shall be recorded of record in the same manner as recording the
notice of lien.



      (3)   Foreclosure of lien. Subsequent to the filing of the
above-described lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for
foreclosure of such lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit
affecting the premises or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the
nature of an intervening petition or cross-complaint the village may proceed
in its corporate name to foreclose such lien. An action to foreclose a lien
under this section must be commenced within two years after the date of
filing notice of lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this
section shall be sold for non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of such
sale shall be applied to pay the monies owing the village.



   (F)   Priority lien procedure for abandoned residential properties.
The priority lien procedure described in this division (F) shall apply only
to costs incurred for property maintenance activities performed on abandoned
residential properties, as defined in division (A) above, and is an
alternative to the traditional lien authorized by division (E) above. If a
bill sent pursuant to division (D) above is not paid in full within 30 days
of the date of the bill, the village shall have the authority to file and
record a priority lien against the property, pursuant to § 11-20-15.1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-15.1), in the following
manner.



      (1)   Notice of lien.



         (a)   The village or the person performing the service
by authority of the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice
of a priority lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the county in
which the real estate is located. The notice of lien shall be filed within
one year after the cost and expense incurred. If for any one property, the
village engaged in nuisance abatement activity described in division (C)
above on more than one occasion during the course of one year, then the
village may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a single
notice of lien.



         (b)   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn
statement setting forth:



            1.   A description of the abandoned residential
property that sufficiently describes the parcel;



            2.   The amount of the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the activities;



            3.   The date or dates when such cost and expense
was incurred by the village or someone working on behalf of the village; and



            4.   A statement that the lien has been filed
pursuant to one or more of the property maintenance activities described in
division (C) above and authorized by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-7(d), ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-8(d), ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-12(d), ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, § 11-20-13(e) and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-1.01, as
applicable.



         (c)   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent
by certified mail to the property owner, his or her agent or legal
representative or occupant in legal possession or control of the premises
and, if different, to the person who received the tax bill for the preceding
year.



         (d)   The village may not file a lien if the lender has
provided notice to the village that the lender has performed, or will
perform, remedial actions; provided, however, that, the remedial actions must
be performed or initiated in good faith with 30 days of the lender’s notice
to the village.



      (2)   Recordkeeping. To enforce a lien pursuant to this
division (F), the village must maintain contemporaneous records that include,
at a minimum:



         (a)   A dated statement of a finding by the village that
the property has become abandoned residential property;



         (b)   The date when the property was first observed to
be unoccupied by any lawful occupant;



         (c)   A description of the action taken by the village
to contact the legal owner of the property, or if known, any agent of the
owner;



         (d)   A statement that no contacts were made with the
legal owner, or if known, any agent of the owner;



         (e)   A dated certification by a village official of the
necessity and specific nature of the work performed;



         (f)   A copy of the agreement with the person or company
performing the work and the rates and estimated cost of the work, if
applicable;



         (g)   Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the
work;



         (h)   A statement whether the work was competitively
bid, and if so, a copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders.



      (3)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the
notice of lien has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released
by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the
release shall be recorded of record in the same manner as recording the
notice of lien.



      (4)   Enforcement of lien. A lien under this division (F) is
enforceable by the village, or entity or person who performs work on behalf
of the village, at the hearing for confirmation of the foreclosure sale of
the abandoned residential property and is limited to a claim of interest in
the proceeds of the sale. The priority lien is superior to all other liens
and encumbrances, except tax liens.



(Ord. 10-O-26, passed 10-14-2010)



§ 12.12  UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Dangerous buildings generally. It shall be unlawful for any
owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any building or structure or part
thereof in any unsafe or dangerous condition. The word "building," as used in
this section, shall describe any walled or roofed structure including mobile
homes, commercial establishments, dwellings and any accessory structures. The
provisions contained in this does not preclude the village from proceeding
under provisions of Article 11, Division 31 of the Illinois Municipal Code,
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-31-1 et seq.



   (B)   Definition of DANGEROUS BUILDINGS. For the purpose of this
section, any building or structure which has any of the following defects or
is in any of the conditions hereinafter described shall be deemed a DANGEROUS
BUILDING and any conditions hereinafter described shall be deemed unsafe:



      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other
means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to
provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic for all
persons housed or assembled therein who would be required to or might use
such door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit.



      (2)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by wind,
flood, fire or by any other cause in such a manner that the structural
strength or stability thereof is appreciably less than it was before the
catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of this section.



      (3)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof
is likely to fail or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and
thereby injure persons or damage property.



      (4)   Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an
extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds that is required in the case of new construction.



      (5)   Whenever any building or structure or any part thereof,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or
because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary
for the purpose of supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other
reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse; or some portion of the
foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give away.



      (6)   Whenever for any reason whatsoever, the building or
structure or any portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for
which it is used.



      (7)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged
by fire, wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in or about the
building structure to their danger.



      (8)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged
by fire, wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
afford a harbor for trespassers, or as to enable persons to resort thereto
for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful acts.



      (9)   Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be
used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty
construction or arrangement is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation as
defined by division (D) of this section, and is likely to work injury to the
health, safety or general welfare of those living within.



      (10)   Whenever a building or structure is infested with
rodents, insects, pests or other vermin; or is likely to cause sickness or
disease when so determined by the health inspector of the Village or County
Health Department or the Division of Code Enforcement.



      (11)   Whenever any building shall become vacant, dilapidated
or open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to
the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers.



      (12)   Whenever any unoccupied building or structure is deemed
a nuisance by division (D) and the structure or building has been secured by
the owner or his agents by covering up the windows and exists with lumber or
materials other than glazing materials for a period of 180 days or more,
thereby causing a blighting influence on a neighborhood.



      (13)   All structures containing a dwelling unit where a fire
is involved shall be processed with a complete housing notice letter.



   (C)   Enforcement power.



      (1)   The code official or a designate of the Mayor shall have
full power to pass any question arising under the provisions of this section,
subject to the conditions, modifications and limitations contained in this
chapter.



      (2)   The code official or a designate of the Mayor is hereby
authorized to demolish or repair or cause the demolition or repair of
dangerous buildings or uncompleted buildings or abandoned buildings within
the territorial limits of the village.



      (3)   The code official or a designate of the Mayor is further
authorized, when removing or causing the demolition of a dangerous building,
uncompleted building or abandoned building from a lot, to remove all private
sidewalks, fences, concrete foundations and driveways located on the lot with
such building.



   (D)   Notice of unsafe condition of buildings; means of service.



      (1)   When a building or structure within the village is found
to be a "dangerous building" or contains an unsafe condition, an inspector
for the Building Inspections Division and/or Code Enforcement Division shall
issue and serve a notice thereof upon all owners of record or persons having
an interest therein as shown by documents recorded in the Office of the
County Recorder of Deeds and upon persons in apparent possession of the
premises.



      (2)   The notice shall briefly and concisely specify the
conditions and factors of the building or structure which renders it
dangerous or unsafe. The notice shall further specify that the owners make
the building safe (by complete elimination of any unsafe conditions) or
commence demolition at owner's costs within 15 days of such notice. The
notice shall further specify that:



         (a)   Demolition shall commence no later than 15 days of
such notice; and



         (b)   A date for completion of demolition. The date for
completion shall be reasonably set in light of the nature of the building,
weather conditions, and other related factors. The 15-day time period shall
commence three days after the notice is mailed or upon personal service.



      (3)   The notice authorized by this section shall be served by
either personal service or by mail. Personal service may be made by either an
inspector of the Building Inspections Division, Code Enforcement Division, or
a police officer of the village.



      (4)   Where, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts
of the owner or owners of any such building, including the lienholders of
record is not ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons in whose
name such real estate was last assessed for general real estate taxes is
sufficient notice under this section.



      (5)   In the event the owner fails to comply with any time
period set forth in the notice, the corporation counsel is authorized to
commence a civil action in the circuit court of the county seeking a court
order authorizing demolition or repair of the building or structure subject
to the notice provided by this section and to create the lien described in
division (G). It shall not be a defense to this cause of action that the
building is boarded up or otherwise enclosed. It further shall not be a
defense that the building is put in a safe condition during the pendency of
the civil action.



      (6)   Joined as defendants in such cause shall be the owner of
record and other parties having an interest in the property as shown by
documents recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds on the date
of the filing of the complaint for demolition.



   (E)   Lis pendens. Upon the commencement of the civil action set
forth in division (D)(6), a lis pendens designating the property upon which
the subject building is located shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds.
Failure to file or the improper filing of the lis pendens does not, however,
affect the civil action for demolition. Any person obtaining or recording in
such office an interest in the property after such filing may become party to
the civil action only if he intervenes by order of the court.



   (F)   Placarding of building or structure.



      (1)   Whenever any dwelling or building has been designated a
dangerous building or contains unsafe conditions, an inspector of the
Division of Building Inspection Services and/or Code Enforcement, shall
placard the building indicating that the condition is dangerous and unsafe.
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, cause to rent, to occupy or
allow another to occupy any premises, knowing that such premises has been
designated a dangerous building.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, cause to
remove or cover up in any way any placard designating a building or structure
a "dangerous building." A violation of this section shall be punishable by a
fine not less than $100 and not more than $750 or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.



   (G)   Demolition lien; personal judgment.



      (1)   The cost of demolition or repair incurred by the
village, including court costs, attorney's fees and other costs related to
the enforcement of this section is recoverable from the owner or owners of
the real estate and is a lien thereon, which lien shall be superior to all
prior existing liens and encumbrances, except taxes; provided, however, that
within 60 days after completion of the demolition or repair, the corporation
counsel shall file a notice of lien for the cost and expense incurred by the
village, in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county. Upon payment
of such cost of demolition by the owner or any person who has an interest in
the property, the lien shall be released by the corporation counsel.



      (2)   The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as
in case of mortgages or mechanics liens. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be
commenced by the corporation counsel within three years after the date of
filing of notice of lien.



      (3)   If payment of the village's cost of demolition is not
paid to the village within 15 days of the filing of the notice of lien, the
corporation counsel may commence proceedings in the circuit court seeking a
personal judgement from the owner of the subject property at the time the
complaint for demolition was filed with the circuit clerk in the amount of
such costs. The action authorized by this subsection shall be in addition to,
and without waiver of, any other remedies.



   (H)   Nuisance structures.



      (1)   Any unsafe, dilapidated or abandoned building, house,
barn or other structure situated within the limits of the village is, and the
same is hereby declared to be, a nuisance.



      (2)   If any such building or other structure is being
constructed, altered, enlarged or repaired and the building permit issued for
such building or structure expires or is revoked by the Building Official,
and the owner of the building or structure fails within 30 days of the
revocation or expiration to obtain a certificate of occupancy as provided by
this chapter or to obtain another building permit, then that building or
structure shall remain a declared nuisance.



      (3)   The penalty for maintaining a nuisance shall be as
provided in division (F) of this section, and each and every day that such
nuisance remains unabated shall constitute a new and separate offense.



      (4)   Any building or structure that is open at a door,
window, or any other opening, leaving the interior of the building exposed to
the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers shall be secured. If
the opening is not restored to its original condition and is temporarily
boarded, compliance with the following sections of the Village of Lakemoor
board up specifications shall be required.



      (5)   The openings shall be covered completely from the
exterior with a minimum of one-half-inch thick exterior grade plywood secured
with screws of a minimum length of one and five-eighths inches placed a
minimum of 12 inches on center around the entire perimeter of the opening
being covered. The plywood shall be cut and fitted so it rest(s) tightly
against the exterior frame butting up to the molding, siding, etc.



      (6)   The use of paneling, OSB panels, waferboard,
particleboard, or similar materials are not to be used for the boarding of
any structures.



      (7)   Nails are not approved for securing plywood to a
structure. Screws shall be used per specifications.



   (I)   Limitations on temporary board-ups.



      (1)   Any building or structure that is temporarily boarded,
whether in compliance with division (H)(4) above, or otherwise temporarily
boarded up, may remain so boarded up for a period not to exceed 180 days;
this section shall not constitute a defense for failure to comply with
division (H)(4) specifications.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or
structure that is temporarily boarded to allow said building or structure to
remain boarded for more than 180 days.



      (3)   The owner of the building or structure that is
temporarily boarded-up may apply to the Code Official, who in the case of a
residential property shall refer said application to a Hearing Officer for an
extension of up to 180 days of the period of board-up. Unless there is a
specific finding that the need for continued board-up is not attributable to
the owner of the property but rather due to circumstances beyond that
property owner's control, the total of extensions may not exceed 180 days. If
such a finding is made that the continued boarding is not attributable to the
owner, then the total extensions shall not exceed 360 days. Extensions shall
be granted for one or more of the following reasons:



      (4)   The boarding is necessary to continue to cover glazing
material or glass, which is present such that if the boarding were removed
the building or structure would not violate division (H)(4).



      (5)   The property is in the process of renovation and to
remove the boarding after 180 days would be impractical and a hardship to the
owner.



      (6)   There is a pending contract for the sale of said
building or structure, and/or a pending contract for renovation and repair of
the building or structure pending at the time that the extension is applied
for.



      (7)   There has been an insurable loss which is still in the
process of being adjusted.



      (8)   The penalty for violation of this section shall be a
minimum fine of $100; each and every day that the violation remains unabated
shall constitute a new and separate offense.



      (9)   It shall not be a defense to a violation of division (H)
that the building or structure is open because the 180-day period provided
for in this section, or any extension granted, has run and the owner is
required to remove the boarding.



      (10)   Upon sale to a bona fide purchaser, the 180-day period
provided for herein shall start anew. A bona fide purchaser is defined as a
party who:



         (a)   Pays at least $3,000 in cash for the property in
question; like-kind exchanges or trades of goods other than cash shall not
qualify; and



         (b)   Is not an immediate family member (spouse, parent
or sibling) of the seller; and



         (c)   Is not a business entity in which the seller has
an interest either as a partner, shareholder or officer.



      (11)   For purposes of this section, a building shall be
deemed continuously boarded up unless it is unboarded and remains unboarded
for at least 30 days.



      (12)   The fact that a building must be unboarded to comply
with this ordinance shall not be a defense to a charge of nuisance structure
under division (H) of this chapter.



(Ord. 15-O-46, passed 12-17-2015)



CHAPTER 13:  GARBAGE, REFUSE AND RECYCLING



Section



   13.01   Definitions



   13.02   Refuse, recyclable material and disposal program



   13.03   Recycling



   13.04   Duties of village hauler



   13.05   Duties of customers



   13.06   Dumping refuse or garbage



   13.07   Enforcement



   13.08   Penalties



   13.09   Refuse and recycling collection charges



   13.10   Penalty for delinquent bills



§ 13.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGREEMENT. The current agreement between the village and village hauler
that has been authorized by the Board of Trustees.



   ADMINISTRATOR. The Village President or his or her designee.



   APPLIANCES. Including, but not limited to, ranges, refrigerators,
dishwashers, washing machines, dryers, room air conditioners, freezers and
water heaters.



   BIN. Approved containers as outlined in this agreement.



   CURBSIDE. Off the street and highway pavement and within five feet
thereof.



   DWELLING UNIT. A single-family attached and detached residence and
duplex.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Aluminum and tin cans, plastic H.D.P.E. No. 2
jugs and P.E.T. soda containers, newspaper, glass bottles/jugs or other
materials specified by the Administrator.



   REFUSE. All household garbage, rubbish and kitchen wastes such as
discarded food or food residues and paper used for wrapping the same, books,
boxes, furniture and other large household items (limited to one item per
household per week and excepting appliances, defined above, and home
remodeling and repair construction materials).



   STOP. Each dwelling unit shall be considered a STOP for the purpose of
defining the extent of the collection service to be provided, and of
determining  the amount of materials collected (refuse and recyclable
material).



   VILLAGE’S OWN FACILITIES. The Village Hall and any other village
buildings that may be obtained or constructed in the future.



(Ord. 95-O-17, passed - -)



§ 13.02  REFUSE, RECYCLABLE MATERIAL AND DISPOSAL PROGRAM.



   (A)   Pickup. All refuse and recyclable material generated in each
dwelling unit in the village shall be picked up only by the village hauler.
Collection shall be made at the curbside from every dwelling unit between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the designated collection day for the
village.



   (B)   Containers. The following containers shall be used for the
service.



      (1)   Refuse. Containers to be used for pickup or refuse shall
be 90-gallon toters which will be provided by the village hauler.



      (2)   Recyclable materials. Bins to be used for the pickup of
recyclable materials shall be provided and distributed by the village hauler
exclusively and shall be identified for use with the recyclable collection
program only. Recyclable materials in excess of the capacity of the bin may
be placed in open containers provided by the customer and set alongside the
bin.



   (C)   Specially contracted service. The pickup of appliances, home
remodeling and repair construction materials shall not be included in the
minimum services, but shall be specifically contracted between the village
hauler and customer. Each stop shall be responsible to pay for any service
requested of, and provided by, the village hauler, in addition to the
minimum. With respect to appliances, the village hauler shall be responsible
for the use of disposal methods pursuant to state and federal laws.



   (D)   Cost. The village hauler shall bill the village monthly for
the collection of refuse and recyclable materials and the village shall bill
customers monthly for the collection of refuse and recyclable materials.
Billing for pickup of appliances and construction material shall be the
responsibility of the village hauler.



(Ord. 95-O-17, passed - -)



§ 13.03  RECYCLING.



   (A)   Program established. There is hereby established a recycling
program for the separating of recyclables from garbage and rubbish for all
dwelling units in the village.



   (B)   Separation of recyclables and placement for removal.
Recyclables shall be prepared and separated from other refuse as required,
and shall be collected by the village hauler. Recyclables shall be placed in
a bin either at the curbside to be collected at times designated by the
village. Recyclable materials in excess of the capacity of the bin may be
placed in open containers provided by the customer and set alongside the bin.



   (C)   Collection by unauthorized person. From time of placement of
recyclables at the curb for collection in accordance with the terms hereof,
items shall become the property of the village or its authorized agent. It
shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized by the
village to collect or pickup or cause to be collected or picked up any such
items. Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more
locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided.



   (D)   Violation and penalty. Any person who violates or neglects to
comply with any provision of this section, or any regulation promulgated
pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of
not less than $25, nor more than $500, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation
occurs or continues.



   (E)   Additional methods of disposal. Any person may donate
recyclables to any verified not for profit organization.



(Ord. 95-O-17, passed - -)



§ 13.04  DUTIES OF VILLAGE HAULER.



   (A)   Hours. Collections shall be made between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 p.m. the day collection is scheduled for the village, subject
to such modifications as the village may require or grant. All collections
shall be made as quietly as possible.



   (B)   Litter. The village hauler shall not litter material or truck
fluids on premises in the process of making collections, but he or she shall
not be required to collect material that has not been placed in approved
containers or otherwise deposited in a manner herein provided.



   (C)   Procedure. When the village hauler encounters refuse or
recyclable materials at curbside that have been improperly bagged, bundled or
tagged,  the following procedure shall apply.



      (1)   Upon each occurrence by the same customer, the village
hauler shall leave the improperly bagged, bundled or tagged refuse or
recyclable materials at the curbside, collecting any properly prepared
materials, and leave a notice of violation approved by the village, noting
the violation with the customer. The date and address of the violation shall
be documented and the village shall be notified of such violation.



      (2)   The village hauler shall supply the required
documentation to the village as requested.



   (D)   Complaints. All customer or citizen complaints shall be
considered and disposed of by the village hauler within 24 hours. The village
hauler shall establish and maintain a method for receiving and responding to
customer calls and complaints. The village hauler’s staff shall be
knowledgeable and courteous in answering customer information requests and
resolving or disposing of customer complaints regarding the collection
services.



   (E)   Complaint log. The village hauler shall supply copies of all
complaints received from village customers and/or residents to the
Administrator on a monthly or quarterly basis, as specified by the
Administrator. The log shall be on a form approved by the village and shall
contain the customer name, address and nature of the request or complaint and
its disposition by the village hauler. The day and the hour on which the
complaint was received and the day and hour on which it was resolved shall be
indicated. The village hauler shall meet with the village as often as
requested by the village to review customer complaints and resolutions.



   (F)   Clean up on route. All materials collected by the village
hauler shall be so contained, tied or enclosed that leaking, spilling or
blowing of litter or fluids is prevented. In the event of any leaking,
spilling or blowing of litter or fluids occurs on|the parkway, street or
alley, the village hauler shall immediately clean up the litter of fluids.
Each vehicle shall be equipped with at least one broom and one shovel for use
in cleaning up material. If such litter of fluids are not cleaned up by the
village hauler within six hours after such notice (verbal or written) from
the village, the village may clean up same and assess the cost to such clean
up to the village hauler.



   (G)   Title to wastes. All refuse and recyclable material collected
by the village hauler shall become the sole property of the village hauler as
soon as the same is picked up or otherwise placed in the village hauler’s
vehicle. All refuse and recyclable material may be removed from the curbside
only by the village hauler or customer.



   (H)   Disposal. All refuse collected shall be removed and disposed
of in accordance with all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations. Disposal site, compost site or facilities shall be licensed and
approved by the State Environmental Protection Agency for the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources and any other state requiring licensing of
the disposal of refuse, recyclable materials and compostable yard waste.
Evidence of such licenses and approval shall be provided to the village. All
recyclable materials collected in accordance with the terms hereof shall be
removed and shall be recycled in accordance with all applicable statutes,
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Under no circumstances shall said
recyclable materials be landfilled unless authorization in writing to do so
is given by the village and at no cost to the village. The village hauler
shall be responsible for storing recycled materials until properly disposed
of and at no cost to the village.



   (I)   Charges and rates.



      (1)   For the minimum service defined under “minimum
curbside service”, the village hauler shall charge according to the
following schedule:



 


Service No. 1




Monthly Refuse/Recycling Per Dwelling Unit



Period
 


11-1-1994 to 10-31-1995
 
$10.37 per month per dwelling unit


11-1-1995 to 10-31-1996
 
To be determined by CPI and disposal 10-2-1995


11-1-1996 to 10-31-1997
 
To be determined by CPI and disposal 10-2-1996



 



      (2)   Any resident, when physically absent from the village,
may temporarily suspend service for a minimum of one day by notifying the
village hauler and village at least five days in advance. The village hauler
shall abate all charges for the period of suspension.



   (J)   Collections on holidays. When the regularly scheduled
collection day falls on a holiday, the village hauler shall collect the
materials on the next business day. The village hauler shall provide the
village a list of such holidays and business days.



   (K)   Village hauler’s personnel.



      (1)   The village haulers shall assign a qualified person or
persons to supervise its operation in the village and shall give such
supervisors’ name, addresses and telephone numbers to the village.



      (2)   Each employee driving a vehicle shall, at all times,
carry a valid operator’s license for the type of vehicle he or she is
driving.



      (3)   No person shall be denied employment by the village
hauler for reasons of race, creed, sex or national origin.



   (L)   Compliance with laws. The village hauler shall conduct
operations in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws,
ordinances,  rules and regulations.



   (M)   Performance bond. If determined to be necessary by the
corporate authorities, a performance bond with corporate surety, in the
amount of $50,000, shall be provided to the village guaranteeing that all
provisions of the agreement with the village shall be met by the village
hauler. The bond shall be furnished within ten days following the award of
the agreement. Thereafter, 90 days prior to the anniversary date of the bond,
said bond shall be renewed by the village hauler for each year of the
agreement and shall continue to indemnify the village against loss resulting
from any failure of performance by the village hauler. In the event of the
failure of the village hauler to perform the services under its agreement for
a seven- day period, the village may declare the agreement at an end and
proceed to set such other or substitute agreements as may be necessary to
cure the default or breach of the agreement by the village hauler.



   (N)   Collection equipment. The village hauler shall provide an
adequate number of vehicles subject to the approval of the Administrator for
regular collection of refuse, recyclable material and compostable yard waste.
All vehicles shall be kept in good repair and appearance and maintained in a
sanitary condition at all times. Each vehicle shall have the name, a vehicle
identification number, a toll-free and/or local phone number of the village
hauler visible on each side. Vehicles shall be repaired by the village hauler
with ten business days of a reported incident or of knowledge by the village
hauler. Vehicles shall enter the village to begin collections empty.



(Ord. 95-O-17, passed - -)



§ 13.05  DUTIES OF CUSTOMERS.



   (A)   Location for pickup. All refuse and recyclable material shall
be placed immediately along the roadside. When a conflict arises concerning a
specific location, the village shall have the exclusive right to determine
the final pickup point for the property in question.



   (B)   Preparing materials. It is the responsibility of the customer
to properly bag, bundle and tag all refuse and recyclables as outlined in
this chapter.



(Ord. 95-O-17, passed - -)



§ 13.06  DUMPING REFUSE OR GARBAGE.



   (A)   General. It shall be unlawful to dispose of any refuse or
garbage, except as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Receptacles required. It shall be the duty of every owner, or
his or her agent, or the occupant of any house, dwelling or other building in
the village wherein people reside or lodge, or where animal or vegetable food
is prepared or served, and at all times, to maintain in good order and repair
a separate receptacle to be used for the purpose of depositing garbage and
other similar refuse. Such receptacle shall be watertight, made or
constructed of metal or plastic and shall be equipped with a close fitting
cover. Unless supplied by the village hauler, the capacity of said receptacle
shall not be less than five gallons nor more than 30 gallons.



   (C)   Deposit on streets and property.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit garbage
or other similar refuse in any street, alley or public way.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit garbage
or other similar refuse upon any private property, unless such garbage or
other similar refuse shall be placed in a receptacle as hereinabove
described, and it shall be unlawful to place such receptacle upon any street,
alley or public way.



   (D)   Littering. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit,
place or locate garbage or other similar refuse in any manner so that the
same could be blow n about or scattered by wind or accessible to animals.



(Ord. 95-O-17, passed - -)



§ 13.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Administrator shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter
and shall make any inspection necessary to that end.



(Ord. 95-O-17, passed - -)



§ 13.08  PENALTIES.



   Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of
this chapter, or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $25,  nor more
than $500.



(Ord. 95-O-17, passed - -)



§ 13.09  REFUSE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION CHARGES.



   There be and is hereby assessed for garbage collection upon all the
residential property within the corporate limits of the village, in addition
to the maximum taxes authorized for general corporate purposes and the
garbage tax levy imposed by the village pursuant to an ordinance previously
adopted, a garbage service charge at the prevailing rate set forth in the
contract from time to time, plus an administrative fee of $1.75 per month for
regular customers and $1.25 per month for senior residents as more fully
described in the contract. The foregoing refuse and recycling collection
charges shall commence as of 5-1-2007.



(Ord. 07-O-03, passed 2-8-2007)



§ 13.10  PENALTY FOR DELINQUENT BILLS.



   (A)   All owners, occupants, consumers or users of premises located
in the village who do not pay their garbage bill on or before the delinquent
period shown on said bill shall pay a penalty of 2% of the unpaid balance per
month, in addition to the fees herein. In addition to any penalties computed
pursuant to this division (A), all owners, occupants, consumers or users
shall be responsible for the village’s costs of collection of any
delinquent garbage bills, including reasonable attorneys fees and court costs.



   (B)   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user
of the garbage service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for such
service to such premises, and such service is furnished to the premises by
the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant
and user of such service are jointly and severally liable therefore to the
village. OWNER, as used herein, shall include any party in title, as well as
any party holding a beneficial interest under a land trust in the premises or
any party with a right to possession of the premises.



   (C)   In the event that any premises which is served by the garbage
service is sold, transferred or assigned to another (hereinafter referred to
as the “transferee”) by any person or entity heretofore responsible for
payment of service charges (hereinafter referred to as “transferor”), it
shall be the responsibility of both the transferor and the transferee to
notify the village in writing of the intended transfer no less than 14
working days prior to the date of the intended transfer of the premises. Upon
notification, the village shall render a final prorated billing for such
service, and upon full payment thereof, the transferor shall thereafter be
relieved of any other responsibility for such service. In the event that the
village is not so notified of such transfer, the transferee shall be deemed
jointly and severally liable with the transferor for all unpaid charges for
the premises incurred up to and including the date of transfer.



   (D)   In no event shall the owner of property who is in arrears in
the payment of charges to the village for garbage service for any property or
otherwise in violation of any code or ordinance of the village, be issued any
permit or license otherwise required under the codes and ordinances of the
village.



(Ord. 08-O-09, passed 5-22-2008)



CHAPTER 14:  ANIMAL CONTROL



Section



   14.01   Definitions



   14.02   General provisions



   14.03   Control of animals



   14.04   Impoundment and redemption of animals



   14.05   Violations; penalty



§ 14.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL. Any live vertebrate creature, except man.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER/WARDEN. Any employee of the village designated
by the chief of police to exercise police powers in the enforcement of this
chapter. This includes sworn police officers, code compliance officers and
community service officers.



   AUTHORIZED PERSON. Any member of the Police Department, Animal Control
Officer/Warden or any person under their supervision.



   BITE. Seizure of a person with the jaws or teeth of any cat, dog or
other animal capable of transmitting rabies so that the person so seized has
been wounded or pierced and further includes contact of the saliva of such
cat, dog or other animal with any break or abrasion of the skin.



   CAT. All members of the feline family.



   CONTROL. Any owned animal that is secured by one or more of the
following:



      (1)   A leash or lead no longer than 12 feet in length;



      (2)   An electrical or mechanical device designed to keep an
animal confined to the owner’s property;



      (3)   A fence, cage, crate or enclosure; and



      (4)   A vehicle.



   DISEASED ANIMAL. Any animal affected with a disease contagious or
infectious to both humans and animals.



   DOG. All members of the canine family.



   ENCLOSURE. Any fence or structure of at least six feet in height,
forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young
children and to confine a dog or other animal, designed with secure sides,
top and bottom adequate to prevent escape.



   IMPOUNDMENT. The removal and taking into custody of animals pursuant to
this chapter.



   KENNEL. Any establishment or premises where more than four dogs or four
cats or any combination thereof, over four months of age are boarded or kept
for any purpose whatsoever, or on which more than two such animals are
boarded for compensation or kept for sale, with the exception of regularly
established veterinary hospitals, pet shops, pounds or shelters.



   LEASH. Any restraint, cord, thong or chain not more than 12 feet in
length, designed for the purpose of keeping the animal under control. The
LEASH must securely fasten to the collar or harness of the animal and must be
of sufficient strength to restrain the animal.



   POUND. Any facility licensed by the State Department of Agriculture and
approved by the Chief of Police for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and
used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals.



   SHELTER. Any establishment where dogs, cats or other animals are
received, housed and distributed with or without charge.



   STRAY ANIMAL. Any animal running at large in the public way or on
private property other than that of the owner or keeper of such animal.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL.



      (1)   Any individual animal that, when unprovoked, inflicts
bites and attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private
property.



      (2)   Any individual animal with a propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise do
any act that might endanger the safety of human beings, domestic animals or
any property of another, including, but not limited to, a disposition to
mischief or fierceness which might lead to attack to the foregoing.



      (3)   Any individual animal which attacks a human being or
domestic animal without provocation, whether in play, anger or outbreak of
untrained nature.



      (4)   No animal shall be deemed vicious if it bites, attacks
or menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner, or harms or menaces
anyone who has tormented or abused it, or is a professionally trained animal
for law enforcement or guard duties.



   VILLAGE. Village of Lakemoor, Lake and McHenry Counties, Illinois.



(Ord. 09-O-16, passed 8-27-2009)



§ 14.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to:



   (A)   Inhumanely beat, underfeed, overload or abandon any animal;



   (B)   Fail to provide any animal with proper shelter, protection
from weather or veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering;



   (C)   Keep animals in violation of the State Humane Care for Animals
Act, ILCS Ch. 510, Act 70, §§ 1 et seq., or the State Animal Welfare Act,
ILCS Ch. 225, Act 605, §§ 1 et seq.;



   (D)   Intentionally strike geese or other wildlife with a motor
vehicle. Geese and other wildlife shall have the right of way when crossing
streets within the village. Any person who, as the operator of a motor
vehicle, strikes an animal, shall stop at once and render such assistance as
may be possible, or shall immediately report such injury to the animal owner,
if known; or to the appropriate law enforcement agency; or to the local
humane society;



   (E)   Torment, shoot at with slingshots, BB or pellet type guns or
other firearms, pelt with rocks or otherwise disturb any animals;



   (F)   Poison or cause to be poisoned any domesticated animal. The
only exception will be by written permit from the State Department of
Agriculture for the purpose of controlling diseases transmissible to humans
or other animals and only when all other methods and means have been
exhausted. Any drugs used for euthanasia shall be by or under the direction
of a licensed veterinarian;



   (G)   Leave any animal unattended in a motor vehicle or enclosed
trailer when the outside temperature exceeds 86°F (30°C) or contain any
animal in such manner that said animal does not have proper air circulation
while confined in a motor vehicle, trailer, kennel, dog house or any type of
container or structure in which an animal may be confined; and



   (H)   Own any animal which is known to be infected with any disease
transmissible to other animals or humans, including severe parasitism, unless
such animal shall be confined in such a manner as not to expose other animals
or humans.



(Ord. 09-O-16, passed 8-27-2009)



§ 14.03  CONTROL OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   General. It shall be unlawful:



      (1)   Consent required. For the owner or any person who has in
his or her custody or control, any dog, cat or other animal to enter upon the
premises of another within the village without the consent of the owners;



      (2)   Public body of water. To permit any animal, whether
licensed or not, to enter any public body of water, public pond, public
fountain or public stream;



      (3)   Food establishment. To permit any animal to enter any
place where food is stored, prepared, served or sold to the public, or any
public building or hall; provided, however, that, this section shall not
apply to any visually impaired or hearing impaired person using a trained
guide dog, to veterinary offices or hospitals or to animal shows or
exhibitions;



      (4)   At large/trespass. To permit any animal to run
uncontrolled or trespass on private or public property;



      (5)   Damage. To permit any animal to damage or destroy any
property;



      (6)   Vehicles. To permit any dog to chase, run after or jump
at vehicles using the public thoroughfares;



      (7)   Threatening animal. To permit any dog to habitually
snap, growl, snarl, jump upon or otherwise threaten persons lawfully using
any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bike path, play area, park or
any place where people congregate or walk;



      (8)   Disturbance of the peace. To permit any dog or other
animal to bark, whine or howl continuously, for a period longer than 15
minutes, intermittently for a period in excess of two hours, or between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., so as to disturb the peace, quiet or
repose, or be audible to another person of ordinary sensibility;



      (9)   Unsanitary conditions. To allow any places where any
animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unsanitary or become offensive
to those residing in the vicinity;



      (10)   Number of dogs or cats. To keep on a
residentially-zoned premise more than three dogs and/or three cats over four
months of age, with the exception of regularly established and zoned
veterinary hospitals, pet shops, pounds or shelters;



      (11)   Excrement removal.



         (a)   For any person to cause or permit a dog to be on
any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person unless
such person has in his or her immediate possession a device for the removal
of excrement and a depository for the transmission of excrement to a
receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such person.



         (b)   Removal required: for any person in control of,
causing or permitting any dog to be on any property, public or private, not
owned or possessed by such person to fail to remove excrement left by such
dog to a proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such
person.



      (12)   Bites. To fail to report an animal bite;



      (13)   Animals other than domestic pets. To keep or harbor
within the corporate limits of the village any wild animal, including, but
not limited to, any snake over six feet in length, any other life-threatening
reptile, monkey, ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion,
lynx or any other animal or bird which can normally be found in the wild or
to keep, harbor or maintain any animal which may endanger the safety of
persons or property. It is no defense to a violation of this section that the
keeper of such animal prohibited herein has attempted to domesticate such
animal. Exceptions to this division (A)(13) are animals displayed or harbored
in a zoo, carnival or circus; and



      (14)   Public street or highway.



         (a)   To permit any dog, cat or other animal upon a
public street or highway, or upon any premises other than that of the person
owning such dog, cat or other animal unless such dog, cat or other animal is
on a leash securely fastened to a collar or harness.



         (b)   The overall length of the leash including the
handle shall not exceed 12 feet and be held by its owner or other person able
to control such dog, cat or other animal.



   (B)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Guide dogs for visually impaired or hearing impaired
persons, support dogs for persons with physical disabilities and sentry,
guard or police owned dogs are exempt from this section; provided, an attack
or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected.



      (2)   To qualify for exemption under this section, each such
dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies.



      (3)   It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog
to notify the Police Department of changes of address.



      (4)   In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall
keep the Police Department advised of the location where such dog will be
stationed.



(Ord. 09-O-16, passed 8-27-2009; Ord. 10-O-02, passed 1-28-2010)



§ 14.04  IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   Nuisance animals; impoundment authorized. Any dog or other
animal doing any of the acts prohibited in § 14.03 of this chapter is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and such animal may be seized and impounded
as provided herein.



   (B)   Notice to owner; impoundment period; disposition of animals.



      (1)   After such animal is impounded, the Police Department,
Animal Warden or authorized representative shall ascertain whether the animal
is licensed and, if so, shall, within a reasonable time, notify the person to
whom the license was issued that said animal has been impounded and may be
redeemed.



      (2)   Impounded animals will be transferred to the Lake County
Department of Public Health or the McHenry County Department of Health, as
applicable, the next business day. The owner of such a transferred animal
will be responsible for all fees charged by the Lake County Department of
Public Health or the McHenry County Department of Health.



   (C)   Redemption of impounded animal. Any dog or other animal
impounded pursuant to the provisions of this section may be redeemed upon
payment of the required redemption fee, fines, license and vaccination fees
as provided herein. The animal shall be returned to the owner; provided, he
or she shall:



      (1)   Show satisfactory proof of ownership;



      (2)   Agree to pay any fines or penalties imposed for
violation of this chapter;



      (3)   Agree to pay the cost of keeping the animal while
impounded by the village at its pound. The fee for each day an animal is
housed/transported by the Village Police Department shall be $25; and



      (4)   Secure an animal license or rabies vaccination, if
applicable and due.



   (D)   Liability for fines and costs. If ownership of the animal is
established and the owner refuses to redeem the same, he or she shall remain
obligated to pay all fines and impoundment expenses.



(Ord. 09-O-16, passed 8-27-2009)



§ 14.05  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   (A)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of §§ 14.02
or 14.03 of this chapter shall be fined not more than $750 for each offense.



   (B)   Payments to avoid prosecution for violations of §§ 14.02 or
14.03 of this chapter. Any person that receives a citation for a violation of
the aforementioned sections of this code may avoid prosecution by paying a
fine pursuant to the following schedule:



 

 

1st Offense

 

2nd Offense

 

3rd and Subsequent Offenses



Within 10 days
 

$25

 

$50

 

$100



After 10 days
 

$50

 

$100

 

$200




 



(Ord. 09-O-16, passed 8-27-2009)



CHAPTER 15:  HOUSING CODE



Section



   15.01   Rental residential property



   15.02   Mandatory rental housing inspection program



   15.03   Vacant dwellings; owner required to act; enforcement
authority



   15.04   Indebtedness to the village



§ 15.01  RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the registration and
inspection of rental residential property so as to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the people of the village including:



   (A)   To protect the public health and safety by ensuring rental
units comply with minimum housing standards as established by village
ordinances;



   (B)   To protect the character and stability of residential areas;



   (C)   To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely
affect or are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare
and health of persons occupying dwellings;



   (D)   To facilitate the enforcement of minimum standards for the
maintenance of existing rental residential property and thus to prevent slums
and blight; and



   (E)   To preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the
village.



(Ord. 09-O-14, passed 7-9-2009)



§ 15.02  MANDATORY RENTAL HOUSING INSPECTION PROGRAM.



   (A)   Registration required. Effective 1-1-2010, it shall be
unlawful for any person, individual, firm, trust, partnership, association,
corporation or other legal entity to rent, lease or allow occupancy of any
“dwelling unit”, as defined hereafter, for any consideration within the
corporate limits of the village without first registering with the village,
as provided in this chapter. (Exceptions: Registration requirements under
this section shall not apply to the following: hotels, motels, bed and
breakfast establishments, nursing homes, retirement homes, rest homes,
assisted living facilities or dwellings owned or controlled by government
agencies and public housing authorities.) The owner shall also be required to
submit a copy of the written lease in effect at the date of registration.



   (B)   Validity. Registration is valid from January 1 until December
31 of the same year in which issued. No registration shall be valid for a
period exceeding one year.



   (C)   Inspection required. Registered residential rental units shall
be inspected by an employee or agent of the village for compliance with the
Municipal Code. No person shall lease, let or otherwise allow in exchange for
any consideration the use of any property for residential purposes,
hereinafter “rental dwellings”, within the village, unless that property
has been inspected by employees or agents of the village. After the initial
inspection, following the effective date hereof, which must not reveal any
violations presenting an imminent threat to the life, health and/or safety of
the residents of the rental dwelling, a rental dwelling may continue to be
leased until the next mandatory inspection.



   (D)   Inspections authorized.



      (1)   The village is hereby authorized and obligated to
conduct inspections of any and all rental dwellings, or units thereof, within
the village to determine compliance with the standards and regulations set
forth in this code, as amended.



      (2)   The employees and agents of the village are hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey all rental dwellings within the
village. All inspections shall occur at reasonable hours, except in emergency
situations where the life, health and/or safety of any individual is
threatened.



   (E)   Frequency, access for and notice of inspection.



      (1)   All rental dwellings shall be inspected by the employees
or agents of the village at least once every 24 months. Inspections may occur
more frequently; provided, there is:



         (a)   Reasonable suspicion to believe that there exists
within such rental dwelling conditions which present a threat to the health,
safety, welfare or general comfort of the resident(s) of such rental dwelling;



         (b)   A complaint lodged by the resident(s) of the
rental dwelling to be inspected;



         (c)   A request made by a prospective resident
accompanied by the consent of the owner (or owner’s agent) of the rental
dwelling to be inspected; or



         (d)   A request made by the owner or owner’s agent.



      (2)   Every owner or owner’s agent of any rental dwelling
shall provide access to such rental dwelling, or any unit thereof, to the
employees or agents of the village for purposes of inspecting the rental
dwelling or unit thereof for compliance with all applicable standards and
regulations set forth in this code, as amended. Either the owner, the
owner’s agent, or the occupant shall accompany the inspector during the
inspection.



      (3)   Notice shall be given to the owner or the owner’s
agent and the occupant of the rental dwelling or unit thereof at least 120
hours in advance of such inspection except in those situations described in
divisions (E)(1)(a) and (E)(1)(b) above.



      (4)   Notice of inspection shall be provided to both the owner
or owner’s agent and occupant and may consist of a letter sent by first
class mail, personal service, telephone call or, for occupants only, the
posting of a door hanger upon the doorknob of the rental dwelling. The form
of notice shall be the village’s sole discretion; provided, however, the
form used substantially achieves the purpose of this “notice”
requirement. Where a rental dwelling is occupied by more than one person,
notice to one occupant shall be deemed notice to all occupants of the rental
dwelling.



   (F)   Identification of rental dwelling and designation of owner’s
agent.



      (1)   Any person owning, managing or supervising any rental
dwelling shall, within 30 days of assuming ownership, management or
supervision of any rental dwelling inform the village on a form approved by
the village of such residential dwelling.



      (2)   Every owner of any rental dwelling, or unit thereof, who
does not reside on the premises of such rental dwelling shall appoint and
designate an individual to act as an agent in his or her behalf. Every owner
shall notify, in writing, the village and each occupant of the rental
dwelling, of the name, address and telephone number of the agent. Such
written notice shall contain the signature of the agent accepting appointment
and designation as agent of the owner.



      (3)   Any individual, who is appointed and designated as agent
of the owner, shall reside within a 75-mile radius of the municipal limits of
the village. An owner of a rental dwelling may act as his or her own agent;
provided, he or she meets the residency requirements set forth herein.



   (G)   Occupants to provide access for inspections and compliance
with code.



      (1)   Each and every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give
the owner thereof, his or her agent, or employee or agents of the village
access to the rental dwelling, or unit thereof under their control, to
conduct inspections authorized by this chapter.



      (2)   Each and every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give
the owner thereof, or his or her agent or his or her employees, access to any
part of such rental dwelling at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter or with any standard regulation set forth in
this code, as amended.



   (H)   Fees.



      (1)   Annual fees for registration of any rental dwelling
pursuant to this chapter shall be $100 per dwelling unit, as defined in
hereafter. Should violations of the standards and regulations of this code be
found and not be corrected by the time of the first reinspection, the owner
shall be subject to a fee of $50 for the second reinspection and each
subsequent reinspection until such violation is corrected.



      (2)   Any reinspection fees remaining unpaid after two weeks
shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law. In addition, the owner shall also be
responsible for the villages’ cost of collection, including court costs and
reasonable attorney fees.



   (I)   Dwelling unit. DWELLING UNIT shall be defined as any room or
group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single habitable unit with
facilities which are used, designed or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, working and eating.



   (J)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $750, for each
offense, unless specified otherwise within this chapter. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation continues. All
violations of this section are hereby determined to be a nuisance which may
be abated or enjoined by the village. Nothing in this section shall exempt
the village or any person from seeking civil remedies against any person who
is in violation of this section.



   (K)   Preservation of other rights and penalties. This section shall
not be construed so as to restrict the right of the village to inspect any
property, nor to seek penalties for violations of other provisions of this
code.



(Ord. 09-O-14, passed 7-9-2009; Ord. 09-O-31, passed 12-17-2009)



§ 15.03  VACANT DWELLINGS; OWNER REQUIRED TO ACT; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Notification of village.



      (1)   The owner of record or any person or entity with an
interest of record (hereafter, collectively “owner”) of or in any
residential dwelling that has become vacant shall within 30 days after the
dwelling becomes vacant, or within 30 days after the effective date of this
chapter, whichever is later, file a registration statement for each such
dwelling with the Village Clerk on forms provided by the Village Clerk for
such purposes. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date
of registration. The owner shall be required to annually renew the
registration as long as the dwelling remains vacant and shall pay an annual
registration fee of $100 for each registered dwelling; provided, however,
that, eleemosynary, religious, educational, benevolent or charitable
associations and all governmental agencies shall be exempt from the payment
of the annual registration fee. The owner shall notify the Village Clerk
within 20 days of any change in the registration information by filing an
amended registration statement on a form provided by the Village Clerk for
such purposes. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof
of the statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the village against the owner of
the dwelling. Registration of a dwelling in accordance with this section
shall be deemed to satisfy the registration requirements set forth in the
village ordinances and the notification requirement set forth in the village
ordinances.



      (2)   In addition to other information required by the Village
Clerk, the registration statement shall include the name, street address and
telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age or older designated by
the owner as the authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations
and for receiving process, in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding, on behalf of such owner in connection with the
enforcement of this code. This person must maintain an office within a 75-
mile radius of the municipal limits of the village. An owner who is a natural
person and who meets the requirement of this section as to location of
residence or office may designate himself or herself as agent. By designating
an authorized agent under the provisions of this section the owner is
consenting to receive any and all notices of code violations concerning the
registered dwelling and all process in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the
registered dwelling by service of the notice or process on the authorized
agent. Any owner who fails to register a vacant dwelling under the provisions
of this section shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting at
the dwelling, any and all notices of code violations and all process in the
administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the
dwelling.



   (B)   Responsibilities of owner or manager. The owner of any
dwelling that has become vacant, and any person maintaining, operating or
collecting rent for any dwelling that has become vacant shall, within 30
days, do the following:



      (1)   Enclose and secure the dwelling; and



      (2)   Maintain the dwelling in a secure and closed condition
sign until the dwelling is again occupied or until repair or completion of
the dwelling has been undertaken.



   (C)   Liability insurance. The owner of any dwelling that has become
vacant shall, within 30 days, acquire or otherwise maintain liability
insurance, in an amount of not less than $300,000 covering any damage to any
person or any property caused by any physical condition of or in the
dwelling. Any insurance policy acquired after the dwelling is vacant shall
provide written notice to the Village Clerk within 30 days of any lapse,
cancellation or change in coverage. The owner and the owner’s authorized
agent for service of process shall provide evidence of the insurance, upon
request, to the Village Clerk within 30 days of any lapse, cancellation or
change in coverage. The owner and the owner’s authorized agent for service
of process shall provide evidence of the insurance, upon request, to the
Village Clerk or his or her designee.



   (D)   Rules and regulation to be promulgated. The Village Clerk may
issue rules and regulations for the administration of this section. These
rules may designate board-up materials and methods which must be used when
securing a dwelling so that the boarding is reasonably incapable of being
removed by trespassers or others acting without the dwelling owner’s
consent.



   (E)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      VACANT. A dwelling which is lacking habitual presence of human
beings who have a legal right to be on the premises, or at which
substantially all lawful business operations or residential occupancy has
ceased, or which is substantially devoid of content. In determining whether a
dwelling is vacant, it is relevant to consider, among, other factors, the
percentage of the overall square footage of the dwelling and the presence of
rental or for sale signs on the property; provided that a residential
property shall not be deemed vacant if it has been used as a residence by a
person entitled to possession for a period of at least three months within
the previous nine months and a person entitled to possession intends to
resume residing at the property; and, further provided that, multi-family
residential property containing five or more dwelling units shall be
considered VACANT when substantially all of the dwelling units are unoccupied.



   (F)   Registration required. The owner of any dwelling shall file a
registration statement for each such dwelling with the Village Clerk on forms
provided by the Village Clerk for such purposes; provided, however, that, the
registration of a vacant dwelling pursuant to the village regulations shall
satisfy the registration requirement of this section. Any such registration
statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements therein
contained in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court proceeding
instituted by the village against the owner of the dwelling. A registration
form shall be prepared by the Village Clerk.



   (G)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $750, for each
offense, unless specified otherwise within this chapter. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation continues. All
violations of this section are hereby determined to be a nuisance which may
be abated or enjoined by the village. Nothing in this section shall exempt
the village or any person from seeking civil remedies against any person who
is in violation of this section.



(Ord. 09-O-14, passed 7-9-2009)



§ 15.04  INDEBTEDNESS TO THE VILLAGE.



   The processing of an application under this chapter shall not commence
and no registration shall be approved if the applicant therefore is indebted
to the village for any sum or if the applicant is in violation of any village
code, regulation or ordinance at the time of application.



(Ord. 09-O-14, passed 7-9-2009)



CHAPTER 16:  HANDBILLS



Section



   16.01   License; application



   16.02   Penalty



§ 16.01 LICENSE; APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for such license shall be made to the Village
Clerk, and shall contain a statement of the nature of the article or cards or
advertisements to be distributed and the name of the applicant and the name
of the manufacturer of or distributor of such article or advertised service.



   (B)   The fee for such license shall be $2 per day.



§ 16.02  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500, for each offense; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs.



CHAPTER 17: RESERVED



CHAPTER 18:  TAG DAYS - SOLICITING FUNDS



Section



   18.01   Notice regulating soliciting



§ 18.01  NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.



   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any
residence, shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches
by four inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
applicable words, as follows:



      “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”



   (B)   The letters shall be at least 1/3-inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.



   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to
any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.



CHAPTER 19:  RAFFLES



Section



   19.01   Definitions



   19.02   License required



   19.03   Applications



   19.04   Restrictions of licenses



   19.05   Conduct of raffles



   19.06   Limitations on licenses



   19.07   Raffles; manager; bond



   19.08   Records



   19.09   Penalty



§ 19.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to
benefit an indefinite number of the public. The services rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.



   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in
their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported
schools.



   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the
primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for
by the government.



   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective
of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit. Such
pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their
respective occupations.



   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.



   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a
not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of
the operation.



   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §
28-2(b) of the Crim. Code of 2012, conducted by an organization licensed
under this chapter in which:



      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for
a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of
numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be
designated the winning chance; and



      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing
or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of
acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except
that, the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.



   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society or organization founded
for the purpose of religious worship.



   VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members which are
substantially veterans and spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the
primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its membership and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public
benefit.



§ 19.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
conduct raffles or chances within the village unless the person, firm or
corporation has a valid license issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide service, religious,
charitable, labor, fraternal, education or veteran organizations that operate
without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously
for a period of five years immediately before making application for a
license and which have been during that entire five-year period a bona fide
membership engaged in carrying out their objects. The fee for said license
shall be $10 unless waived by the Board of Trustees.



§ 19.03  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the President and Board
of Trustees, signed by the applicant or its duly authorized representatives
and verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following
information and statements:



   (A)   Names, ages and addresses of the applicant in the case of an
individual or in such other case by the duly authorized representatives of
the applicant, the date of incorporation of any corporation, the date of
formation of any club, the objects for which a club or corporation was
formed, the names and addresses of the officers and directors of any club,
the name and address of the local representative of any church;



   (B)   The character of business and in the case of a corporation the
objects for which it was formed;



   (C)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business upon which the raffle will be held;



   (D)   The area or areas within the village in which raffle chances
will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be
sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and the method
by which the winning chance will be determined;



   (E)   A statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the
respective licensee organization signed by the presiding officer and
secretary of that organization;



   (F)   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a
felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter
or thing contained in this chapter, other ordinances of the village, laws of
the state or of the United States of America;



   (G)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof
or by the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor;



   (H)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the
laws of the state or of the United States or any ordinances of the village in
the conduct of the raffle; and



   (I)   A statement that the applicant will not allow gambling devices
or gambling on the premises where the drawing will be held.



§ 19.04  RESTRICTIONS OF LICENSES.



   No such license shall be issued to:



   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the city;



   (B)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal
or state law;



   (D)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;



   (E)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been
revoked for cause;



   (F)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;



   (G)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or
any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate, more than 5% of the
stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than residence within the village;



   (H)   Any law enforcing public official, any Village Manager, any
President, Trustee or member of the Village Board or commission, or any
president or member of a county board and no such official shall be
interested in any way;



   (I)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as
proscribed by any part of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 28-2(a)(3) through
(a)(10) or 28-3 of the Criminal Code of 2012, as heretofore or hereafter
amended as contained in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 38-1 or as proscribed by a
statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;



   (J)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period; and



   (K)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a
federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period.



§ 19.05  CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.



   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions.



   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that
game.



   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (D)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area
specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.



   (E)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be
within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.



§ 19.06  LIMITATIONS ON LICENSES.



   (A)   A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles, as
defined in this chapter. Each such license is valid for one raffle.



   (B)   The license shall contain information including the aggregate
retail sale value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by the licensee in a
single raffle, the maximum retail value of each prize awarded by the licensee
in a single raffle, the maximum price which may be charged for each raffle
chance issued or sold by the licensee and the number of days during which the
chances are to be sold. The aggregate retail value of the prizes, the retail
value of each prize, the price which may be charged for each raffle chance
and the number of days during which said chances may be sold is subject to
the approval of the Village Board.



   (C)   Except as is provided in division (B) above, the Village
President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall have
30 days in which to approve or disapprove the license applied for.



   (D)   The Village President or his or her designated representative
may revoke any licenses issued by the village if it is determined that the
licensee has violated any provision of this chapter.



§ 19.07  RAFFLES; MANAGER; BOND.



   Operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single raffles manager designated by the person or organization making
application for a license. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in an
amount not less than the anticipated gross receipts for each raffle. The bond
shall be in favor of the organization and conditioned upon his or her
honestly in the performance of his or her duties. The bond shall also provide
that notice be given in writing to the village not less than 30 days prior to
its cancellation. The Village President or his or her designated
representative is authorized to waive requirement for bond by including a
waiver provision in the license issued; provided that, the license containing
such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members
of the licensed organization.



§ 19.08  RECORDS.



   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances
shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each
single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All
deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a
description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the
deduction and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.



   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue
of the state, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.



   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report at
the conclusion of the raffle, to its membership and to the village, its gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net
proceeds itemized as required in this section.



   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.



§ 19.09  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500, for each
offense.



   (B)   A judgment of a fine imposed upon an offender may be enforced
in the same manner as a judgment entered in a civil action; provided,
however, that, in such judgment imposing the fine the court may further order
that upon non-payment of such fine, the offender may be imprisoned until the
fine is paid or satisfied at the rate of $5 per day of imprisonment;
provided, further, however, that, no person shall be imprisoned under the
first provision hereof for a longer period than six months.



CHAPTER 20: RESERVED



CHAPTER 21:  PLANNING



Section



   21.01   Village Plan & Zoning Commission



   21.02   Powers of Plan & Zoning Commission



   21.03   Official plan



   21.04   Continuing functions of Plan & Zoning Commission



   21.05   Subdivision compliance with official plan



   21.06   Establishment of security for development



   21.07   Economic Development Commission



§ 21.01  VILLAGE PLAN & ZONING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation. A Plan & Zoning Commission is hereby established for
the village as is authorized by and in accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5,
§§ 11-12-4 et seq.



   (B)   Members. The Plan & Zoning Commission shall consist of seven
members appointed by the President and confirmed by the Board of Trustees.
The President and the Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
members ex officio of the Commission.



   (C)   Terms. Plan & Zoning Commission members shall serve for five
years and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms only.



   (D)   Organization. As soon as possible after their appointment, the
members of the Plan & Zoning Commission shall organize by the election from
their membership of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary and such other
officers as may, in their judgment, be necessary; except that, the members of
such Commission may appoint and designate a person other than a member of the
Commission to be Secretary of the Commission. All the members and officers of
the Commission shall receive $50 per meeting; exceptthat, if the Board of
Trustees deems it advisable, the Secretary may receive such compensation as
may be fixed from time to time by the Board of Trustees, and provided for in
the appropriation ordinance. If the Plan & Zoning Commission shall deem it
advisable to secure technical advice or service of any nature, or incur
expense in connection with the carrying on of its work, it may do so upon
authority from the Board of Trustees and appropriation by the Village Board
therefor.



(Ord. 15-O-32, passed 9-10-2015)



§ 21.02  POWERS OF PLAN & ZONING COMMISSION.



   The Plan & Zoning Commission shall have the power to:



   (A)   Prepare and recommend to the President and Board of Trustees a
Comprehensive Plan of public improvements looking to the present and future
development of the village and unsubdivided land situated within the
corporate limits or in contiguous territory not more than one and one-half
miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality;



   (B)   Study the possible growth and changes in land and building
uses and in planning conditions and zoning conditions within the corporate
limits or in contiguous territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond
the corporate limits and not included in any municipality;



   (C)   Prepare and recommend a Comprehensive Plan of public
improvements designed to meet the present and future needs of the village
including a schedule of projects, estimate time when needed, and methods of
financing;



   (D)   Recommend the regulations governing the development,
maintenance and future changes or redevelopment of private property;



   (E)   Exercise such other powers as shall be germane to the powers
granted hereunder and in the Illinois Municipal Code;



   (F)   Consider and report on special and current matters relating to
the development within the village or contiguous unincorporated territory as
may arise or be referred to the Commission by the President and Board of
Trustees or other corporate authority prior to the passage and approval of
the Comprehensive Plan; and



   (G)   Exercise such powers granted in the Zoning Ordinance of this
code (Ch. 22).



§ 21.03  OFFICIAL PLAN.



   (A)   The Comprehensive Plan may be prepared in whole or in separate
geographical or functional parts.



   (B)   The Comprehensive Plan or any part thereof, when passed and
approved by the President and Board of Trustees, shall be designated as the
official plan or as part thereof of the village and shall be known as the
official plan of the village. From time to time thereafter, changes in the
official plan or any of its part may be recommended by the Plan Commission.



   (C)   The Board of Trustees supplements the Comprehensive Plan of
the village by inclusion of the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.







(Ord. 14-O-24, passed 6-26-2014)



§ 21.04  CONTINUING FUNCTIONS OF PLAN & ZONING COMMISSION.



   The Plan & Zoning Commission shall continue to operate for the purpose
of enforcing this chapter, and to:



   (A)   Study the means of providing for the health, safety, comfort
and convenience of the inhabitants of the village and contiguous territory;



   (B)   Recommend from time to time changes in the Official Plan or
any part thereof;



   (C)   Prepare and recommend from time to time plans for special
specific improvements in pursuance of the Official Plan;



   (D)   Give aid to the village officials charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced with the official plan, to further the
making of these projects and generally to promote the realization of the
official plan;



   (E)   Consider and report on current and special matters relating to
the development within the village and contiguous and unincorporated
territory as may arise or be referred to the Commission by the President,
Board of Trustees or other corporate authority; and



   (F)   Exercise such other powers, germane to the powers granted by
Ch. 22 (Zoning) and in the Illinois Compiled Statutes.



§ 21.05  SUBDIVISION COMPLIANCE WITH OFFICIAL PLAN.



   No map or plan of subdivision presented for record affecting land
within the corporate limits of the village shall be entitled to record or
shall be valid unless it shall conform to the requirements hereof and to the
official plan and to al1 other applicable ordinances of the village. Any map
or plat of subdivision presented for record shall provide for streets, alleys
and public grounds in conformity with the requirements of the official plan.
The official plan and regulations pertaining to the subdivision, development
or redevelopment or resubdivision of land as may be adopted by the President
and Board of Trustees may include requirements for territory both within the
corporate limits and within contiguous territory outside of the corporate
limits and not extending more than one and one-half miles beyond the
corporate limits and not included in any municipality. No map or plat of
subdivision, development, redevelopment or resubdivision shall be entitled to
record or be valid unless it conforms to the aforesaid requirements and to
such other ordinance of the village that shall be applicable.



§ 21.06  ESTABLISHMENT OF SECURITY FOR DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   All subdivision development within the village, all
development requiring zoning approval, and all development that contains any
improvements intended to be dedicated to the public use, shall deposit with
the village, adequate security to insure the complete performance of the
developer. Acceptable forms of performance security shall be irrevocable
letters of credit or cash bonds equal to 120% of the estimated cost of all
improvements. Any such letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan
association shall be first approved by the village.



   (B)   In certain instances, the Village Board may consider approving
a performance bond in the amount of 120% of the estimated cost of
improvements. In any instance where a developer requests the use of a
performance bond, such developer shall appear before the Board of Trustees
and ask for a waiver of the requirement to provide a letter of credit or cash
bond. The Board of Trustees may deny any such request if the Board determines
that the terms of the security being offered are inadequate or fail to insure
performance upon developer default. Any such performance bond shall include
assurances by the surety that declaration of bankruptcy by the principal
triggers the assumption of the obligation by such surety, as well as such
other guarantees that the Board of Trustees deems necessary for the
protection of the public interests.



(Ord. 13-O-39, passed 12-19-2013)



§ 21.07  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The village recognizes the need to establish an economic
development advisory board that will take the lead in developing a climate
for buoyant economic growth that is commensurate with the needs and desires
of it residents.



      (2)   The Lakemoor Development Commission, composed of
regional residents from various professional disciplines shall make available
to the Mayor and Village Board, pertinent information and proposals relative
to the monitoring, assessing and strengthening of existing economic
development strategies and to develop new strategies of economic development
for the village.



   (B)   Lakemoor Development Commission.



      (1)   Membership. The Lakemoor Development Commission shall be
composed of no more than seven members who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the majority consent of the Village Board.



      (2)   Terms. A majority of the advisory board shall be
appointed to one-year terms, with the balance of the board, appointed to
two-year terms. Each subsequent term shall be for two years or less in order
to maintain the original rotation.



      (3)   Vacancy. In the event of a vacancy in the membership of
the advisory board, the Mayor shall appoint, with majority consent of the
Village Board, a replacement to serve out the remainder of the unexpired term.



      (4)   Removal. Only after a public hearing and "for cause" as
stated in writing and made part of the public record, the Mayor, with
majority consent of the Village Board, may remove a sitting member of the
Lakemoor Development Commission.



   (C)   Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities
of the board shall include but are not limited to:



      (1)   Advising the Mayor and Village Board on matters relating
to economic development issues and those specific tasks referred to the board
by the Village Board;



      (2)   Coordinate with other local and regional agencies to
maximize economic development opportunities;



      (3)   Develop activities and procedures to maximize economic
development opportunities;



      (4)   Coordinate and work with individuals, organizations and
institutions in the pursuit of economic development projects;



      (5)   Coordinate local, state, and federal programs,
activities, and funding sources for economic development projects;



      (6)   Additional duties as assigned by the governing body that
impact the village's economic development.



   (D)   Organization.



      (1)   Officers. The Lakemoor Development Commission shall
elect from its members a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary, each
for a one-year term. Officers may be elected for an indefinite number of
terms.



      (2)   Conduct of business. The Lakemoor Development Commission
shall adopt and publish such rules, regulations and procedures for the
conduct of business as seems appropriate to its members. A quorum shall be a
majority of the membership of the Lakemoor Development Commission.



      (3)   Meetings. The Lakemoor Development Commission shall hold
regularly scheduled meetings at least once a quarter, and such meetings will
be open to the public in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 120 et seq. The advisory board may hold special meetings, also open to
the public, as may be called by the chairperson or vice-chairperson with at
least 48 hours public notice



      (4)   Records. A public record shall be kept of all actions
and considerations undertaken by the Lakemoor Development Commission. The
records shall be filed with the Village Clerk and kept available for public
inspection during normal business hours in the Office of the Village Clerk.



   (E)   Compensation. Each Commission member shall be compensated at a
rate of $50 for each meeting attended by that Commission member, but in no
event will a Board member be paid for greater than three meetings per month.



(Ord. 15-O-33.5, passed 10-8-2015)



CHAPTER 22:  ZONING



Section



General Provisions



   22.001   Title



   22.002   Purpose



   22.003   Repeal



   22.004   Effective date



   22.005   Applicability



   22.006   Separability



   22.007   Allowable uses



   22.008   Minimum requirements



   22.009   (Reserved)



   22.010   Unlawful existing uses not made lawful



   22.011   Definitions



Filing Procedures



   22.025   Applicability



   22.026   Application filing



   22.027   Approval process



   22.028   Filing fees and retained personnel fees



   22.029   Disclosure of interest



   22.030   Public notice



General District Regulations



   22.040   Establishment of districts



   22.041   Zoning district map



   22.042   Interpretation of district boundaries



   22.043   Zoning of annexed land



   22.044   Regulation of floodplain lands



   22.045   Air rights



   22.046   One principal building per lot



   22.047   Operations within enclosed buildings



   22.048   Spacing of service stations



   22.049   Adult uses



   22.050   Temporary uses



   22.051   Exceptions to arterial lot dimensions



Residential Districts



   22.065   General Residential District regulations



   22.066   Residential Zoning Districts



Commercial Zoning Districts



   22.080   C-1 Convenience Commercial District



   22.081   C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District



   22.082   C-3 Community Commercial District



   22.083   C-4 Downtown Commercial District



   22.084   C-5 Highway Commercial District



   22.085   C-6 Planned Regional Center District



Office, Industrial Districts, Agriculture and Mining



   22.095   Office Districts



   22.096   O-1 Industrial District



   22.097   A-M Agriculture and AMO Mining Overlay District



   22.098   Medical cannabis dispensary establishment standards



   22.099   Medical cannabis cultivation center standards



Off-Street Parking and Loading



   22.110   Provisions applying to parking and loading



   22.111   Off-street parking provisions



   22.112   Front yard impervious surface coverage



   22.113   Parking of recreational vehicles



   22.114   Parking of commercial vehicles



   22.115   Handicapped and bicycle parking



   22.116   Land-banked parking



   22.117   Off-street loading standards



Landscaping and Screening



   22.130   Intent and purpose



   22.131   Applicability



   22.132   Landscape and screening requirements



   22.133   Landscape plan required



   22.134   General standards applicable to all landscaping



   22.135   Protection and preservation of exiting trees



Signs



   22.145   Purpose



   22.146   General provisions



   22.147   Administration



   22.148   Sign standards



Accessory Uses, Yards and Fences



   22.160   Accessory uses and structures



   22.161   Yards



   22.162   Fences



Planned Unit Development



   22.175   Purpose



   22.176   Qualifications for filing as a Planned Unit Development



   22.177   Incentives for Planned Unit Development



   22.178   Requirements for Planned Unit Developments



   22.179   Approval process



   22.180   Planned Unit Development Review Committee



   22.181   Final plan



Performance Standards



   22.195   Purpose



   22.196   Applicability



   22.197   Noise



   22.198   Vibration



   22.199   Smoke



   22.200   Particulate matter



   22.201   Toxic matters



   22.202   Odor



   22.203   Fire explosion



   22.204   Glare



   22.205   Heat



   22.206   Radioactive radiation



   22.207   Administration



Surface Mining and Fill Operations



   22.220   General provisions



   22.221   Standards for operations



   22.222   Finished site conditions



Conditional Uses



   22.235   Purpose



   22.236   Approval process



   22.237   Existing special uses



   22.238   Review of conditional uses



   22.239   Issuance of permit



   22.240   Revocation of permit



   22.241   Expansion or alteration



   22.242   Conditional use waiver for outdoor storage



Variances



   22.255   Purpose



   22.256   Approval process



   22.257   Minor variances



   22.258   Existing variations



   22.259   Administration variations



Amendments and Rezonings



   22.270   Purpose



   22.271   Approval process



   22.272   Protest



   22.273   Amendment after ordinance adoption



Nonconformities



   22.285   Purpose



   22.286   Types of nonconformities



   22.287   Elimination of nonconformities



   22.288   Conditional or intermittent uses



   22.289   Administration



Administration



   22.300   Permits and certificates



   22.301   Violation, penalty and enforcement



   22.302   Planning and Zoning Commission



   22.303   Zoning Administrator and Village Clerk



   22.304   Appeals



Personal Wireless Telecommunications Facilities



   22.315   Purpose



   22.316   Definitions



   22.317   Regulations



   22.318   Permitted use



   22.319   Conditional use permit



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 22.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as “The Village of
Lakemoor Zoning Ordinance.”



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.002  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of improving and
protecting the public health, safety and welfare of residents of the village.
To this end the chapter seeks:



      (1)   To further the implementation of the objectives of the
adopted Comprehensive Plan for the village in such a manner as any changed
conditions since the adoption of the Plan may require;



      (2)   To zone all land in the village with a view to
conserving property values and encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the village;



      (3)   To protect all areas of the village from harmful
encroachment by incompatible uses;



      (4)   To establish adequate standards for the provision of
light, air and open spaces;



      (5)   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue
concentration of population, thereby preventing the development of blight and
deterioration;



      (6)   To lessen congestion in the public streets;



      (7)   To facilitate provision of adequate public services and
facilities such as transportation, water, sewerage and parks;



      (8)   To provide for adequate drainage, control of erosion,
reduction of flood damage, and destruction of sensitive or valuable
environmental resources;



      (9)   To foster a desirable pattern of relationships among
residential, commercial, industrial and other uses for the mutual benefit of
all types of development;



      (10)   To isolate and control the location of unavoidable
nuisance-producing uses;



      (11)   To ensure and facilitate the preservation of sites,
areas and structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance.



   (B)   To accomplish the above objectives, this chapter further seeks:



      (1)   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings,
structures and other uses of land shall conform;



      (2)   To prevent new construction or alteration or expansion
of existing construction that does not comply with the restrictions in this
chapter;



      (3)   To provide for the elimination in appropriate situations
of existing uses that are incompatible with the character of the districts in
which they are located;



      (4)   To define the powers and duties of the officers and
bodies charged with the enforcement of this chapter;



      (5)   To prescribe penalties for any violation of the
provisions hereof.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.003  REPEAL.



   Upon adoption of this chapter, the ordinance known as the Zoning
Ordinance of the Village of Lakemoor adopted 1980 is hereby repealed. No
other ordinance, regulation, annexation agreement, or private agreement,
covenant or easement is intended to be repealed or abrogated by this chapter.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.004  EFFECTIVE DATE .



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and publication according to law.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.005  APPLICABILITY.



   No building, structure, land or premises shall hereafter be
constructed, altered, converted, enlarged, moved, used or occupied except in
conformity with the provisions in chapter.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.006  SEPARABILITY.



   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid
any provision of this chapter, such judgment shall not affect any other
provision hereof not specifically included in said judgment.



   (B)   Further, if such court shall adjudge invalid the application
of any provision hereof to a particular property, such judgment shall not
affect the application of said provision to any other property not
specifically included in said judgment.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.007  ALLOWABLE USES.



   Only the following uses of land, buildings or structures are allowed in
the village:



   (A)   Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this
chapter;



   (B)   Uses which:



      (1)   Had a building permit lawfully issued prior to the
effective date of this chapter;



      (2)   Began construction within six months of such date, which
construction was diligently prosecuted to completion; and



      (3)   Are constructed and occupied in conformance with the
plans that were the basis for the issuance of the permit.



   (C)   Permitted uses in the applicable zoning districts, subject to
the conditions and requirements in this chapter;



   (D)   Conditional uses in the applicable zoning districts, subject
to the approval of a conditional use permit and other conditions and
requirements in this chapter; and



   (E)   Temporary uses subject to the provisions in this chapter.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.008  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   The provisions in this chapter shall, in their interpretation and
application, be held to be minimum requirements.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.009  (RESERVED).



§ 22.010  UNLAWFUL EXISTING USES NOT MADE LAWFUL.



   No building, structure or use not lawfully existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter shall be made lawful solely by the adoption thereof.
Such structure or use shall remain unlawful hereunder to the extent that it
is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.011  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  The
present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future tense the
present.  The singular number includes the plural number and vice-versa. 
The word SHALL is mandatory.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and
neuter. All measured quantities shall be to the nearest integral unit of
measure, and if a fraction is one-half or greater, the next highest integral
unit shall be used. Any term not defined in this section shall be as defined
elsewhere in the municipal code or, if not defined elsewhere in the code, as
defined in Webster’s New World Dictionary of the American Language-Second
College Edition.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING.  See BUILDING, ACCESSORY.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  See STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY.



   ACUPUNCTURE. A medical practice or procedure that treats illness or
provides local anesthesia by the insertion of needles at specific sites on
the body.



   ADULT USE.  Any commercial or recreational establishment which at all
times excludes minors by virtue of age, including adult bookstores, adult
motion picture theatres, adult mini-motion picture theatres, adult drive-in
theatres, adult massage parlors, adult modeling studios, and eating and
drinking places with sexually-oriented entertainment.



   AGRICULTURE.  The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage,
apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry
husbandry, and the necessary uses for packing, treating, and storing the
produce but not including the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine
or other animals; provided that the operation of accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of normal agriculture.



   AIRPORT.  Any public or private land area or other facility designed
for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including all taxiways, hangars,
airport buildings, and other related structures and open spaces.



   ALLEY.  A public or private right-of-way not constituting a street
used primarily for secondary vehicular access to property abutting on a
street.



   ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL.  See STRUCTURAL ALTERATION.



   ANIMAL HOSPITAL (WITH KENNEL). A building or place where animals are
given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to
short term care associated and incidental to the hospital use.



   ANTENNA.  A device by which radio signals are transmitted, received or
both.



   ANTENNA FACILITY.  That part of the signal distribution system used or
operated by a telecommunications carrier under a license from the FCC
consisting of a combination of improvements and equipment including one or
more antennas, a supporting structure and the hardware by which antennas are
attached, equipment housing, and ancillary equipment, such as signal
transmission cables and miscellaneous hardware.



   ANTENNA FACILITY LOT.  The zoning lot on which a facility is or will
be located.



   ANTENNA HEIGHT.  The total height of the facility’s supporting
structure and any antennas that will extend above the top of the supporting
structure; however if the supporting structure’s foundation extends more
than three feet above the uppermost ground level along the perimeter of the
foundation, the each full foot in excess of three feet shall be counted as a
an additional foot of facility height. The height of a facility’s
supporting structure is to be measured from the heights point of the
supporting structures foundation.



   ANTENNA, HORIZONTAL SEPARATION DISTANCE.  The distance measured from
the center of the base of the facility’s supporting structure to the point
where the ground meets a vertical wall of a principal residential building.



   ANTENNA, LOT LINE SETBACK DISTANCE.  The distance measured from the
center of the base of the facility’s supporting structure to the nearest
point on the common lot line between the facility lot and the nearest
residentially zoned lot. If there is no common lot line, the measurement
shall be made to the nearest point on the lot line of the nearest
residentially zoned lot without deducting the width of any intervening
right-of-way.



   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  A structure, whether an antenna tower or
another type of structure, that supports one or more antennas as part of a
facility.



   APARTMENT HOTEL.  See HOTEL, APARTMENT.



   AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP.  A business establishment where collision
service such as body, frame, or fender straightening or repair, painting of
more than 10% of the surface, or upholstering for motor vehicles, trailers,
or boats is conducted wholly within one or more enclosed buildings.



   AUTOMOBILE CAR WASH.  A permanent commercial facility where motor
vehicles are detailed and washed by hand, by mechanical devices, or both-
excluding temporary car washes organized for civic or charitable purposes.



   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD.  See WRECKING YARD.



   AWNING.  A roof-like cover projecting on a temporary or non-continuous
basis from the wall of a building.



   BAKERY. Any building or part where bread, cakes, pastries or other
baked goods are prepared and sold at retail.



   BANK. A financial institution that is open to the public and engaged in
deposit banking, and that performs closely related functions such as making
loans, investments, ami fiduciary activities which may include a
drive-through.



   BANNER SIGN.  See SIGN, BANNER.



   BASEMENT. A story having part, but not more than one-half its height
below grade. A basement subdivided and used for dwelling purposes other than
by a janitor employed on the premises is counted as a story for purpose of
height regulations.



   BEDROOM.  Any private room in a dwelling unit suitable for regular use
for sleeping purposes. BEDROOMS include rooms designated on as other than a
bedroom but which in the judgment of the President and Board of Trustees
would normally be usable for sleeping purposes shall be considered a bedroom.



   BILLBOARD.  See SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.



   BLOCK.  A tract of land, whether legally so described or subdivided,
bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more streets and public
parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore lines of
waterways, or corporate boundary lines.



   BOARDING HOUSE.  See ROOMING HOUSE.



   BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum
open space requirements of this code have been complied with.



   BUILDING.  Any structure permanently affixed to the land and
constructed or used for the shelter, enclosed, or protection of persons,
animals or property.



   BUILDING, ACCESSORY.  A building that is an accessory use.



   BUILDING, ENCLOSED.  A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space of from other buildings or structures by a permanent roof
and by exterior walls having only windows and normal entrance or exit doors,
or by party walls.



   BUILDING, DETACHED.  A principal building surrounded by open space.



   BUILDING FRONTAGE.  The linear length of the front wall of building,
excluding walls that abut loading areas and service drives exclusively.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the mean average
ground level at the front building line of a principal or accessory building
to the highest point of the roof in case of a flat roof; to the deck line of
a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the caves and ridge of a
gable, hip, or gambrel roof. Chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses,
tanks and similar projections other than signs shall not be included in
calculating building height.



   BUILDING LINE.  The line parallel or nearly parallel to a lot line
that separates all parts of a building from the open space adjacent thereto
on the same lot.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A non-accessory building in which is conducted
the principal use of the lot on which it is located.



   BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL.  A building designed for residential occupancy.



   BUILDING, TEMPORARY.  A building that is established for a period of
less than one year and is removed within that time period.



   BUSINESS. An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time,
attention, labor and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited, bought
or sold, or where services arc offered for compensation.



   BUSINESS PARK.  A special or exclusive type of planned business area
designed and equipped to accommodate a community of manufacturing, showroom,
warehousing, research or similar industrial uses together with substantial
office development related thereto.



   BUSINESS SIGN.  See SIGN, BUSINESS.



   CAMPER TRAILER (POP-UPS). A partially collapsible structure designed to
provide temporary living quarters primarily for recreational use, constructed
with integral wheels to make it mobile and/or tow able by motor vehicle.



   CANOPY.  A roof-like structure that projects permanently and
continuously from the exterior wall or a building or from a free standing
support.



   CARDHOLDER.  A qualifying patient or a designated caregiver who has
been issued and possesses a valid registry identification card by the
Department of Public Health.



   CARGO OR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or premises in which cargo or
freight is received or dispatched.



   CARPORT. A structure without substantial walls used solely for shelter
for private passenger vehicles.




   CATERING ESTABLISHMENTS. A facility whose primary purpose is to provide
food, generally in large quantities, for banquets or for special events which
are held off the premises not including a carry out or sit down restaurant.




   CEMETERIES, CREMATORIES, OR MAUSOLEUMS. Land used or dedicated to the
burial of the dead, including crematoriums, mausoleums, related sales, and
related maintenance facilities;



   CLEAN CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS (CCDD).  Uncontaminated
broken concrete without protruding metal bars, bricks, rock, stone, reclaimed
or other asphalt pavement or soil generated from construction or demolition
activities. CCDD does not include uncontaminated soil generated during
construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of utilities, structures and
roads provided the uncontaminated soil is not commingled with any CCDD or
other waste. For purposes of this definition, uncontaminated soil may include
incidental amounts of stone, rock, gravel, roots, and other vegetation.



   CLEAN CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS FILL OPERATION.  A current
quarry, mine, or other excavation where CCDD is used as fill material.



   CLINIC.  A place for care, diagnosis and treatment of persons needing
medical, dental or surgical attention but where in-patient care is not
provided.



   CLUB, HEALTH.  Any establishment providing physical culture or health
services, including health clubs, racquetball or tennis clubs, reducing
salons, tanning salons or massage salons.



   CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE.  A non- profit association of persons who are
bonafide members paying dues which owns, hires or leases a building or
portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and
their guests. It shall he permissible to serve food and meals on such
premises provided adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are
available. The sale or serving of alcoholic beverages to members and their
guests shall he allowed provided such sale or serving is in compliance with
applicable federal, state and municipal laws.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.  See VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL.



   COMMON OPEN SPACE.  See OPEN SPACE, COMMON.



   COMMUNITY CENTER.  A building owned, leased and operated by a
governmental agency or a non-profit organization for recreational,
educational or entertainment purposes.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  The officially adopted plan for the physical
development, conservation and redevelopment of the village.



   CONDITIONAL PUBLIC USE.  See USE, CONDITIONAL PUBLIC.



   CONDITIONAL USE.  See USE, CONDITIONAL.



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.  See PERMIT, CONDITIONAL USE.



   CONGREGATED CARE HOUSING.  A building, a neighborhood group of one to
four unit buildings or a group of multi-family buildings, comprising an
aggregate of five or more acres, which provide long term care for residents
18 years of age or older, and which shall consist of the following levels of
service:



      (1)   ASSISTED LIVING.  A special combination of housing,
supportive services, personalized assistance and health care designed to
respond to the individual needs of those who need help with activities of
daily living such as bathing, dressing, grooming or meal preparation and may
include without limitation , common dining and social and recreational
features, special safety and convenience features designed for the needs of
the elderly, such as emergency call systems, grab bars and handrails, special
door hardware, cabinets, appliances, passageways, and doorways designed to
accommodate wheelchairs, and the provision of social services for residents
which may include meal services, transportation, housekeeping, linen and
organized social activities. 



      (2)   SUPPORTIVE CARE. A special combination of housing with
available 24-hour medical care, including without limitation, short term
rehabilitation (physical therapy) and long-term care for people with chronic
ailments or disabilities that require daily attention of a skilled nursing
staff in addition to help with personal care such as bathing, dressing,
grooming, meal preparation or mobility.



      (3)   Excluded from the definition are facilities in which
residents are criminal offenders or past criminal offenders. Also excluded
from this definition are persons whose disabilities arise from current use or
addiction to a controlled substance as this term is used in the U.S. Code and
the state statutes.



   CONSTRUCTION YARD.  An establishment with space used for stock piling
CCDD, uncontaminated soil, and other fill related material; bulk storage of
landscape and building material; heavy construction equipment and machinery;
and which may include the provision of services; the fabrication of building
related products; the operating of machinery; and the construction yard’s
business office.



   CONTRACTOR’S OFFICE. A room or group of rooms used for conducting
administrative, clerical and general office (business) affairs, and may
include a design showroom but shall not include on site, outdoor storage of
contractors vehicles, equipment, and materials.



   CONTRACTOR’S SHOP. An establishment used for conducting
administrative, clerical and general office (business) affairs, design
showroom, indoor repair, maintenance and or indoor storage of contractor
vehicles, equipment and materials.



   CORNER LOT.  See LOT, CORNER.



   CORNER SIDE LOT LINE.  See LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE.



   CORNER SIDE YARD.  See YARD, CORNER SIDE.



   COURT.  Any open space other than a yard bounded on two or more sides
by the walls of one or more buildings.



   COURT, OUTER.  A court that is not an inner court.



   CREMATORIUM.  See CEMETERIES, CREMATORIES OR MAUSOLEUMS.



   CURB LEVEL.  The height of the established street curb abutting a
street line measured at the midpoint of such line. Where no curb has been
established, the curb level shall be considered to be the established level
of the surface of the street abutting the street center line opposite the
midpoint of the street line. On lots abutting more than one street line, the
average of the measurements at the midpoints off all street lines shall
determine the curb level.



   CURIE.  A unit of radioactivity equal to 3.7 multiplied by 10 to the
10th power disintegrations per second.



   CURRENT PLAT OF SURVEY.  See PLAT OF SURVEY, CURRENT.



   DAY CARE CENTER, ADULT. Any facility operated for the purpose of
providing care, protection, and guidance to three or more adults during only
part of a 24-hour day.



   DAY CARE CENTER, CHILD.  A facility that receives more than three or
more children during any 24-hour period for daytime care and that provides
personal care, protection, supervision, training and other programs. CHILD
DAY CARE CENTERS exclude:



      (1)   Kindergartens and other programs run by public or
private schools or churches;



      (2)   Centers conducted on federal, state or local governments
premises;



      (3)   Facilities operated in connection with a shopping center
or other facilities where children are cared for while their parents or
custodians are in the vicinity and readily available; and



      (4)   Special and activities conducted periodically by civic,
charitable and government organizations.



   DECIBEL.  A unit or measurement of the intensity or loudness of sound.



   DENSITY.  The number of dwelling units per acre of land. Gross density
refers to the number of units per acre of the total land to be developed. Net
density refers to the number of units per acre of land devoted to residential
use.



   DESIGNATED CAREGIVER.  A person who is at least 21 years of age, has
agreed to assist with a patient’s medical use of cannabis, has not been
convicted of an excluded offense and assists no more than one registered
qualifying patient with his or her medical use of cannabis.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  See SIGN, DIRECTIONAL.



   DISABILITY. Any person whose disability:  i) is attributed to mental,
intellectual or physical impairment or a combination of mental, intellectual
or physical impairment; ii) is likely to continue for a significant amount of
time or indefinitely; iii) reflects the persons need for a combination and
sentience of special interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other
service which are of a life-long or extended duration; or iv) results in
functional limitations in three or more of the following areas of major life
activities



      (1)   Self-care;



      (2)   Receptive or expressive language;



      (3)   Learning;



      (4)   Mobility;



      (5)   Self-direction;



      (6)   Capacity of self living; and



      (7)   Economic self sufficiency.



   DISPLAY BOARD.  See SIGN, DISPLAY BOARD.



   DOG KENNEL.  See KENNEL.



   DOG RUN, ENCLOSED.  An outdoor area enclosed on all sides by a fence
for the exclusive purpose of continuous or occasional confinement of one or
more animals commonly kept as household pets.



   DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT.  See LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE.



   DRIP LINE.  The perimeter formed by the points furthest away from the
trunk of a tree where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree
lands on the ground.



   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT.  An establishment at which patrons may be
served without leaving their motor vehicle. Any restaurant, bank, dry
cleaning establishment or other business having drive-up or curb service
facilities shall be considered a drive-in establishment.



   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT.  See RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN.



   DWELLING.  A building or portion thereof designed or used as a
residence, excluding boarding or lodging houses, nursing homes, motels,
hotels, tourist homes, cabins, tents and recreational vehicles.



   DWELLING, EFFICIENCY.  See EFFICIENCY UNIT.



   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.  A building consisting of three or more
dwelling units.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A residential building consisting of a
single dwelling unit.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED.  A single-family dwelling attached
to one or more other single-family dwellings by one or more common vertical
walls with each dwelling located on a separate lot.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED.  A single-family dwelling separated
from other dwelling units by open space.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A building consisting of two dwelling units.



   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE.  A dwelling unit that is attached to one or more
other dwelling units on the same lot and that has an individual private
ground-level entrance to the outside and not portion of which is located
above any other unit or portion thereof.



   DWELLING UNIT. Space within a building designed or used exclusively as
living quarters for one family, its household employees, and not more than
two boarders or roomers, and which includes cooking, bathing and toilet
facilities.



   EASEMENT.  A right possessed by one party to use the land or air above
the land belonging to another party for a special purpose or purposes.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.  See INSTITUTION, EDUCATIONAL.



   EFFICIENCY UNIT.  A dwelling unit consisting  of just one principal
room together with bathroom, kitchen, hallways, closets, and/or dining
alcove, and which does not include a BEDROOM as defined in this section.



   EMBELLISHMENT.  See SIGN EMBELLISHMENT.



   EMPLOYEE. One who works for wages or salary in the service of an
employer, including officers, managers, and other administrative personnel.



   ENCLOSED, LOCKED FACILITY.  A room, greenhouse, building or other
enclosed area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit
access only by a cultivation center’s agents or a dispensing
organization’s agent working for the registered cultivation center or the
registered dispensing organization to cultivate, store and distribute
cannabis for registered qualifying patients.



   EQUIPMENT HOUSING.  A combination of one or more equipment buildings
or enclosures housing equipment that operates in conjunction with the
antennas of a facility, and the equipment itself.



   ERECT.  To build, construct, locate, hang, attach, manually place,
suspend, or affix, including the initial painting of all signs.



   EXCAVATION.  Removal, stripping, or disturbing of soil, earth, sand,
rock, gravel or other similar substance from the ground. Also, see OTHER
EXCAVATION, as defined herein.



   FAA.  The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation.    



   FACING.  See SIGN FACING.



   FAMILY.  Any number of persons related by blood, adoption, or
marriage, or up to three persons not so related, living together in one
dwelling unit as a single household, together with up to two household
employees but excluding more than two roomers, boarders, or permanent paying
or non-paying guests.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission.



   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA).  The independent Federal
agency that, in addition to carrying out other activities, administers the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).



   FEDERAL INSURANCE ADMINISTRATION (FIA).  The component of FEMA
directly responsible for administering the flood insurance aspects of the
NFIP.



   FENCE HEIGHT.  The height of a fence, hedge or wall measured from the
ground level at the lowest grade level within three feet of either side
thereof.



   FENCE, OPEN.  A fence, in which less than 50% of its surface is closed
when viewed from a right angle.



   FENCE, SOLID.  A fence that is not an open fence.



   FILL OPERATION.  A CCDD fill operation or Uncontaminated Soil Fill
Operation (USFO).



   FILLING.  The placing of any soil, earth, sand, rock, gravel, or other
similar substance on the ground.



   FIREPROOF CONTAINER.  An enclosure designed to prevent the release of
radioactive materials that is made of steel or concrete or similar materials
but not of lead or other low melting metals or alloys unless completely
encased in steel or concrete.



   FLASHING SIGN.  See SIGN, FLASHING.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of a flood plain that excludes the
floodway.



   FLOOD PLAIN.  The land consisting of the floodway and the flood fringe
that is subject to inundation by a 100-year flood.



   FLOODWAY.  That portion of the flood plain, including the channel,
that is reasonably required to discharge the bulk of the waters from a
100-year flood.



   FLOOR AREA. 



      (1)   The sum of the gross horizontal area of space contained
on all floors measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls of each building, of from the center line of party walls separating two
buildings.



      (2)   FLOOR AREA includes space in accessory buildings; all
cellar, basement, and attic space; and space for stairs, elevators,
maintenance areas and equipment areas except as provided in the definitions
in this section of FLOOR AREA, GROSS, and FLOOR AREA, NET. For structures
devoted to bulk storage of materials, every ten feet of building height shall
be considered as one floor for purposes of calculating floor area.



   FLOOR AREA, GROSS.  A measure of FLOOR AREA, as defined in this
section, used for purposes of calculating conversions of existing structures.
GROSS FLOOR AREA is floor area excluding only:



      (1)   Areas devoted to off-street parking or off-street
loading, including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space;



      (2)   Attic or half-story space having headroom of seven feet
or less;



      (3)   Exterior balconies and open porches;



      (4)   Space on the roof used for mechanical equipment; or



      (5)   Basements where half or more of the ceiling height is
below grade.



   FLOOR AREA, NET. 



      (1)   The sum of the net horizontal floor area of several
floors of a building measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls
or from the interior faces of walls separating two buildings. The NET FLOOR
AREA (NFA) of a building shall include:



         (a)   Basements, when used for other than storage;



         (b)   Penthouses, excluding mechanical penthouses;



         (c)   Attic space having headroom of seven and one-half
feet or more;



         (d)   Interior balconies and mezzanines, excluding those
designated and used as provided in subsection (2)(h);



         (e)   Enclosed porches; and



         (f)   Floor area devoted to storage areas.



      (2)   The net floor area (NFA) of a building shall not include:



         (a)   Floor space occupied by mechanical, telephone and
electrical equipment including mechanical penthouses;



         (b)   Stairwells, escalators and elevator shafts;



         (c)   Attic space  having headroom of less than seen
and one-half feet;



         (d)   Public restrooms;



         (e)   Off-street parking and loading;



         (f)   Basements, or portions thereof used for storage;



         (g)   Entrance lobbies; and



         (h)   Interior covered common areas designed primarily
for pedestrian circulation and other activities in connection with a regional
shopping center. 



   FLOOR AREA RATIO.  The NET FLOOR AREA, as defined in this section, of
all buildings on a lot divided by the area of the lot.



   FREE-STANDING SIGN.  See SIGN, FREE-STANDING.



   FREQUENCY.  The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave, a
measure of the pitch of the resulting sound.



   FRONTAGE.  The length of any street line.



   FRONTAGE, BUILDING.  See BUILDING FRONTAGE.



   FRONT LOT LINE.  See LOT LINE, FRONT.



   FRONT SETBACK.  See YARD, FRONT.



   FRONT WALL.  See WALL, FRONT.



   FUNERAL HOME.  See MORTUARY.



   GAME ROOM.  Any premises where there are available to the public more
than four coin- operated amusement devices, excluding vending machines that
do not incorporate gaming and amusement features and excluding coin-operated
musical devices.



   GARAGE.  A structure or part thereof used or designed to be used
primarily for the enclosed parking or storage of motor vehicles, boat or
trailers, but excluding exhibition areas, showrooms or other facilities for
display of such vehicles in shows or exhibits or in connection with their
being offered for sale, rent or lease.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC.  Any building or premise, other than a WRECKING YARD
as defined in this section, where more than one motor vehicle is stored for
compensation.



   GARAGE, STORAGE.  A building or premises used only for the housing of
motor vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements and not by transients, and
where not equipment or parts are sold and vehicles are not rebuilt, serviced,
repaired, hired or sold, except that fuel, grease or oil may be dispensed
within the building to vehicles stored therein.



   GRADE.  The average level of the finished surface of the ground
adjacent to the exterior walls of building, or directly beneath a sign, more
than five feet from the street line, the grade is the sidewalk elevation at
the center of the building. Where there is no sidewalk the grade shall be
established by the Village Engineer.



   GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA).  The total floor area in a commercial
building or shopping center that is designed for the occupancy and exclusive
use of tenants, measured from outside wall faces and from the centerline of
joint partitions. GLA includes sales areas and integral stock areas but
excludes public or common areas such as public toilets, corridors,
stairwells, elevators, machine and equipment rooms, lobbies, and open and
enclosed mall areas.



   GROUND FLOOR AREA.  The lot area covered by a building measured from
the exterior faces of exterior walls but excluding open porches, patios, or
terraces, garages, or carports.



   GROUP HOME.  A halfway house or similar non-hospital residential
facility housing more than three persons not related by blood, marriage or
adoption to the owner who need psychological rehabilitation and who are
provided 24-hour professional supervision while on the premises.



   HALF STORY.  See STORY, HALF.



   HEDGE.  Planted vegetables, including trees, shrubs or other natural
vegetation, that is planted in close proximity or clustered together and that
has a surface areas that obstructs the view.



   HEIGHT, BUILDING.  See BUILDING HEIGHT.



   HEIGHT, FENCE.  See FENCE HEIGHT.



   HEIGHT, SIGN.  See SIGN HEIGHT.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  A business, profession, occupation or activity which
is conducted wholly within a residential dwelling unit or accessory building,
by a resident of the dwelling, and is incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the lot and which does not adversely and/or perceptively
affect the character of the lot or surrounding area.



   HOME DAY CARE.  An owner occupied residence where care, protection and
supervision are provided for less than 24 hours a day for more than three
children, but not to exceed eight children, under the age of 12. The total
number of children shall include the family’s biological and/or adopted
children under the age of 12.



   HOSPITAL.  An establishment that provides accommodations, facilities
and services over a continuous period of 24 hours or more for observation,
diagnosis and care, of two or more individuals not related by blood, marriage
or adoption to the operator, who are suffering from illness, injury,
deformity, or abnormality, or from any condition requiring obstetrical,
medical or surgical services.



   HOTEL.  A building containing lodging rooms, a general kitchen and
dining room, a common entrance lobby, halls and stairways; and where each
lodging room does not have a doorway opening directly to the outdoors except
for emergencies; and where more than 50% of the lodging rooms are for rent to
transient guests for a continuous period of less than 30 days.



   HOTEL, APARTMENT.  An establishment having the character of a hotel
but in which at least 50% of the accommodations are for occupancy by guests
staying 30 consecutive days or more.



   IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  See SIGN, IDENTIFICATION.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN.  See SIGN, ILLUMINATED.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE, FRONT YARD.  Any hard-surfaced, man-made
area that does not readily absorb or retain water, including but not limited
to buildings, patios, paved parking and driveway areas, walkways, sidewalks
and paved recreation areas (such as, basketball court, tennis court and
swimming pools). This would exclude public sidewalks on private property. To
determine the percentage of impervious surface covered, divide the total
square footage of the impervious surfaces by the total square footage of the
front yard.



   INCIDENTAL SIGN.  See SIGN, INCIDENTAL.



   INDUSTRIAL PARK.  A special or exclusive type of planned industrial
area designed and equipped to accommodate a community of industries.



   INSTITUTION, EDUCATIONAL.  A public or private school, college,
university, seminary, museum, library, or similar educational or cultural
establishment.



   INSTITUTION, PHILANTHROPIC AND CHARITABLE.  An office and meeting hall
used exclusively by a non-profit public service organization.



   INSTITUTION, RECREATIONAL.  A public or private facility for group
recreational or social activity, including private clubs, lodges, recreation
buildings and community centers.



   INSTITUTION, RELIGIOUS.  A church, synagogue, temple, convent,
monastery or other premises devoted to religious or church-connected
activities.



   INTENSITY OF USE OF LOT. That portion of the area of a lot which is
occupied by or which may be occupied under this ordinance by a buildings and
their accessories.



   INTERIOR LOT.  See LOT, INTERIOR.



   INTERNET SALES.  Also known as electronic commerce or e-commerce
consisting of the buying and selling of products or services over the
internet with no display of products outside.



   JUNKYARD.  An open area where waste or used or second-hand materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles.
Uses carried on entirely within enclosed buildings and establishments engaged
only in the processing of scrap metal to be sold for the manufacture of steel
are not considered junkyards.



   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which
more than four dogs, cats, and other household domestic animals over four
months of age are kept, or on which more than two such animals are boarded
for compensation or kept for sale.



   LINE, STREET.  The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of
land and the right- of-way of a contiguous existing or dedicated street or
planned street included in the major street plan of village.



   LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET.  A completely off-street space or berth
located on the same lot, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, for
the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and
egress to a public street or alley.



   LODGING ROOM.  A room rented as sleeping or living quarters, but
without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In the
case of  a suite of rooms, each room shall be counted as one lodging room.



   LOT.  A parcel of land under the same ownership or control (whether
legally so described or subdivided as one or more contiguous parcels or parts
of parcels) located within a single block, occupied by or suitable for
occupancy by one principal building, and having its principal frontage upon a
dedicated public street.



   LOT AREA.  The area of a lot within its front, rear and side lot lines.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets, or a lot located at the point where the alignment of a single street
curves or changes; provided that an interior angle of not more than 135
degrees is created by the right-of-way lines of the abutting street or
streets or, in the case of a curving right-of-way, by straight lines
projected tangent to the curve from the points of intersection between the
curve and the lot lines.



   LOT DEPTH.  The mean average of the lengths of the side lot lines on
either side of the lot.



   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE.  A through lot abutting only two streets.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT LINE.  A property boundary line of any lot, except that where any
portion of a lot extends into an abutting street or alley the lot line shall
be deemed to be established at the existing street or alley right- of-way
line.



   LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE.  Any street line that is not a front lot line.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.



      (1)   The only street line bordering a lot;



      (2)   Otherwise, if the lot is a through lot, every street
line; or



      (3)   Otherwise, if the lot is a corner lot:



         (a)   The shortest street line; or



         (b)   Otherwise, if more than one street line is the
shortest:



            1.   The lot line designated as the front lot line
on a plat of dedication or plat of subdivision; or



            2.   Otherwise, the lot line designated as the
front lot line by the President and Board of Trustees.



   LOT LINE, INTERIOR SIDE.  Any lot line that is not a corner side lot
line.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  That lot line which is most distant from and is, or
is approximately, parallel to the font lot line. If the rear lot line is less
than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear
lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet in length within the lot,
parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.    



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which
was recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, or a parcel of
land the deed to which was recorded in the office of said Recorder, prior to
the adoption of this chapter.



   LOT, REVERSED CORNER.  A corner lot that is a reversed frontage lot.



   LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE.  A lot with a front lot line at right angles
or approximately right angles to the general pattern of front lot lines in
the block.



   LOT, THROUGH.  An interior lot with frontage on more than one street.



   LOT WIDTH.  The width of a lot at the setback line established by the
applicable front yard requirement of this chapter.



   LOT, ZONING.  A tract of land which is designated or required as a
tract of land to be used to attain compliance with the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located, or developed or built upon as a unit,
under single ownership or control. A ZONING LOT may or may not coincide with
a lot of record.



   MANUFACTURING. The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials
or substances into new products including the assembling of components,
parts, the manufacturing of products and the blending of materials.



   MARQUEE.  See CANOPY.



   MARQUEE SIGN.  See SIGN, CANOPY.



   MASSAGE/ACCU-PRESSURE ESTABLISHMENTS. A place of business which
provides any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading,
rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external soft
parts of the body with the hand or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or appliance with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar
preparation used in this practice under such circumstances that it is
reasonable expected that the person to whom treatment is provided, or some
third party on such person’s behalf will pay money or give other
consideration of any gratuity therefore.



   MEDICAL CANNABIS CONTAINER.  A sealed, traceable, food compliant,
tamper resistant, tamper evident container or package used for the purpose of
containment of medical cannabis from a cultivation center to a dispensing
organization.



   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER.  A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Department of Agriculture
to perform necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis
dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis.



   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION.  A  facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Department of Financial
and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered
cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia or
related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients.
Also includes dispensing organization or dispensary organization, or
dispensary.



   MEDICAL CANNABIS INFUSED PRODUCT.  Any food, oils, ointments or other
products containing usable cannabis that are not smoked.



   MENTAL HEALTH CENTER.  Any institution providing in-patient or
out-patient care or therapy for the mentally ill, developmentally disabled,
alcoholics, abusers of controlled substances or others needing psychological
therapy but which does not serve as a residence for such individuals.



   MINE.  An excavation created for the purpose of extracting ore or
minerals, including but not limited to coal. Also see Quarry, as defined
herein.



   MINING AND RECLAMATION OPERATIONS.  Mining operations and all
activities necessary and incidental to reclamation of such operations. Also
see SURFACE MINING, as defined herein.



   MINOR VARIANCE.  See VARIANCE, MINOR.



   MOBILE HOME.  A detached single- family dwelling unit designed and
used exclusively for residential occupancy with plumbing and electrical
connections for attachment to outside systems but designed to be transported
after fabrication on its own wheels or on flatbed trailers and to be ready
for occupancy at is site except for minor and incidental unpacking, assembly
and connection operations.



   MOBILE HOME PARK.  Any lot or tract of land other than a mobile home
subdivision or mobile home sales or storage lot upon which three or more
mobile homes used for habitation are located.



   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION.  A subdivision designed and intended for
residential use exclusively by mobile homes on permanent foundations with
wheels, tongue, lug bolts and hitch permanently removed and wherein each lot
occupied by a mobile home is owned by the owner of the mobile home situated
thereupon.



   MORTUARY.  An undertaking establishment or funeral parlor which may
include a single family as an accessory use.



   MOTEL.  A building or buildings designed for transient, occupancy
containing lodging rooms or suites accessible through a common hall or
separate outside entrances, providing living sleeping and bathroom
facilities. No room shall be equipped with kitchen facilities.



   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL.  A building or premises the principal use of
which is the receipt of freight for forwarding or trans- shipment or the
dispatching of freight by motor vehicle.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designed primarily
for transportation of persons or goods along public streets.



   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR. Includes engine rebuilding or major
reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers, collision
service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair, and overall
painting of vehicles.



   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MINOR. Includes incidental repairs, replacement
of parts, and motor service to motor vehicles. MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MINOR
shall include but shall not be limited to such businesses as general
automotive repair, transmission shops, muffler shops, lube shops, and brake
shops. MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MINOR shall not include any operations specified
under MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR.



   MOVING SIGN.  See SIGN, MOVING.



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING.  See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.



   NAME PLATE.  See SIGN, NAME PLATE.



   NET FLOOR AREA.  See FLOOR AREA, NET.



   NET LOT AREA.  See LOT AREA.



   NONCONFORMITY.  Any characteristic of a use, building, structure or
lot that was lawful prior to the effective date of this chapter or of any
amendment thereto but which does not conform to all of the requirements of
the zoning district in which the property is situated.



   NONCONFORMITY, ACTIVITIES.  Any activities or function lawfully
carried on at the premises at the time of enactment of this chapter but that
is not thereafter allowed by the permitted and conditional uses of the zoning
district in which the premises are located.



   NONCONFORMITY, DESIGN.  The design or intended use of all or
substantially all of the premises for any use not allowed by the permitted
and conditional uses of the zoning district in which it is located,
irrespective of the nature of the activities carried on at that premise.



   NONCONFORMITY, STANDARDS.  Any nonconformity other than an activities
or design nonconformity.



   NURSING HOME.  An establishment providing full-time convalescent or
chronic care or both for three or more individuals not related by blood,
adoption or marriage to the operator and which does not provide care for
surgical or medical cases commonly treated in hospitals.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Any building, structure, or object, or part thereof,
located in the way of any yard or open space required by this chapter,
excluding trees and shrubs.



   OCTAVE BAND.  All the frequencies between a given frequency and double
that frequency.



   OCTAVE BAND FILTER.  An electrical frequency analyzer designed
according to standards formulated by the American Standards Association and
used in conjunction with a sound-level meter to take measurements in specific
octave intervals.



   ODOR THRESHOLD VALUE.  The minimum concentration of odorous material
in air that can be detected by the normal human nose as determined by the
American Society for Testing and Materials Method D1 391-57, Standard Method
for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres (Dilution Method), or its equivalent.



   OFFICE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL. A use or structure other than a
medical use where business on professional activities such as administrative,
clerical, and general office affairs are conducted and business or
professional services are made available to the public.



   OFFICE, MEDICAL OR DENTAL. The office of a member of the medical
profession requiring licensing by the state and maintenance of professional
standards applicable to the field which services are provided on an
out-patient basis.



   OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE.  See LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET.



   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE.  See PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET.



   OPEN FENCE.  See FENCE, OPEN.



   OPEN SALES LOT.  Open land that is used or occupied for the purpose of
buying and selling merchandise, passenger cars, trucks, motor scooters,
motorcycles, boards, nursery plants or supplies, or monuments, or for the
storing of same prior to sale thereupon, and that is provided with a
permanent, durable, and dustless surface and is drained to dispose of all
surface water.



   OPEN SPACE.  Uncovered areas open to the sky on the same lot with a
building.



   OPEN SPACE, COMMON.  Net site areas in a Planned Unit Development that
is not covered by buildings or pavement that is permanently set aside for the
common use and enjoyment of the residents of businesses within development of
for the community at large and the preservation and perpetual maintenance of
which is assured by dedication to the village or other satisfactory legal
arrangement. COMMON OPEN SPACE may include parks, playgrounds and tot lots;
parkway medians; landscaped green space; natural lakes, ponds and streams;
and 75% of dry and 50% of wet storm water retention or detention basins.
COMMON OPEN SPACE shall not include street rights-of-way or off-street
parking or loading areas.



   ORNAMENTAL FENCE.  See FENCE, ORNAMENTAL.



   OTHER EXCAVATION.  A pit other than a quarry or mine created primarily
for the purpose of extracting resources, including, but not limited to, clay
or other soil and does not include holes, trenches, or similar earth removal
created as part of normal construction, removal, or maintenance of a
structure, utility, or transportation infrastructure. Also see EXCAVATION, as
defined herein.



   OVERBURDEN.  All of the earth and other m materials which lie above
natural deposits of coal, clay, stone, sand, gravel, or other minerals, and
also means such earth and other materials disturbed from their natural state
in the process of surface mining.



   OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT. An overlay zoning district is a mapped area
with restrictions and standards beyond those in the underlying zoning. An
overlay district is used to achieve planning objectives, which may not be
achievable through the underlying zoning. Where conflicts arise between the
overlay district and the underlying zoning, the overlay district restriction
apply.



   OUTDOOR STORAGE. An area, place or space where goods, materials,
personal property, equipment, and vehicles are placed and kept.



   PARAPET.  That portion of a wall that extends above the roof.



   PARKING SPACE DEPTH.  The longer of the two dimensions of a
rectangular parking space. In the case of a space that is not rectangular,
the depth shall be the length of the largest imaginary rectangle that can fit
within the space.



   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET.  An area outside of any public street or
alley right-of- way that is adequate for parking an automobile with room for
opening doors on both sides together with maneuvering room and properly
related access to a public street or alley.



   PARTICULATE MATTER.  Material, other than steam or water vapor,
suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in finely divided form as a
liquid or solid at atmospheric pressure and temperature.



   PARTY WALL.  A wall starting from the foundation and extending
continuously through all stories to or above the roof that separates one
building from another and that is in joint us by each building.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARD.  A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, glare, heat
or other effects generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.



   PERMIT, CONDITIONAL USE.  A permit required for the use of land, water
or building as a conditional use received only after approval by the
President and Board of Trustees of an application for a conditional use.



   PERMITTED PUBLIC USE.  See USE, PERMITTED PUBLIC.



   PERMITTED USE.  See USE, PERMITTED.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE.  Commercial mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services.



   PHILANTHROPIC AND CHARITABLE INSTITUTION.  See INSTITUTION,
PHILANTHROPIC AND CHARITABLE.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A tract of land of five acres or more
initially under the same ownership or control that is or shall be developed
with more than two principal use buildings as an integral unit based on a
plan that allows for more flexible standards than would normally apply in
order to provide a higher quality of design and amenity than would otherwise
be possible.



   PLAT OF SURVEY, CURRENT.  A plat prepared by a licensed surveyor
containing the legal description of the premise thereon showing:



      (1)   The boundary lines of the property;



      (2)   The locations of all improvements and monuments
thereupon;



      (3)   All encroachments; and



      (4)   The boundaries of all existing streets, easements,
rights-of-way and areas dedicated to public use within 200 feet of the
property as all of the foregoing exist as of the date of filing.



   PLAYHOUSE. A freestanding accessory structure, exclusively for the use
of children.



   POLE SIGN.  See SIGN, POLE.



   PREMISES.  Any improved or unimproved property.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING.  See BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.



   PRINCIPAL USE.  See USE, PRINCIPAL.



   PROJECTING SIGN.  See SIGN, PROJECTING.



   QUARRY.  An open surface excavation or pit created for purpose of
extracting stone, rock, sand and gravel. Also see MINE, as defined herein.



   RADIATION HAZARDS.  The harmful effects of all radiations capable of
producing ions in their passage through matter, including electromagnetic
radiations such as x-rays and gamma rays and particulate radiations such as
electrons or beta particles, protons, neutrons and alpha particles.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  See SIGN, REAL ESTATE.



   REAR LOT LINE.  See LOT LINE, REAR.



   REAR YARD.  See YARD, REAR.



   RECLAMATION.  Conditioning areas affected by mining operations to
achieve the purpose of the Village of Lakemoor Comprehensive Plan and the
Surface Mined Land Conservation and Reclamation Act.



   RECREATIONAL INSTITUTION.  See INSTITUTIONAL, RECREATIONAL.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicular type unit primarily designed as
temporary living quarters in conjunction with recreation, camping or travel
use which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by
another vehicle, including travel trailers, fifth wheel travel trailers,
camping trailers, truck campers, boats on or off trailer, motor homes, or any
other vehicle with state R.V., R.T., or T.A. license plates.



   REFUSE.  All waste products resulting from human activity except
sewage.



   REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER.  An integrated complex of retail, business
and service uses which may include health and care establishments which
contains two or more anchor stores and over 500,000 square feet of gross
leasable space.



   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.  See INSTITUTION, RELIGIOUS.



   REM.  A quantity of ionizing that, when imparted to a biological
system, has the same effect as an absorbed does of one roentgen of x-rays per
gram of living matter.



   RESEARCH LABORATORY.  A building or buildings housing facilities for
scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation but not
primarily housing facilities for the manufacture, sale or storage of products.



   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. See BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL.



   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN.  A restaurant that is a drive-in establishment
as defined in this section.



   REST HOME.  See NURSING HOME.



   REVERSED CORNER LOT.  See LOT, REVERSED CORNER.



   REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT.  See LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land used for passage of motor vehicles,
railroads, or pedestrians or for the location of utility or communications
lines. An access easement shall not be considered a RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY PUBLIC.  A RIGHT- OF-WAY as defined in this section
dedicated to or owned by a public body and available for use by the general
public. In the case of public street, the right-of-way normally includes the
curbs, lawn strips, and lighting and drainage facilities.



   RINGELMANN CHART.  A chart described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines
Circular 6888 or its successor upon which are illustrated graduated shades of
grey for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke or its
equivalent.



   RINGELMANN NUMBER.  The number of the area of the Ringelmann Chart
that coincides most nearly with the light-obscuring capacity of the emission
or smoke observed.



   ROOF SIGN.  See SIGN, ROOF.



   ROOMING HOUSE.  A building or part thereof that is not a hotel or
motel and that provides lodging rooms for compensation to three or more
persons who are not members of the keeper’s family.



   SCHOOLS, COMMERCIAL.  A for-profit organization or not-for-profit
organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic
instruction in some type of trade or vocation or instruction or lessons
related to recreation, music, art or similar activity. 



   SCREENING.  A structure erected or vegetation planted to wholly or
partially conceal the area behind it.



   SETBACK.  See YARD.



   SETBACK, FRONT.  See YARD, FRONT.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  A group of three or more retail or service
commercial uses characterized by any one or more of the following:



      (1)   Uses are designed as a single commercial group, whether
or not located on the same lot;



      (2)   Contiguous uses occupy premises that are under common
ownership or management;



      (3)   Uses are connected by party walls, partitions, canopies
or other structural members to form one continuous structure;



      (4)   Uses are located in separate buildings but are
interconnected by walkways or access ways designed to facilitate customer
interchange between uses;



      (5)   Uses share a common parking area; or



      (6)   Uses otherwise present the appearance of a single
continuous commercial development.



   SIDE LOT LINE.  See LOT LINE, SIDE.



   SIDE YARD.  See YARD, SIDE.



   SIDEWALK OR PATIO SEATING.  Seating in connection with but outside of
a restaurant near but not encroaching on the public thoroughfare without
permission from the village.



   SIGN.  Any visual or graphic device designed through use of words,
numbers, characters or symbols to inform or attract attention and which is
designed to be visible from outside any building or structure in which, upon
which, or attached to which it may be located. Window displays of merchandise
and signs of less than one- half square foot in area that are part of such
displays and are not affixed to windows shall not be considered signs for
purposes of this chapter.



   SIGN AREA.  The total exposed surface on each facing devoted to a
sign’s message, including all ornamentation, embellishment and symbols but
excluding any supporting structure that does not form part of the sign
consisting of individual letters or symbols against a wall shall be the sum
of the areas within rectangular envelopes completely enclosing each separate
letter or symbol or attached group thereof.



   SIGN, BANNER.  A temporary sign composed of lightweight material
either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame and secured or mounted so as
to allow movement of the sign caused by movement of the atmosphere.



   SIGN, BUSINESS.  A sign directing attention to a business, profession,
commodity, service, entertainment, person, cause, event or organization
conducted, sold, offered, operating or having premises upon the same lot.



   SIGN, CANOPY.  A sign, other than an under canopy sign, attached to or
constructed in or on a canopy.



   SIGN, CHANGING.  A sign with a message copy of other display that is
produced and periodically changed electronically such as a public service
time and temperature sign.



   SIGN, CLEARANCE.  The distance to grade from the lowest edge of a sign
excluding any pole or support structure attached to the ground.



   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION.  A non- illuminated sign displayed prior to or
during construction and removed thereafter that identifies a building under
construction together with such information as the owner, the manager, the
contractor, and subcontractors, the architect and engineer, the source of
financing, the projected date of completion, the major tenants, and related
information.



   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL.  A sign that serves solely to direct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic or parking within a premises or to provide related
instructions of facility information but that contains no advertising other
than the name and logo of the business on the premise.



   SIGN, DIRECTORY.  A sign that states only the names, addresses and
trades or professions of multiple occupants of a commercial or industrial
building or development.



   SIGN, DISPLAY BOARD.  A sign other than a changing sign on which
letters are changeable and that is attached to another sign, to the support
structure thereof, or to a wall for the purpose of displaying advertising or
other notices.



   SIGN EMBELLISHMENT.  Any framing or trim attached to or superimposed
upon a sign.



   SIGN FACING.  The surface of a sign upon, against or through which the
message is displayed or illustrated.



   SIGN, FLASHING.  A sign which contains an intermittent or flashing
light sources or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing
light by means of animation of an externally mounted intermittent light
source. CHANGING SIGNS as defined in this section are not considered FLASHING
SIGNS.



   SIGN, FREE-STANDING.  A sign supported by one or more poles, uprights,
pylons or braces on the ground and not attached to a building.



   SIGN, GROUND.  A free-standing sign with a sign height of less than
eight feet.



   SIGN, HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the CURB LEVEL as
defined in this section of the closest public street to a sign to the highest
point of the sign. Where a sign is equally close to more than one public
street, the mean average of the curb levels of each street shall be used to
determine sign height.



   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION.  A non- illuminated sign indicating the name or
trademark of a permitted use, the address of a building or occupants, and the
name of the management of the establishment on which the sign is located.



   SIGN, ILLUMINATED.  A sign illuminated by a source of artificial light
having the principal purpose of furnishing illumination for the sign whether
or not said source is part of the structure of the sign.



   SIGN, MARQUEE.  See SIGN, CANOPY.



   SIGN, MOVING.  A sign that has one or more visible parts that move.



   SIGN, NAME PLATE.  A non-illuminated sign that states only the names,
addresses, and trades or professions of one or more businesses or occupants
of the lot where the sign is placed.



   SIGN, NONDURABLE.  A sign made of paper, cloth, or other nondurable
material, or any sign not affixed to a building or to the ground.



   SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.  A sign that directs attention to a
business, profession, commodity, service, entertainment, person, cause,
event, or organization conducted, sold, offered, operating or having premises
elsewhere than on the lot on which the sign is located, and only
incidentally, if at all, on such lot.



   SIGN, POLE.  A free-standing sign with a sign height of eight feet or
greater.



   SIGN, PORTABLE.  Any sign that is moveable, and not permanently
attached to the ground, a structure or another sign.



   SIGN, PROJECTING.  A sign attached to the wall of a building having a
face that is not parallel to such wall or that extends more than 12 inches
from the face of the wall or higher than the highest point of the roof or the
top of the parapet, whichever is higher.



   SIGN, REAL ESTATE.  A non- illuminated sign used to offer for sale,
lease or rent the property upon which or within which the sign is places or
to announce an open house or that the property has been sold.



   SIGN, ROOF.  A sign erected or maintained upon or over a roof with its
principal support on the roof structure. A sign that is erected or maintained
upon but projects no more than 12 inches from the face of that portion of a
mansard roof that is vertical or approximately vertical and that does not
extend above the highest point of the vertical portion of the roof, shall be
considered a wall sign and not a roof sign.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY.  A sign-including banners, pennants, flags,
searchlights, twirling signs, sandwich type signs, sidewalk or curb signs,
balloons or other air or gas filled figures-that is displayed for a period of
less than 30 days.



   SIGN, TRAILER.  A sign mounted on a vehicle normally licensed by the
state as a trailer for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention.



   SIGN, UNDER CANOPY.  A sign projecting from and beneath a canopy.



   SIGN, WALL.  A sign erected upon or parallel to an outside building
wall which does not extend more than 12 inches from the face of the wall or
higher than the highest point of the roof or the top of the parapet,
whichever is higher.



   SIGN, WINDOW, PERMANENT.  A sign placed inside or upon a window and
designed to be visible from outside a building with the purpose of
identifying for a period of 30 days or more the proprietor or name of a
business.



   SIGN, WINDOW, TEMPORARY.  A sign placed inside or upon a window and
designed to be visible from outside a building with the purpose of attracting
attention for a period of less than 30 days.



   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.  See DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.



   SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING.  See DWELLING, SINGLE- FAMILY
ATTACHED.



   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING.  See DWELLING, SINGLE- FAMILY
DETACHED.



   SITE AREA, NET.  The acreage of land excluding the rights-of-way of
streets within a bordering a development.



   SMOKE UNITS, NUMBER OF.  The number obtained by multiplying the smoke
density in Ringelmann numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the
purpose of this calculation, a Ringelmann density reading is made at least
once every minute during the period of observation, each reading is
multiplied by the time in minutes during which the emission is observed, and
the various products are summed to give the total number of smoke units
during the period of observation.



   SOLID FENCE.  See FENCE, SOLID.



   SOUND-LEVEL METER.  Any instrument standardized by the American
Standards Association for measurement of the intensity of sound.



   SPACE, NON-VEHICULAR.  That portion of the uncovered space on a site
that is not normally used for the circulation or parking of motor vehicles
and that has been improved for aesthetic appeal and to serve as pedestrian
and recreation areas.



   SPACE, UNCOVERED.  That portion of the total horizontal net site area
that is not covered by buildings, including one-half of covered spaces that
are no less than 50% open such as carports or park shelters.



   SPACE, RECREATION.  That portion of the non-vehicular space on a site
that is suitable for common recreational use by virtue of its being at least
5,000 square feet in area (except where total recreation space required is
less), its having no dimension less than 50 feet, and its being improved with
facilities for recreational pursuits.



   STORAGE. A space or place within a building where goods, materials, or
personal property is placed or kept for more than 24 consecutive hours.



   STORAGE GARAGE.  See GARAGE, STORAGE.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the top surface of
any floor and the top surface of the floor next above, or, if there is no
floor above, the ceiling next above.



   STORY, HALF.  A space under a sloping roof where the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall is nor more than three feet above the
top floor level and in which space not more than 60% of the floor area is
completed for principal or accessory use.



   STREET.  A public or private right-of-way as defined in this section
that affords a primary means of motor vehicle access to abutting property
and/or provides for the movement of traffic.



   STREET LINE.  See LINE, STREET.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change except those required by law or
ordinance, which would prolong the life of the supporting embers of a
building or structure such as: bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, not
including openings in bearing walls s permitted by other ordinances.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything erected the use of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having such a
location. An outdoor advertising sign or business sign or other advertising
device, if detached of projecting, shall be considered a separate structure.
Structures shall also include buildings, mobile homes, walls and fences.



   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY.  One which is subordinate to and serves a
principal building; is subordinate in extent, or purpose to the principal
building served; contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of
occupants of the principal building, and is located in the rear yard or side
yards anil on the same zoning lot as a principal building served, except as
otherwise indicated in this code.



   STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY.  A structure that is established for a period of
less than one year and is removed within that period.



   STUDIO APARTMENT.  See EFFICIENCY UNIT.



   SURFACE MINING.  The mining of any minerals by removing the overburden
lying above natural deposits thereof, and mining directly from the natural
deposits thereby exposed or the deposition of the overburden therefrom. Also
see MINING ANDRECLAMATION OPERATIONS, as defined herein.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER.  A telecommunications carrier as define in
Public Utilities Act as of January 1, 1997.



   TEMPORARY BUILDING.  See BUILDING, TEMPORARY.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  See SIGN, TEMPORARY.



   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. See STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY.



   TEMPORARY USE.  See USE, TEMPORARY.



   THROUGH LOT.  See LOT, THROUGH.



   TOWNHOUSE.  See DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE.



   TOWING OPERATION.  Any business which offers the services of a vehicle
wrecker or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or
otherwise removed from one place to another by the use of a motor vehicle
adapted to and designed for that purpose, without offering any additional
services such as auto repair, and including outside storage of towed vehicles.



   TOXIC MATERIAL.  Any liquid, sold or gaseous substance which if
discharged into the environment could, alone or with other substances likely
to be present in the environment, cause or threaten to cause bodily injury,
illness or death to members of the general public through any body surface.
Substances that are corrosives, irritants, strong sensitizers, or radioactive
substances shall be considered toxic substances.



   TRAILERS.  Any portable structure or vehicle designed for highway
travel and used on a short-term or interim basis for living, sleeping or
commercial purposes.



   TRAILER PARK.  Any site or tract of land under single ownership or
control other than a construction site, trailer service or repair facility,
trailer manufacturing plant, trailer sales or storage lot, or wrecking yard
on which three or more trailers or recreational vehicles are located in the
open.



   TREE HOUSE.    An accessory structure which utilizes one or more
trees for structural support and/or incorporates the tree into the design.



   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING.  See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.



   UNCONTAMINATED SOIL.  Soil generated during construction, remodeling,
repair or demolition of utilities, structures, and roads that does not
contain contaminants in concentrations that pose a threat to human health and
safety and the environment.



   UNCONTAMINATED SOIL FILL OPERATION (USFO).  A current or former
quarry, mine, or other excavation where uncontaminated soil is used as fill
material but does not include a Clean Construction and Demolition Debris
(CCDD) fill operation.



   UNCOVERED SPACE.  See SPACE, UNCOVERED.



   UNIT.  See DWELLING UNIT.



   UNIT GROUPING.  A single detached building consisting of multiple
dwelling units.



   USE.  The purpose or activity for which land or structures thereon are
designed, arranged or intended of for which they are occupied or maintained.



   USE, ACCESSORY.  A subordinate land use located on the same lot or
parcel as a principal use (except for such off-street parking or off-street
loading on a separate lot) and serving a purpose customarily incidental to
that of the principal use.



   USE, CONDITIONAL.  A special use as provided by state statute that
because of its special character cannot be allowable generally in a
particular zoning district but which may be allowed under special conditions
and which is therefore subject to the prior approval of a conditional use
permit.



   USE, CONDITIONAL PUBLIC. 



      (1)   The use of property other than as PERMITTED PUBLIC USE
as defined in this section by a public utility, railroad or governmental body
for the provision of public utilities or services, including sewage, water
supply, electricity, gas, public safety, transportation and communication.



      (2)   Shall include power plants or substations; water or
sewage treatment plants, reservoirs, or pumping stations; railroad and
utility buildings; and public transportation facilities, including shelters,
garages, terminals, parking and turnaround areas, and service buildings.



   USE, PERMITTED.  A use allowable generally within a zoning district
without a conditional use permit.



   USES, PERMITTED PUBLIC.  Poles, towers, tunnels, conduits, wires,
cable, vaults, laterals, pipes, drains, mains, valves, hydrants and similar
distribution equipment for public services or utilities; fire alarms and
police call boxes; traffic signal; and pay telephones.



   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use to which premises are devoted comprising
at least 80% of the floor area and primary purpose for the premises and parcel



   USE, TEMPORARY.  A principal or accessory use that is established for
a period of less than one year and is discontinued within that time period.



   VARIANCE.  A modification of the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with the provisions in this chapter concerning variances in cases
where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship as a result of special
circumstances affecting an individual property that do not generally affect
other properties in the same zoning district.



   VARIANCE, MINOR.  A variance granted to the fee owner, contract
purchase or option holder of a single single-family detached or attached
dwelling or single-family detached or attached building lot for that dwelling
or lot.



   VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL.  A motorized vehicle other than a passenger car,
passenger van, or recreational vehicle used by a household for non-commercial
personal or family transportation, for recreation, of for van pooling or
ride-sharing use and trucks licensed to 8,000 pounds or less gross motor
weight, so long as they meet all other vehicle ordinances. COMMERCIAL
VEHICLES include all other commercial trucks, buses, buses used as
recreational vehicles, commercial vans, tractors, semi-trailers, motorized
farm vehicles and earth-moving equipment.



   VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE.  A triangular area located at the at-grade
intersection of streets, railroads, driveways or any combination thereof,
formed by the right-of-way lines (or the edge of the driveway or aisle in the
case of a driveway) between their intersection and points 30 feet from their
intersection along each line (or ten feet in the case of a driveway), and by
a straight line connecting these two points.2017 S-9



   WALL, FRONT.  The wall of a building nearest the front lot line that
is parallel to or most nearly parallel to said line.



   WALL SIGN.  See SIGN, WALL.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS).  Any device that converts wind
power to another form of energy, such as electricity or heat (also referred
to by such common names as wind charger, wind turbine, or wind mill).



   WINDOW SIGN.  See SIGN, WINDOW PERMANENT AND SIGN, WINDOW, TEMPORARY.



   WRECKING YARD.  Any premises where there are stored in the open two or
more motor vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, and construction and farm
implements-or trailers, boats, or mobile homes, which are not in usable
condition and have not been restored to useable condition within 30 days of
their arrival, or where parts thereof are stored in the open.



   YARD.  An open space on a lot other than a court that is required to
remain unoccupied and unobstructed above ground by any structure or part or
projection thereof from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise
permitted in this chapter. Yard requirements are as measured horizontally
irrespective of the slope of the land.



   YARD, CORNER SIDE.  That part of the yard, on a corner lot, lying
between the exterior side lot line and the nearest line of the principal
building and extending from the front yard to the rear lot line. 



   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending the full width of a zoning lot between
the lot line which fronts on a street and nearest line of the principal
building. On a corner lot, the smaller of the two dimensions adjacent to a
street shall be considered the front yard.



   YARD, INTERIOR SIDE.  That part of the yard lying between the side lot
line and the nearest line of the home, and extending from the front yard to
the rear yard.



   YARD, REAR.  That part of the yard lying between the rear lot line and
the nearest line of the principal building and extending across the full
width of the rear lot line for an interior lot or to the corner side yard on
a corner lot. 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-11, passed 3-9-2017; Ord. 17-O-12, passed
3-9-2017; Ord. 18-O-14, passed 5-15-18; Ord. 19-O-02, passed 1-15-19)



FILING PROCEDURES



§ 22.025  APPLICABILITY.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the requirements of this
section shall apply to all applications submitted under the provisions of
this chapter except appeals, including applications for:



   (A)   Conditional uses;



   (B)   Temporary uses;



   (C)   Planned Unit Development preliminary plans;



   (D)   Planned Unit Development final plans;



   (E)   Variances;



   (F)   Sign permits; and



   (G)   Zoning amendments.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.026  APPLICATION FILINGS.



   Except in the case of a zoning action proposed by the President and
Board of Trustees or a board or commission of the village, any party
requesting any village action to which this section applies shall file an
application on a form provided therefor by the Village Clerk. Every such
application shall include a minimum the applicable items provided in Table 1.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.027  APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   The approval process shall apply to all applications except:



      (1)   Administrative variations;



      (2)   Appeals;



      (3)   Conditional use waiver;



      (4)   Sign permits; and



      (5)   Temporary uses.



   (B)   The approval process for the excepted applications shall be as
provided in the applicable sections of this chapter.



   (C)   Optional Village Board early review. Prior to filing for
approval of a particular zoning action or development plan, an applicant may
request an early review of the Village Board to present their development
concept plan. To schedule an early review of the Village Board, the applicant
must submit in writing a request for early review to the Department of
Community and Economic Development, as well as provide a written narrative
explaining the project scope, and include a schematic site/floor plan, The
applicant must also acknowledge in writing that the comments provided by the
Village Board are non-binding and are in no way an endorsement or indication
as to the approval or denial of the proposed request.



   (D)   Staff review.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator may, together with other
departments, consultants, and officials of the village, prepare a written
review of the application. Such review shall be forwarded to the Planning and
Zoning Commission before the scheduled public hearing date.



      (2)   The staff may advise and assist the applicant in meeting
ordinance requirements but shall have no power to approve or disapprove any
filing or in any way restrict the applicant’s right to seek formal approval
thereof.



   (E)   Public hearing process (filings requiring hearings only). 
For any action that requires a public hearing, the provisions in this section
shall be complied with. Applications that require a public hearing are
amendments (rezonings), variances and conditional uses, including Planned
Unit Developments preliminary plans but not Planned Unit Development final
plans.



      (1)   Public notice.  The applicant shall comply with the
requirements for public notice in this chapter for any zoning action that
requires a public hearing.



      (2)   Notification to petitioner by objectors. Any attorney
employed by any objector to any petition requiring a public hearing shall
notify the petitioner that he or she has been so retained and will file an
objection at the hearing. Such notice shall be delivered no later than four
days before the scheduled date of the hearing. If such notice has not been
given, and the petitioner so requests, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
reschedule the hearing.



      (3)   Public hearing. 



         (a)   Upon receipt of a complete and accurate
application for a zoning action requiring a public hearing, the Village Clerk
shall establish a date for a public hearing and transmit the application to
the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
hold a public hearing on the application. No public hearing shall be held in
the absence of a quorum, which shall consist of five members of the
Commission.



         (b)   As provided in state statute, applicants for
variances and conditional uses shall have the right to have subpoenas issued
by the village for persons or documents, to present witnesses, and to
cross-examine all witnesses testifying at the public hearing.



         (c)   The Chairman or Acting Chairman may compel the
attendance of witnesses. All testimony by witnesses shall be given under oath
administered by the Chairman or Acting Chairman.



      (4)   Planning and Zoning Commission action.



         (a)   Within 30 days after the close of the public
hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the Village
Board written findings of fact pertaining to the approval criteria provided
in this section for the applicable zoning action together with a
recommendation for action, passed by a majority vote of its members, and any
conditions or restrictions to which the Commission recommends the action be
made subject. The report shall include the roll call vote for the Board on
the recommendation.



         (b)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may not defer
voting on any petition for more than one meeting unless the petitioner
approves any further postponement.



         (c)   In case of an application requiring a public
hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation may include
any modification of normal requirements that is authorized by this chapter.



      (5)   Planning and Zoning Commission report.  The Zoning
Administrator shall forward a copy of the Planning and Zoning Commission
report to the petitioner and to representatives of any objectors not less
than two days prior to the public hearing of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and President and Board of Trustees meeting at which the report is
to be acted upon.



   (F)   President and Board of Trustees action.



      (1)   The President and Board of Trustees shall not act upon
any application requiring a public hearing until either it has received a
report thereupon from the Planning and Zoning Commission or until 30 days
have elapsed from the close of the public hearing thereupon.



      (2)   The President and Board of Trustees shall not approve
any application unless it finds that the zoning action applied for meets
applicable criteria for approval provided in this section. In the case of a
variance, a vote of two-thirds of all Trustees shall be required to approve
any application not approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. In all
other cases, the concurrence of a majority of the President and Board of
Trustees, shall be required.



      (3)   In case of a conditional use, Planned Unit Development,
or variance, the President and Board of Trustees may make its approval
subject to any conditions or restrictions it finds necessary to assure
compatibility with the vicinity of the subject property. The President and
Board of Trustees may also set time limits within which such conditions or
restrictions must be complied with.



   (G)   Resubmission.  Except as otherwise provided in this section,
no application that has been denied by the President and Board of Trustees
shall be resubmitted within one year of the date of denial except on the
grounds of new factual evidence or a change in conditions found to be valid
by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 19-O-06, passed 3-5-2019)



§ 22.028  FILING FEES AND RETAINED PERSONNEL FEES.



   (A)   All applications shall be accomplished by a filing fee. A
deposit toward the costs of any retained personnel necessary for the
processing of the application, such as consulting engineering services,
consulting planning services, legal services or court reporter services shall
also be paid except for applications for:



      (1)   Minor variances;



      (2)   Temporary uses;



      (3)   Appeals; and



      (4)   Sign permits.



   (B)   The deposit shall be credited against the expense to the
village of such personnel, which shall be fully charged to the applicant. Any
portion of the deposit not need to pay such expense shall be refunded without
interest to the applicant within 30 days of final action on the application.



   (C)   The amounts of such filing fees and deposits shall be as
determined from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees. A
schedule of current fees and deposit requirements shall be made available in
the offices of the Village Clerk and the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.029  DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST.



   (A)   The party signing the application shall be considered the
applicant.



   (B)   An applicant must be the fee owner or trustee of record, trust
beneficiary, lessee, contract purchaser, or option holder of the subject
property or his or her agent or nominee.



      (1)   Applicant is not fee owner.



         (a)   If the applicant is not the fee owner of the
record of the subject property, the application shall disclose the legal
capacity of the applicant and the full names, addresses, and telephone
numbers of all owners.



         (b)   In addition, an affidavit of the fee owner or
owners shall be filed with the application stating that the applicant has
authority from the owner to make the application.



      (2)   Applicant of fee owner is corporation or partnership. 
If the applicant, fee owner, contract purchaser, option holder or any
beneficiary of a land trust is a corporation, the application shall disclose
the names and addressed of the corporation’s officers, directors, and
registered agents, or the partnership’s general partners and those
shareholders or limited partners owning in excess of 5% of the outstanding
stock or interest in the corporation or interest shared by the limited
partners.



      (3)   Applicant or owner is a land trust.



         (a)   If the applicant or fee owner is a land trust or
other trust or trustee thereof, the full name, address, telephone number and
extent of interest of each beneficiary must be disclosed in the application.



         (b)   Disclosure of the present ownership interests
shall be accompanied by a statement by the applicant of proposed ownership of
all land. In the event of a change in ownership between the time the
application is filed and the time of the public hearing, such change shall be
disclosed by affidavit no later than the time of the hearing.



         (c)   For any application for a sign permit, the
application shall disclose the ownership of the sign and the ownership or
management of the premises on which it is to be displayed. For an application
for either a sign permit or a temporary use permit, the application shall
include the written permission of the owner or manager of the premises on
which the sign or temporary use permit, the application shall include the
written permission of the owner or manager of the premises on which the sign
or temporary use is to be located. A manager providing such permission shall
furnish satisfactory evidence of his or her authority to act on behalf of the
owner.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.030  PUBLIC NOTICE.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an applicant for
any action that requires a public hearing must provide public notice of such
hearing. Zoning actions that require a public hearing are:



      (1)   Amendments (rezonings);



      (2)   Variances; and



      (3)   Conditional uses, including Planned Unit Development
preliminary plans but not Planned Unit Development final plans.



   (B)   The required notice shall consist of the following actions:



      (1)   Sign display.



         (a)   Except in the case of applications for minor
variances, the applicant shall post a sign in the front yard of the affected
property, facing and visible from a public street and no further than 30 feet
from the right-of-way line.



         (b)   The sign shall conform to such requirements as to
copy, size of lettering and other items as may be established by the
President and Board of Trustees.



         (c)   The sign shall be erected no less than 15 days
prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing and remain continuously in
place until the public hearing is concluded but no more than ten days
thereafter.



         (d)   No posting of a sign shall be required if the
applicant is the village, the zoning action pertains to property not owned by
the village and the property owner does not consent to the erection of a sign
giving notice of the action.



      (2)   Written notification.



         (a)   Except in the case of applications for minor
variances, the applicant shall also provide written notice of the public
hearing to the owners of record of each parcel of real estate abutting or
across a street or alley from any boundary of the property affected by the
application.



         (b)   The owners of record for this purpose shall be
considered those appearing on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds or
those who paid property taxes for the most recent year according to the
records of the County Collector.



         (c)   The written notice shall be delivered in person or
by certified mail, return receipt requested, not more than 30 nor less than
15 days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing.



         (d)   The written notice shall be substantially in the
form of notice provided by the Village Clerk. It shall contain:



            1.   The name and address of the owner and the
applicant, if different from the owner;



            2.   The street address, legal description, and a
simple description of the location of the subject property that will enable
the ordinary reader to accurately locate it;



            3.   The zoning action requested; and



            4.   The date, time and location of the public
hearing thereupon.



      (3)   Newspaper publication.



         (a)   The applicant shall publish a notice of the public
hearing. This requirement shall apply to all applications, including those
for minor variances.



         (b)   The notice shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village at least 15 days but no more than 30 days
before the scheduled date of the hearing. The published notice shall contain
the same information as is required for written notification in this section.



         (c)   If a board or commission of the village or the
President and Board of Trustees proposes an amendments, the village shall be
responsible for meeting this requirement.



      (4)   Evidence of compliance.  No later than the time of the
public hearing, the applicant shall file with the Village Clerk or the
Planning and Zoning Commission:



         (a)   An affidavit stating that he or she has complied
with all notice requirements in this section;



         (b)   A copy of the written notice sent;



         (c)   A list of  names and addresses of all owners of
record of property abutting the subject parcel; and



         (d)   A publisher’s certificate of publication of the
required notice.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 



 


Table 1: Required Contents of Application Filings






 

Map
Amendment (Rezone)

 

Conditional Use

 

Variance Except Minor Variance

 

PUD
Preliminary Plan

 

PUD Final Plan

 

Temporary Use





Zoning Application with Contact Information of applicant, consultants, and
experts
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Legal description
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Ownership information; warranty deed, trust, title policy, lease agreement or
contractor to purchase
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Ownership affidavit and site visit authorization form
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Location aerial and map
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


A non-refundable filing fee & retained personnel fee deposit
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Project/business narrative outlining existing site conditions; underlying
zoning and comprehensive plan land use designation of the subject site and
surrounding properties; project scope; requested zoning actions with
variations or exceptions; proposed land use(s); number of employees; hours of
operation; delivery and refuse collection times; construction timeline,
project phasing; and implementation scheduled.
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


List of all owners of record of property abutting the subject property per §
22.030(B)(2)
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
-
 
-


The zoning district classifications of the subject property and all abutting
properties per § 22.030(B)(2)
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
-
 
X


Current plat of survey
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
-
 
R


Sight geometric plan that is fully dimensioned and to scale
 
X
 
X
 
R
 
X
 
X
 
R


Performance standards compliance as per §§ 22.195 - 22.207
 
R
 
I
 
-
 
R
 
-
 
-


Preliminary engineering and storm water management plans, details, and
detention calculations
 
R
 
R
 
R
 
X
 
 
 
R


Final engineering plans, details, and detention calculations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 


Floor plans
 
R
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Building elevations
 
R
 
R
 
R
 
X
 
X
 
 


Building rendering(s)
 
R
 
R
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Building cross section (multi-story buildings only)
 
R
 
R
 
R
 
X
 
X
 
 


Landscape and tree preservation plan
 
R
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Signage plan
 
 
 
R
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Fiscal impact and market assessment
 
R
 
R
 
 
 
R
 
R
 
 


Written justification to zoning approval criteria
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


Renderings
Architectural renderings showing substantial design intent for proposed
structures but not necessarily final design detail
 
R
 
R
 
-
 
X
 
X
 
-


Association by-laws and covenants, conditions & restrictions (CC&R’s)
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
X
 
X
 
-


Traffic and Parking Study from a Certified Traffic Engineer that includes but
may not be limited to; trip generation, trip distribution, Level of Service,
parking supply and demand, and recommended improvements
 
R
 
R
 
-
 
R
 
-
 
-


School impact and capacity analysis:
Of capacity of all affected public school districts to handle the enrollment
likely to be generated by the residential development
 
R
 
R
 
 
 
R
 
-
 
-


Final plat of subdivision deeds or easement agreements conveying ownership
interest in any parcel to any public body
 
R
 
R
 
R
 
R
 
-
 
-


Performance bonds: to guarantee installation of public or common improvements
 
R
 
R
 
-
 
-
 
X
 
-


Any other information the Planning and Zoning Commission requires to
determine whether the application conforms to the requirements of this chapter
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


X :   Required for all applications
- :   (Blank): not required for any application
R :   When applicable as determined by the village
I :   Required for industrial uses only
   Contents of applications for administrative variations, conditional use
waivers, minor variations, temporary use permits, and zoning appeals, shall
be pursuant to the sections herein and the application packets as provided by
the village




 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 19-O-06, passed 3-5-2019)



GENERAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 22.040  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   To accomplish the purposes of this chapter, the village is hereby
divided and classified into the following zoning districts:



 


Residential Districts





RE-1
 
Estate Single-Family Residential District


RS-1
 
Low-Density Single-Family Residential District


RS-2
 
Medium-Density Single-Family Residential District


RS-3
 
Medium-High-Density Single-Family Residential District


RS-4
 
High-Density Single-Family Residential District


RM-1
 
Low Density Multi-Family Residential District


RM-2
 
High Density Multi-Family Residential District


Commercial Districts


C-1
 
Convenience Commercial District


C-2
 
Neighborhood Commercial District


C-3
 
Community Commercial District


C-4
 
Downtown Commercial District


C-5
 
Highway Commercial District


C-6
 
Planned Regional Center District


Office, Industrial and Agricultural Districts


O-1
 
Local Office District


O-2
 
Office Park District


I-1
 
Industrial District


A-M
 
Agriculture AND Mining Overlay District (MC-88-435)




 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.041  ZONING DISTRICT MAP.



   (A)   The zoning district classification of all land in the village
shall be shown on the map designated as the Village of Lakemoor Zoning
District Map, dated and signed by the Village Clerk upon adoption. No land
shall at any time be classified in more than one zoning district, except that
land may be classified in any district designated as an overlay district and
in a district that is not an overlay district.



   (B)   The zoning district map, everything shown thereon, and all
amendments thereto shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully
described herein and shall be filled as part of this chapter by the Village
Clerk. Said map shall be available for public inspection in the Office of the
Village Clerk. Any amendments to this map shall be similarly dated, filed and
made available for public reference and shall be incorporated into the zoning
map by the Zoning Administrator on or before March 31 of each year and
published as provided by statute.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.042  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   District boundary lines shall, unless otherwise indicated, be
on the boundary lines of the village, of sections or divisions of sections,
or tract or lot lines; on the center lines of streets railroads, alleys,
easements, rivers and other water bodies; or on the extension of such lines.



   (B)   District boundary lines approximately following such lines
shall be interpreted as located on those lines. Distances not specifically
indicated on the map shall be established using the scale of the map.



   (C)   Where a district boundary divides a lot in single ownership,
the district governing any portion of the lot may, at the owner’s
discretion, extend to the entire lot if such extension is not more than 25
feet beyond the district boundary on the map.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.043  ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND.



   Except as may be provided for by a preannexation agreement or by a
subsequent amendment to this chapter, any parcel of land hereafter annexed to
the village shall be classified in the lowest-numbered RS Single-Family
Residential District that will permit the parcel, or the smallest subdivided
lot therein, to conform to the minimum lot area required in that District.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.044  REGULATION OF FLOODPLAIN LANDS.



   The use of land located within flood plains is regulated by the village
flood control ordinance (Chapter 46 in addition to the requirements in this
chapter).



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.045  AIR RIGHTS.



   The development of air rights shall be a conditional use in all zoning
districts and subject to all other requirements of the zoning district
applying to the land below as well as to the procedures and criteria
governing conditional uses.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.046  ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING PER LOT.



   Except within Planned Unit Developments, no more than one principal
building or use shall be permitted on any lot in any zoning district.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.047  OPERATIONS WITHIN ENCLOSED BUILDINGS.



   All business, service, storage, merchandise, display, and, where
permitted, repair and processing shall be conducted wholly within enclosed
buildings except for off-street parking, off-street loading and for open
sales lots or outside storage where these uses are permitted.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.048  SPACING OF SERVICE STATIONS.



   No automobile service station shall be located within 600 feet of any
other automobile service station.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.049  ADULT USES.



   All lot lines of a lot on which any ADULT USE, as defined in § 22.011,
is located shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet from:



   (A)   The boundary of any Residential District; and



   (B)   Any lot line of any lot on which is located a single- or
multiple-family dwelling, religious institution, education institution, park,
playground or other area where large numbers of minor regularly travel or
congregate.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.050  TEMPORARY USES.



   (A)   Temporary uses of land may be permitted in any zoning district
by the Zoning Administrator of a temporary use permit, subject to the
provisions in this section.



   (B)   An application for a temporary use permit shall be filed with
the Zoning Administrator at least 30 days before the requested beginning of
the temporary use.  The application shall include the items specified in
Table 1 in the filing procedures section of this chapter.



   (C)   Upon receipt of a complete and accurate application and upon
determining that there is evidence of compliance with the conditions and
requirements set forth in this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall issue
a temporary use permit. Such permit shall be limited to the uses and time
periods provided on the permit and shall set forth any applicable conditions
provided in this chapter.



   (D)   The permittee shall display the permit within plain view on
the premises of the temporary use for the duration of the use.



   (E)   The following temporary uses are subject to the conditions
provided below:



      (1)   Carnival or circus conditions.



         (a)   Is limited in duration to ten days;



         (b)   Is operated or sponsored by a non-profit group; and



         (c)   Is not located in or adjacent to any developed
residential area other than on church, school or park property.



      (2)   Sidewalk display and sale of bedding plants conditions.



         (a)   Does not exceed 90 days per calendar year;



         (b)   Is conducted in Commercial Districts only; and



         (c)   Does not cover an area exceeding 50% of the width
of any public sidewalk.



      (3)   Sale of Christmas trees conditions.



         (a)   Is limited in duration to 30 days; and



         (b)   Is not conducted in or adjacent to any developed
residential area.



      (4)   Temporary roadside display and sale of farm produce, art
work or other merchandise conditions.



         (a)   Is not conducted in or adjacent to any developed
residential area;



         (b)   Is limited in duration to 90 days;



         (c)   Provides adequate ingress and egress from
adjoining roadways;



         (d)   Provides one off-street parking space per 75
square feet of display areas with a minimum of three spaces. Such spaces need
not meet the requirements of the off-street parking and loading or
landscaping sections in this chapter.



      (5)   Downtown or shopping center sidewalk sales conditions.



         (a)   Do not exceed ten days per calendar year;



         (b)   Are not held more than twice a year;



         (c)   Do not cover an area exceeding 50% of the width of
any public sidewalk at any point within the shopping center or downtown area;
and



         (d)   Represent the only times during the year when any
business shall maintain a sidewalk sale display.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.051  EXCEPTIONS TO ARTERIAL LOT DIMENSIONS.



   The following lots are exempt from the special required minimum lot
dimensions along streets designated as arterials in the Comprehensive Plan
that are provided in the regulations for individual zoning districts:



   (A)   Existing lots of record as of the effective date of this
chapter; and



   (B)   Lots subdivided after the effective date of this chapter that
meet any of the following conditions:



      (1)   The only access to the lot is from public streets or
public access drives that are not arterials, and are either already in
existence or have been planned and approved by the village. Except in the
case of a lot in a Residential District, such streets or access drives shall
not primarily serve a residential area.



      (2)   (a)   The only access to the lot is from curb cuts
provided jointly with one or more other lots with a combine frontage on the
arterial of 150 feet or more.



         (b)   Where such lots are part of the same subdivisions,
the curb curs shall meet all village requirements. Where such lots are not
part of the same subdivision, village requirements shall be met to the extent
possible, and the total number of curb cuts shall not be increased.



      (3)   The only access to the lot is ultimately to be provided
from a frontage road planned and approved by the Illinois Departments of
Transportation, the county, or the village and where right-of-way adjacent to
the lot has been dedicated totaling 100 feet from the center line of the
arterial or such lesser distance equaling or exceeding 50 feet as the village
may approve.



      (4)   Other arrangements approved by the village establish a
minimum distance of 150 feet between each curb cut on the lot and all other
curb cuts on the lot or on adjacent parcels or control left turns in and out
of curb cuts by driveway channelization and signage.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 22.065  GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.



   The following provisions apply in all Residential Districts:



   (A)   Home occupations.



      (1)   Home occupations must be managed and owned by a person
residing in the dwelling unit.



      (2)   Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within
enclosed structures and there shall be no exterior storage of equipment or
materials used.



      (3)   There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of
such occupation in the outside appearance of the premise, and said home
occupation shall not create noise, fumes, odor, dust, electrical
interference, or pedestrian or vehicular traffic that is more than normal for
the area in which it is located.



      (4)   The home occupation must be conducted so that it does
not create parking or traffic congestion or otherwise unreasonable interfere
with the peace and enjoyment of surrounding homes as places of residence.



      (5)   No more than one customer/client may be on site at any
given time and said home occupation may not employ anyone who is not a member
of the immediate family living on the premise.



      (6)   The home occupation must be operated in accordance with
all applicable laws, and if any state, federal or local permit or license is
required, such permit or license shall be obtained prior to said business
operating.



      (7)   Home occupation may include, among others, the following
uses provided they conform to all other requirements in this chapter:



         (a)   Art or crafts studio;



         (b)   Dressmaking;



         (c)   Teaching or tutoring, limited to one pupil at a
time except for occasional groups;



         (d)   Authors or composers;



         (e)   Offices of a professional person such as but not
limited to; a clergyman, attorney, architect, engineer, physician, dentist or
accountant; and



         (f)   Home day for more than three children but not to
exceed eight children, under the age of 12 years. The total number of
children shall include the family’s biological and/or adopted children
under the age of 12 years.



      (8)   Home occupations shall not include:



         (a)   Any wholesale or retail business that involves the
use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premise;



         (b)   Any manufacturing or processing operation;



         (c)   Any repair or service establishment;



         (d)   A stable or kennel;



         (e)   A restaurant;



         (f)   A clinic or hospital;



         (g)   A mortuary;



         (h)   A private club;



         (i)   The renting of trailers;



         (j)   A tourist home; and



         (k)   Barber or beauty shop employing any outside people.



      (9)   All home occupations must be registered with the village
and are subject to administrative review and approval, pursuant to the terms
in this chapter.  Any home occupation that does not meet the above mentioned
requirements, or is not specifically listed above, shall not be allowed
unless a conditional use permit is granted by the Village Board, pursuant to
§ 22.235 through 22.242 of this chapter.



   (B)   Standards for non-residential uses.



      (1)   Yard requirements for non-residential permitted and
conditional uses except permitted and conditional public uses and temporary
uses shall be the same as required for single-family detached dwellings in
the same zoning district. Where a building height is over 35 feet, however,
each required yard shall be increased by two feet for each additional foot of
building height over 35 feet.



      (2)   The lot width and are requirements for each
non-residential permitted use except permitted public uses and temporary uses
shall be the same are required per dwelling unit in the same district. For
non-residential conditional uses, such requirements shall be as determined by
the President and Board of Trustees. For both non-residential permitted and
conditional uses, maximum building height shall be governed by a maximum
floor area ratio of 0.6 and off-street parking and loading and landscaping
requirements and sign regulations shall be as provided in §§ 22.110 through
22.148.



   (C)   Residential lots abutting arterial streets.  In subdivisions
created after the date of effect of this chapter, residential lots
accommodating fewer than four dwelling units and abutting an arterial street
shall not have direct access onto the arterial. Such lots shall front upon
and have access only to existing or new collector or local streets, and not
to an arterial, except where the Planning and Zoning Commission determines
this to be impractical. Arterial streets shall be designated in the
Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.066  RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Single-Family Districts. To recognize, preserve and protect
the present character of existing single-family residential neighborhoods and
to provide for the development of new neighborhoods in accordance with
contemporary residential development standards.



      (1)   RE-1 Estate Single-Family Residential District. 



         (a)   Purpose. This District is intended to provide in
existing and newly developed outlying areas for a single-family detached
residential environment characterized by estate size lots.



         (b)   Regulations. As provided in Tables 4 and 5.



      (2)   RS-1 Low-Density Single-Family Residential Districts.



         (a)   Purpose. This District is intended to provide in
existing and new developing outlying areas for a single-family detached
residential environments characterized by large lots.



         (b)   Regulations. As provided in Tables 4 and 5.



      (3)   RS-2 Medium-Density Single-Family Residential Districts.



         (a)   Purpose. This District is intended to provide in
existing and new developing outlying areas for a single-family detached
residential environments characterized by medium-sized lots.



         (b)   Regulations. As provided in Tables 4 and 5.



      (4)   RS-3 Medium-High Density Single- Family Residential
District.



         (a)   Purpose. This District is intended to provide in
existing areas for a single-family detached residential environments
characterized by medium-small sized lots.



         (b)   Regulations. As provided in Tables 4 and 5.



      (5)   RS-4 High-Density Single-Family Residential District.



         (a)   Purpose. This District is intended to provide for
the appropriate zoning of existing single-family neighborhoods in the village
developed years ago under less stringent development standards.



         (b)   Regulations. As provided in Tables 4 and 5.



   (B)   Multi-Family Districts.  To provide for a variety of housing
types suited to the differing age groups and lifestyles of present and future
village residents in a way that most effectively controls the impacts on the
environment and public services created by high population densities.



      (1)   RA-1 Attached Residential District.



         (a)   Purpose. This District is intended to:



            1.   Provide for intermediate housing types and
densities between single-family detached and apartment development in order
to further a balance distribution of non-single-family detached housing in
the village;



            2.   To provide for intermediate- density
residential development in locations where apartment buildings would not be
compatible; and



            3.   To provide in a flexible manner for numbers
and sizes of dwelling units that will produce approximate population
densities of up to 20 persons per acre in such dispersed locations as will
produce minimal conflict with single-family areas.



         (b)   Regulations. As provided in Tables 4 and 5.



      (2)   RM-1 Low-Density Multi-Family Residential District.



         (a)   Purpose. This District is primarily intended to
provide in a flexible manner for numbers and sizes of dwelling units that
will produce approximate population densities of up to 26 persons per acre in
locations along major arterial streets and near centers of activity.



         (b)   Regulations. As provided in Tables 4 and 5.



      (3)   RM-2 High-Density Multi-Family Residential District.



         (a)   Purpose. This District is primarily intended to
provide in a flexible manner for numbers and sizes of dwelling units that
will produce approximate population densities of up to 31 persons per acre in
areas where the compatibility of high densities can be assured by means of
special review under conditional use procedures.



         (b)   Regulations. As provided in Tables 4 and 5.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 


Table 4: Residential District Requirements

Zone standards




Standard
 

RE1

 

RS1

 

RS2

 

RS3

 

RS4

 

RA1

 

RM1

 

RM2





Minimum lot area/dwelling unit
 
 
43,560
 
30,000
 
10,000
 
7,500
 
5,000
 
2,175
 
1,675
 
1,405



Minimum lot area/dwelling unit

 
43,560
 
30,000
 
10,000
 
7,500
 
5,000
 
2,900
 
2,178
 
1,815



Minimum lot area/dwelling unit

 
43,560
 
30,000
 
10,000
 
7,500
 
5,000
 
4,800
 
3,630
 
3,111



Minimum lot area/dwelling unit

 
43,560
 
30,000
 
10,000
 
7,500
 
5,000
 
7,250
 
5,455
 
4,356



Minimum lot area/dwelling unit

 
43,560
 
30,000
 
10,000
 
7,500
 
5,000
 
7,900
 
6,223
 
4,840


Minimum lot width abutting arterial street (b)
 
150

200
 
100

200
 
80

200
 
70

200
 
50

50
 
75

200
 
30(a)

200
 
30(a)

200


Minimum front yard setback
 
30
 
30
 
25
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
25
 
25


Minimum corner side yard setback
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20


Minimum interior side yard setback (c)
 
6*
 
6*
 
6*
 
6*
 
6*
 
15
 
15
 
15


Minimum rear yard setback
 
40
 
40
 
30
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25


Minimum percent of net site area in:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



   Uncovered space

 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
73%
 
73%



   Non-vehicular space

 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
45%
 
45%



   Recreation space

 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
5%
 
5%


Permitted use groups (d)
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A,C
 
A,C,D
 
A,C,D


Conditional use groups (e)
 
B
 
B
 
B
 
B
 
B
 
B
 
B,E
 
B,E


Off-street parking and loading: as provided in §§ 22.110 through 22.117

Landscaping and screening: as provided in §§ 22.130 through 22.135

Signs: as provided in §§ 22.145 through 22.148

Other requirements: as provided in General Residential District regulations
and general district regulations


Notes:


*   Or 10% of the width of the lot, whichever is more.



(a)    For uses also permitted in RA Districts only. No minimum lot width
per dwelling unit shall be required for other uses permitted in RM Districts.



(b)   Required front and corner side yard frontages for any lot abutting
an arterial street designated in the Comprehensive Plan or in an annexation
agreement or subdivision plat an not qualifying under exceptions in general
district regulations.



(c)   Side yard requirements for attached dwelling units shall not apply
where the unit is attached to another unit at the side lot line.



(d)   See Table 5 for permitted and conditional uses by group.



(e)   Subject to the provisions of §§ 22.235 through 22.242 .



(f)   RM-2 lot area per dwelling unit minimums shown are a conditional use
in the districts. Without a conditional use permit, the minimums applicable
to the RM-1 District apply in the RM-2 District.



Note:   Single-family detached dwellings in RA and RM Districts shall meet
the same requirements as provided in the RS-3 District for such dwellings.





 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



Table 5: Permitted and Conditional Uses in Residential Districts



Group A:  Permitted Uses in all Residential Districts



1.   Home occupations, subject to the standards listed in § 22.065(A)



2.   Single-family detached dwellings



3.   Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife
sanctuaries and other publicly-owned open space



4.   Permitted public uses, as defined in § 22.011



5.   Streets and alleys



6.   Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes for a
period not to exceed the period of construction



7.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all permitted uses in the
district, including off-street parking and loading and signs as provided in
§§ 22.110 through 22.112 and 22.145 through 22.148



Group B: Conditional Uses in all Residential Districts



1.   Cemeteries



2.   Conditional public uses, as defined in § 22.011



3.   Educational institutions, as defined in § 22.011



4.   Golf courses and country clubs, private



5.   Hospitals, clinics, nursing and group homes, mental health centers



6.   Philanthropic and charitable institutions, as defined in § 22.011



7.   Planned Unit Developments



8.   Religious institutions, as defined in § 22.011



9.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all conditional uses in
the district, including off-street parking and loading and signs as provided
in §§ 22.110 through 22.112 and 22.145 through 22.148



Group C: Permitted Uses in RA and RM Residential Districts



In unit groupings of six or fewer dwelling units:



1.   Single-family attached dwellings as defined in § 22.011



2.   Townhouses as defined in § 22.011



Group D: Permitted Uses only in RM Residential Districts



1.   Multiple-family dwellings are defined in § 22.011



2.   Two-family dwellings that are not townhouses as defined in § 22.011



Group E: Conditional Uses only in RM Residential Districts



1.   Congregate care housing



2.   Mobile home parks as defined in § 22.011



3.   Mobile home subdivisions as defined in § 22.011



Group F: Conditional Uses only in RE-1 Residential District



1.   Asphalt batch plant in areas consisting of no less than 190 acres;
the provisions of §§ 22.195 through 22.207 shall apply to any conditional
use granted under this section.



2.   Concrete redi-mix plant and related uses, provided that no such
conditional use may be approved for placement within 700 feet of any parcels
under residential use at the time of application therefor; any such
conditional use parcel must be located in the county, and any such
conditional use parcel must be located adjacent to State Route 120. 



3.   Landscape Waste Transfer Station, provided that no such conditional
use may be approved for placement within 700 feet of any parcels under
residential use at the time of application therefor; any such conditional use
parcel must be located in the county, and any such conditional use parcel
must be located adjacent to State Route 120.



4.   Surface extraction and/or processing of earth materials in areas
consisting of no less than 190 acres; the provisions of §§ 22.195 through
22.222 of this chapter shall apply to any conditional use granted under this
section.



5.   Clean construction and demolition debris (CCDD).



6.   Fill operations, including but not limited to uncontaminated soil
fill operation (USFO).



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 18-O-08, passed 2-27-2018; Ord. 18-O-14, passed
5-15-18; Ord. 19-O-02, passed 1-15-19)



COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 22.080  C-1 CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  This District is intended to provide convenient
access to goods and services close to residential areas in a manner that is
environmentally compatible with such areas.  To accomplish this intent, the
district provides close-to-home locations for a very limited range of
frequently patronized establishments providing convenience goods and services
that predominantly serve only the immediate neighborhood.  It is intended
that such uses will create minimal land use incompatibility with surrounding
residential areas.



   (B)   Regulations.  As provided in Tables 6 and 7.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.081  C-2  NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  This District is intended to provide locations for
a broader selection of convenience goods and services and a limited selection
of shoppers goods in locations serving more than one neighborhood.



   (B)   Regulations.  As provided in Tables 6 and 7.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.082  C-3 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. This District is intended to provide locations for a
broader selection of convenience and comparison shoppers goods and services
in centralized and highly accessible locations that serve the entire village
and surrounding areas.



   (B)   Regulations.  As provided in Tables 6 and 7.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.083  C-4 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  This District is intended to provide appropriate
standards for developments in the village’s older central business areas
and to reflect and protect the existing character of those areas.



   (B)   Regulations.  As provided in Tables 6 and 7.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.084  C-5 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  This District is intended to provide locations for
highway-oriented commercial uses, businesses having large space needs, and
other establishments offering goods and services that are less frequently
purchased.



   (B)   Regulations.  As provided in Tables 6 and 7.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.085  C-6 PLANNED REGIONAL CENTER DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  To promote the highest and best use of
strategically located land, so that public utilities may be extended, traffic
and parking facilities provided and buildings located to insure adequate
light and air, in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the village.



      (1)   Minimum District size.  The minimum size of any area
zoned in the C-6 Planned Regional Center District shall be 150 acres.



      (2)   Minimum lot size.  The area of each zoning lot shall
not be less than 20,000 square feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width of any zoning
lot shall be not less than 100 feet measured at the building line, property
line or setback line, whichever is greater.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage.



         (a)   The maximum lot coverage of a freestanding
building including accessory buildings and structures and excluding parking
structures shall not exceed 50% of the total area of the zoning lot on which
the building is located.



         (b)   The maximum lot coverage of a regional shopping
center consisting of one or more structures including an attached and
integrated complex of structures, including accessory buildings and
structures and excluding parking structures, shall not exceed 50% of the
total area designated by the regional shopping center as devoted to regional
shopping center use and parking therefor.



      (5)   Maximum floor area ratio.



         (a)   The maximum FAR for a freestanding building,
including accessory buildings and structures and excluding parking
structures, located on a zoning lot shall be 1.00, provided, however that an
increase in the floor area ration may be allowed as a special permit by the
Village Board after receipt of recommendations from the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Such factors as project design, amenities, traffic improvements
and impact on the surrounding area shall be taken into consideration in
reviewing requests for increase in the FAR.



         (b)   The maximum FAR for a regional shopping center
consisting of one or more structures including an attached and integrated
complex of structures, including accessory buildings and structures and
excluding parking structures, located in an area designated by the regional
shopping center as devoted to regional shopping center use and parking
therefor, shall be 1.00 provided, however, that an increase in the FAR may be
allowed as a special permit by te Village Board after receipt of
recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such factors as
project design, amenities, traffic improvements and impact on the surrounding
area shall be taken into consideration in reviewing requests for increases in
FAR.



      (6)   Minimum setback requirements.



         (a)   Buildings.  No setback from other buildings or
zoning lots shall be required for attached buildings located in an integrated
complex of structures. All buildings located within an area bounded by
private streets on all sides shall be setback from said private streets a
minimum of 30 feet. Buildings which are freestanding and which are located in
an area bound by private streets and interior lot lines shall be setback from
said private streets a minimum of 20 feet plus one-half foot for each foot in
building height over 35 feet and interior lot lines a minimum of ten feet
plus one-half foot for each foot in building height over 30 feet.
Freestanding buildings located in an area bounded by a public street on one
side and interior lot lines or private streets on one side and interior lot
lines or private streets on the others shall be setback from said public
street right-of-way a minimum of 35 feet; from said private street a minimum
of 20 feet plus one-half foot for each foot in building height over 35 feet;
and/or from said interior lot line a minimum of ten feet plus one-half foot
for each foot in building height over 30 feet. Freestanding buildings shall
be setback 20 feet from any exterior lot line bounding the C-6 District. 



         (b)   Parking.



            1.   All surface off-street parking and loading
areas shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from any public street
right-of-way.



            2.   For regional shopping centers, no setback
shall be required from private streets for surface off-street parking and
loading areas.



            3.   For peripheral property development, surface
off-street parking and loading shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from
any private street.



            4.   Parking structures shall be subject to the
same setback requirements as set forth for buildings.



      (7)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   The regional mall building shall not exceed 100
feet in height; and



         (b)   Buildings located in the peripheral property shall
not exceed 60 feet in height.



      (8)   Operations within an enclosed structure.  All business,
service, storage and display of goods shall be conducted within completely
enclosed structures except:



         (a)   Automobile service stations;



         (b)   Off-street parking and loading;



         (c)   Outdoor seating areas accessory to restaurants
provided such outdoor seating areas comply with all other village chapters
applicable to such outdoor seating areas;



         (d)   Accessory uses;



         (e)   Gardening supplies and plants, trees, shrubs and
flowers offered for sale on the premises;



         (f)   Permitted sales uses which require outdoor storage
lots such as auto sales, building supply stores and boat sales.



      (9)   Performance standards.



         (a)   Regional shopping center development.  All
regional shopping centers of at least 500,000 square feet with at least two
anchor stores located in an integrated complex of structures shall conform to
the following standards:



            1.   The regional shopping center shall be served
by an internal circulation roadway;



            2.   Parking lots and structures for the regional
shopping center shall only be accessible from the private internal
circulation roadway and not directly from the public right-of-way;



            3.   At least 10% of the area designated for the
regional shopping center, including the 20-foot greenbelt hereinafter
described in the performance standards-peripheral property development, shall
be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants;



            4.   At least 5% of the area, designated for the
regional shopping center shall be left as open space which can be used for
permanent or temporary detention or retention of storm water;



            5.   All exterior lighting shall be shaded or
inwardly directed in such a manner sot that no direct lighting or glare is
cast upon adjacent residential or institutional property. The intensity of
such lighting shall not exceed two-foot candles as measured at the abutting
property line at ground level;



            6.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter whether more or less restrictive, temporary occupancy certificates
for all or any portion of a regional shopping center shall be valid for a
period of one year and renewable thereafter for twelve month periods with the
approval of the Zoning Administrator.



         (b)   Peripheral property development.



            1.   For any peripheral lot, a 20- foot wide
greenbelt of plants, shrubs, trees or grass



shall be located along any lot line which abuts and which is parallel with
public right-of-way;



            2.   For any peripheral lot, a ten- foot wide
greenbelt of plants, trees, shrubs or grass shall be located along any lot
line with abuts and which is parallel to a private street; and



            3.   A ten-foot greenbelt shall be located along
any lot line which bounds the C-6 Zoning District and which does not abut a
street.



   (B)   Regulations.  As provided in Tables 6 and 7.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 

Table 6:  Commercial District Requirements



 
C-1
 
C-2
 
C-3
 
C-4
 
C-5
 
C-6




Minimum lot area
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
20,000


Minimum lot width
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
 



   Along arterial street (a)

 
200
 
200
 
200
 
-
 
200
 
100


Minimum front yard and corner side yard setback (b)
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
-
 
30
 
(f)


Minimum interior side yards setback (b)
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
-
 
10
 
(f)



   Adjacent to Residential District (b)   

 
20
 
20
 
20
 
-
 
20


Minimum rear yard setback (b)
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
-
 
15
 
(f)



   Adjacent to Residential District (b)

 
30
 
30
 
30
 
-
 
30


Maximum floor area ratio
 
0.5
 
1.0
 
2.0
 
3.0
 
1.0
 
1.0 (e)


Permitted use groups (c)
 
F
 
F,H
 
F,H,J
 
F,H,J,L
 
F,H,J,L,N
 




   Conditional use groups (d)

 
G
 
G,I
 
G,I,K
 
F,I,K,M
 
G,I,K,M,O


Off-street parking and loading: as provided in §§ 22.110 through 22.112

Landscaping and screening: as provided in §§ 22.130 through 22.135

Performance standards: as provided in §§ 22.195 through 22.207

Signs: as provided in §§ 22.145 through 22.148

Other requirements: as provided in general district regulations



(a)   Required front and corner side yards and frontages for any lot
abutting an arterial street designated in the village Comprehensive Plan or
in an annexation agreement or subdivision plat except for lots meeting
requirements under exceptions in general district regulations



(b)   Plus two feet for each one-foot of building height over 35 feet



(c)   See Table 7 for permitted and conditional uses by group



(d)   Subject to the provision of §§ 22.235 through 22.242: 
conditional uses



(e)   See C-6 Planned Regional Center District-floor area ratio





 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



Table 7: Permitted and Conditional Uses in Commercial Districts



Group F: Permitted Uses in all Commercial Districts



1.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all permitted uses in the
district, including off-street parking and loading and signs as provided in
§§ 22.110 through 22.112 and 22.145 through 22.148



2.   Automated teller machines (not including drive-through kiosk)



3.   Beauty shops, barber shops and spas



4.   Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nut and yogurt stores



5.   Currency exchanges



6.   Drug stores



7.   Dry cleaners and laundries (processing to be done off-site) and
laundromats



8.   Food and grocery stores under 5,000 square feet, convenience mars,
meat markets, fish markets, dairy stores, health food stores and bakeries
with no food preparation on premises



9.   Liquor stores (package goods only)



10.   Newspaper, magazine and tobacco shops



11.   Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife
sanctuaries and other publicly-owned open spaces



12.   Permitted public uses, as defined in § 22.011



13.   Restaurants (whether alcohol is served or not), eat-in or carry-out;
delicatessens; retail bakeries; donut shops, and convenience marts with
limited food preparation on premises; not to include live entertainment,
dancing clubs or bars or drive-in restaurants



14.   Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes for a
period not to exceed the duration of construction



Group G: Conditional Uses in all Commercial Districts



1.   Cemeteries



2.   Conditional public uses, as defined in § 22.011



3.   Educational institutions, as defined in § 22.011



4.   Golf courses and country clubs, private



5.   Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, group homes, and mental health
centers



6.   Philanthropic and charitable institutions, as defined in § 22.011



7.   Planned Unit Developments



8.   Personal wireless telecommunications facilities



Group H: Additional Permitted Uses in C-2 and Higher Numbered Commercial
Districts



1.   Card and gift stores



2.   Clothing repair, hat repair and shoe repair stores and tailor shops



3.   Appliance sales and service



4.   Banks, credit unions, currency exchanges, and financial institutions



5.   Florist shops



6.   Jewelry and watch sales and repair stores



7.   Office, business, professional, and governmental



8.   Optician sales, retail



9.   Paint, tile and wallpaper stores



10.   Photocopying and duplication distribution establishment with six or
fewer employees



11.   Schools, commercial



12.   Travel Agency



Group I: Additional Conditional Uses in C-2 and Higher Numbered Commercial
Districts



1.   Adult day care center



2.   Child day care centers, as defined in § 22.011



3.   Drive-through establishments, as defined in § 22.011



4.   Game rooms, as defined in § 22.011 and excluding restaurants with
ancillary gaming devices



5.   Outdoor cafes



6.   Recreational institutions, as defined in § 22.011



Group J: Additional Commercial Uses in C-3 and Higher Numbered Commercial
Districts



1.   Antique shops



2.   Art galleries, studios and supply stores



3.   Automobile accessory, parts and supply stores



4.   Bakery



5.   Bicycle sales, rental and repair shops



6.   Bookstores or book and stationery stores



7.   Business machine sales, rental and service



8.   Camera and photographic supply and processing stores (excluding kiosk)



9.   Camping and outdoor recreational equipment sales



10.   Carpet and rug stores (retail sales with ancillary cleaning service)



11.   Catering establishments



12.   Apparel and accessory stores



13.   Coin and philatelic stores



14.   Computer sales and rental



15.   Custom dressmaking and clothing establishments



16.   Department stores, junior department stores and discount department
stores



17.   Employment agencies



18.   Exterminating services



19.   Frozen food stores, including locker rental



20.   Furniture and home decorating stores, including upholstery when
conducted as part of the retail operations and secondary thereto



21.   Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of
furs



22.   Garden supply, tool, and seed stores, including lawn mower, snow
blower, and snowmobile sales and services



23.   General merchandise



24.   Gunsmith shops



25.   Hardware store



26.   Health clubs as defined in § 22.011



27.   Hobby and craft shops



28.   Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and the making of
draperies, slip covers and other similar articles when conducted as part of
the retail operations and secondary thereto



29.   Leather goods and luggage stores



30.   Locksmith shops



31.   Meeting and banquet halls



32.   Millinery shops



33.   Musical instrument sales and repair



34.   Offices, medical and dental



35.   Orthopedic and medical appliance stores (retail sales only)



36.   Pawnshops



37.   Pet shops and pet grooming



38.   Photography studios, including the development of film when
conducted as part of the retail business



39.   Picture framing shops



40.   Post offices



41.   Produce markets



42.   Schools, commercial, for music, dance, business or trade



43.   Second hand stores and rummage shops



44.   Sewing machine sales and service



45.   Sporting goods stores



46.   Tanning salons



47.   Taxidermists



48.   Toy stores



49.   Video sales or rental



Group K: Additional Conditional Uses in C-3 and Higher Numbered Commercial
Districts



1.   Animal hospitals



2.   Animal day care and kennels



3.   Indoor amusement establishments, including bowling alleys, pool
halls, dance halls, commercial swimming pools and skating rinks



4.   Funeral home and mortuaries as defined in § 22.011



5.   Towing operations



Group L: Additional Permitted Uses in C-4 and Higher Numbered Commercial
Districts



1.   Dwelling units above the ground floor in buildings with a ground
floor in non-residential use



2.   Plazas and public spaces



3.   Tourist information and hospitality centers



Group M: Additional Conditional Uses in C-4 and Higher Numbered Commercial
Districts



1.   Parking, off-street, lots, public garages, or storage garages as a
principal use



Group N: Additional Permitted Uses in C-5 and Higher Numbered Commercial
Districts



1.   Automobile gas station, including convenience mart



2.   Building materials and supply sales



3.   Contractors offices



4.   Electrical showrooms and shops



5.   Equipment rental



6.   Golf courses and country clubs, private



7.   Greenhouses and nurseries



8.   Grocery stores greater than 5,000 square feet



9.   Hotels and motels



10.   Laundry plants, commercial



11.   Mail order houses and letter shops



12.   Monument sales (no open sales lot)



13.   Motor vehicles sales (no open sales lot) or rental, including cards,
trucks, boards, trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, motorcycles,
motor scooters and mopeds



14.   Outdoor cafes/dining and drive-through facilities, including but not
limited to restaurants, pharmacies and banks/financial uses, provided that
the same are constructed on or within developments that are no less than 50
acres in size, and subject to the establishment of such drive-through
facility uses in compliance with the village-approved design standards for
the subject development, as determined by the Village Administrator or
designee



15.   Plumbing and heating sales



16.   Sewer cleaning and rodding services



17.   Swimming pool sales (no open sales lot)



18.   Auditoriums and theater-indoor



Group O: Additional Conditional Uses in C-5 and Higher Numbered Commercial
Districts



1.   Air conditioning sales and service



2.   Ambulance services



3.   Auction rooms



4.   Boat sales



5.   Car rental



6.   Car wash



7.   Crematories



8.   Dry cleaners and laundries, (including on-site processing)



9.   Laboratories, medical, dental, research, and testing



10.   Machinery sales



11.   Motor vehicle repair



12.   Motor vehicle body shops



13.   Open sales lots as defined in § 22.011 as a principal or accessory
use



14.   Outdoor amusement establishments, including archery ranges,
miniature gold and similar facilities



15.   Outdoor storage associated with a permitted or conditional use



16.   Truck stops



17.   Landscape waste transfer station, provided that no such conditional
use may be approved for placement within 700 feet of any parcels under
residential use at the time of application therefor; any such conditional use
parcel must be located in the county, and any such conditional use parcel
must be located adjacent to State Route 120



18.   Concrete redi-mix plant and related uses, provided that no such
conditional use may be approved for placement within 700 feet of any parcels
under residential use at the time of application therefor; any such
conditional use parcel must be located in the county, and any such
conditional use parcel must be located adjacent to State Route 120



Group P: Additional Permitted Uses in C-6 Commercial District



1.   Automobile sales with outdoor sales lots



2.   Bus stops



3.   Dry cleaners: retail outlet only, no processing



4.   Electrical supply and equipment stores



5.   Electronic sales and service



6.   Employment agencies



7.   Eye wear sales and service



8.   Fish markets: retail



9.   Fruit and vegetable markets: retail



10.   Furniture and home furnishing stores



11.   Haberdasheries



12.   Home decorating stores



13.   Home supply and building material centers (not including wholesale
lumber yards)



14.   Hosiery stores



15.   Lawnmower sales



16.   Limousine services



17.   Liquor stores



18.   Locksmith



19.   Marine craft and accessories sales



20.   Meat markets



21.   Medical appliance and supply stores



22.   Millinery shops



23.   Musical studios and instrument sales and services



24.   Nurseries and garden stores: retail



25.   Pain, glass and wallpaper stores



26.   Parcel pick up and delivery



27.   Parking garage, private



28.   Pet stores



29.   Souvenir and curio stores



30.   Sporting goods stores



31.   Swimming pool sales



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 13-O-27,
passed 10-24-2013; Ord. 14-O-36, passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-10, passed
3-9-2017; Ord. 17-O-21, passed 7-27-2017; Ord. 17-O-32, passed 10-3-2017)



OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS, AGRICULTURE AND MINING



§ 22.095  OFFICE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   O-1 Local Office District .



      (1)   Purpose. 



         (a)   This District is in intended to provide for small
office buildings on smaller sites housing uses that do not generate large
amounts of traffic.



         (b)   This District is intended for locations that can
serve as a buffer between commercial and residential developments and
locations that are not best suited either for residential or form more
intensive business development.



      (2)   Regulations.  As provided in Tables 8 and 9.



   (B)   O-2 Office Park District.



      (1)   Purpose.  This District is intended to provide
locations on larger sites for large office buildings and planned office park
developments including office-related retail and service uses.



      (2)   Regulations.  As provided in Tables 8 and 9.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.096  I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  This District is intended to provide primarily for
low-nuisance industrial uses that are compatible with a residential community
but also to allow after special review heavier industrial facilities that can
meet suitable environmental performance standards.



   (B)   Regulations.  As provided in Tables 8 and 9.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.097  A-M  AGRICULTURE AND AMO MINING OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   The intent and purpose of the A-M Agriculture and Mining
Overlay District (AMO) is:



      (1)   To provide for the long range mixed use development of a
parcel upon which earth extraction material or mineral processing has been
approved for a portion of the parcel.



      (2)   To identify and take advantage of the unique features of
the parcel that provides superior development and infrastructure taking into
consideration the parcel's condition as a result of earth extraction.   



      (3)   To grant relief from the fixed regulations of
conventional zones and from certain aspects of the subdivision and other
engineering and regulatory ordinances and village plans. The AMO regulations
supercede and govern the development of properties and, the instance of a
conflict of regulations or in the instance when other village regulations
exceed the standards of the AMO, the requirements of the AMO ordinance shall
supercede all other requirements.



      (4)   To encourage an innovative site plan.



      (5)   To encourage the enhancement and development of the post
extraction condition of the parcel.



      (6)   To obtain usable open space and recreational space.



      (7)   To increase the quality of the site design.



      (8)   To provide a compatible relationship between AMO land
uses and adjoining land.



      (9)   To provide sensitive handling of on-site and off-site
traffic flow for efficiency of circulation and safety.



      (10)   Provide land for agricultural uses as set forth in this
section.



   (B)   AMO eligibility requirements.



      (1)   The parcel must have a unified design. The tract of land
submitted for AMO development must be developed as a single design entity
even though it may be developed in phases, or contain a wide variety of uses
and activities otherwise not necessarily compatible with one another.



      (2)   All land in the parcel submitted as the AMO application
must be initially under the control of the applicant.



      (3)   The AMO parcel shall be no less than 400 acres and the
majority of the current underlying zoning for said parcel must be RE-1 Estate
Single-Family Residential District.



      (4)   After a proposed development has received AMO tentative
plan approval, additional properties which when put together are less than
300 acres may be added to the AMO parcel by an applicant who has received AMO
tentative plan approval as long as the additional properties have been
granted AMO District Zoning. Such additional properties must be contiguous to
the parcel, and must enhance and further the purposes of the approved AMO
tentative plan.



   (C)   There is a two-step AMO application review procedure as
hereinafter set forth.



   (D)   Step One. AMO application and tentative AMO plan (Required).



      (1)   Tentative AMO information shall be filed with the
village, including:



         (a)   Ten copies of a general description of the overall
development and one electronic copy.



         (b)   A tentative plan of the proposed development
fulfilling the requirements of this AMO ordinance including land uses and
major roadways.



         (c)   Ownership of land.



         (d)   Minerals to be extracted or mined including a
mining plan and reclamation plan.



         (e)   Character and composition of vegetation and
wildlife on land to be affected.



         (f)   The nature, depth, and proposed disposition of the
overburden.



         (g)   The estimated depth to which the mineral or
aggregate resource will be extracted or mined.



         (h)   The technique to be used in the extracting and/or
mining operation.



         (i)   Estimated type and volume of excavation.



         (j)   The equipment proposed to be used.



         (k)   Practices and methods to be used to minimize
noise, dust, air contaminants, and vibration and to prevent pollution of
surface or ground water.



         (l)   If applicable, the recycling of water used for
washing and grading.



         (m)   If applicable, the proposed usage or drainage of
excess water.



         (n)   The simultaneous reclamation plan including
methods of accomplishment, phasing, and timing.



         (o)   Location of existing roads, and anticipated access
and haulage roads operation(s).



         (p)   Location and names of all streams, creeks,
wetlands and bodies of water within lands to be affected.



         (q)   Drainage on and away from affected land, including
directional flow of water, natural and artificial drainage ways and
waterways, and streams or tributaries receiving the discharge.



         (r)   A topographic survey with two foot- contours, at
the same scale as the aerial photo showing the existing conditions on the
subject site.



         (s)   A current Illinois Department of Natural Resources
Endangered Species Consultation (EcoCAT) Report.



         (t)   Demonstrate compliance with all applicable
performance standards as outlined in §§ 22.195 through 22.207 and surface
mining standards as outlined in §§ 22.220 through 22.222. In cases where
conflicts arise between the AMO district and the underlying zoning, the
overlay district restriction apply.



      (2)   The petitioner shall submit 10 copies of the tentative
plan plus one electronic copy (including all documents listed in division (D)
of this section and the deposit required by the village) at least 45 days
prior to a meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission ("PZC"), at which
time the petitioner shall make a presentation regarding the proposed
development. The PZC shall make recommendations regarding the proposed
development at their next regularly scheduled meetings (not longer than 45
days after the meeting).



      (3)   The Village Board of Trustees, upon receiving the report
of findings and recommendation of the PZC, if any, may grant or deny any
proposed Petition in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes or may
refer it back to the PZC for further consideration one time.



      (4)   The tentative plan is a general indication of the
proposed land uses and the general or schematic locations of detention areas,
open spaces, and parks. At this stage of planning, detailed data pertaining
to precise building locations, parks, and detention will not be available and
will be further refined as the plans progress to the final plan stage. The
more detailed data and site plans shall be submitted to the village for
review and approval at the final plan stage of development. It is understood
that the engineering plans for the development of the property shall not be
completed at this early stage of planning. The tentative plan will undergo
further refinement and when the final plan is prepared it will be submitted
for final site plan approval and engineering approval by the village. The
final plan may be submitted for approval either in phases or as a whole.
Tentative and final plans shall permit a lesser residential density in area
approved for a higher residential density.



      (5)   The tentative plan submittals shall also contain the
following:



         (a)   Analysis of relationship to Village Comprehensive
Plan. An analysis of how the proposed development complies with and advances
the goals and policies established in the Village Comprehensive Plan.



         (b)   General site information. Data regarding site
conditions, land characteristics, general land use, existing and proposed
zoning including designation of an underlying village zoning district. A
summary of the site data must be provided listing the percentages of the site
for each anticipated use.



         (c)   Sketch plan. A scaled drawing in simple sketch
form showing the proposed location and extent of the land uses, anticipated
designated areas for specific uses along with the types of land uses,
approximate number of acres assigned to each land use, the total number of
dwelling units.



   (E)   The criteria for approval of a Reclassification to A-M
Agriculture and Mining Overlay District (AMO) tentative AMO plan are as
follows:



      (1)   Does the plan take advantage of the unique qualities of
the property?



      (2)   Compatible with use or zoning of environs. The proposed
use(s) or the uses permitted under the zoning classification are compatible
with existing uses or existing zoning of property in the environs.



      (3)   Supported by trend of development. The trend of
development in the general area since the original zoning of the affected
property was established supports the proposed use or zoning classification.



      (4)   Consistent with comprehensive plan objectives. The
proposed use or zoning classification is in harmony with the objectives of
the Comprehensive Plan of the village as viewed in light of any changed
conditions since the adoption of the plan.



      (5)   Furthers public interest. The proposed use or zoning
classification promotes the public interest and not solely the interest of
the applicant.



      (6)   The extent to which infrastructure will be provided for
the property which may benefit contiguous properties subject to the owner's
ability to recapture an equitable portion of its expense for said
infrastructure.



      (7)   The extent to which the plan promotes the orderly growth
of the village and positively affects the long range interest of the village.



      (8)   Steps taken to minimize effect on adjoining properties.



   (F)   Step Two. AMO application, final AMO plan (Required).



      (1)   The final plan accompanied by a proposed final plat for
any phase of the development shall be submitted to the PZC and shall be
reviewed at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The PZC shall make its
recommendations regarding the final plan no later than their next meeting
after the meeting at which the initial review has occurred (within 45 days).
The Village Board shall take final action on a final plan promptly after
receipt of the recommendation of the PZC. If no recommendation is timely made
by the PZC, then the final plan shall be deemed to have been approved by the
PZC as presented. It is recognized that Overlay District developments are of
a different character and may require modifications and variations from the
subdivision ordinance and other ordinances of the village. Such modifications
shall be reasonably considered and approved by the village in its reasonable
discretion as part of the final plan approval process as long as the final
plan conforms to requirements of the village's subdivision ordinance.
However, it is understood that the requirements of the stormwater detention
ordinance will be abided by unless the village and McHenry or Lake County (if
required) grant a waiver of same or portions of same in light of the lakes
that may be created on a parcel.



      (2)   The final plan (ten copies) for any phase of the
development shall include:



         (a)   All items required by division (D) of this section.



         (b)   Final plat of subdivision.



         (c)   All documents required by the village's
subdivision ordinance.



         (d)   Service facilities. Provide information on all
service facilities, related driveways, private streets, paths and off street
parking facilities.



         (e)   Schedule/phasing. Anticipated development schedule
indicating:



            1.   Stages in which project will be built, with
emphasis on area, density, use and public improvements/facilities, such as
open space to be developed with each stage.



            2.   Each stage shall be described and mapped as a
phase of the project. The overall design of each phase shall be shown on the
plan and through supporting graphic material.



      (3)   Anticipated dates for beginning and completion of each
phase.



         (a)   Market analysis. If requested by the village,
background data indicating the extent of market demand for the uses proposed
in the development shall be provided.



         (b)   Covenants/Homeowners Association. Proposed
methodology as to how the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the
development, ponds, lake and any of its common open space will occur.



         (c)   Residential. Provide information on the density of
residential uses, including dwelling units per gross acre, dwelling units per
net acre; gross and net residential density (dwelling units per acre of land
devoted to residential sectors of the development; gross being all land
excluding perimeter roadway dedication and net being gross acres as
previously defined minus land used for other land use classes/districts and
utilities that serve land not included in the development); and the number of
dwelling units by type. Information should be provided for each phase in the
development.



         (d)   Nonresidential intensity. Provide information on
the type and amount of nonresidential uses including locations, the amount
and location of common open space; and any other data pertinent to a
comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development.



         (e)   Landscape data. Preliminary landscape standards,
which shall include enhanced landscaping between different use zones;
portions of the property perimeter and the property's frontage.



         (f)   Traffic analysis. If requested by the village, a
study of the impact caused by the development on the street and highway
systems operating in the village will be required. Copies of the analysis
shall be provided to other governmental entities with jurisdictional control
over any roadways contained within or abutting the development along with a
request that such entities acknowledge receipt of and provide written
comments on the analysis to the village.



         (g)   Variations. Listing of known variations to be
requested from the subdivision regulations.



         (h)   The required information for Final AMO review
shall be submitted to the Village Clerk a minimum of 60 days prior to the
meeting with the Village PZC, and promptly forwarded to village staff, the
Village Engineer, the PZC and the Board of Trustees.



   (G)   Modification to the tentative or final plans in the AMO
District. Minor changes are defined as changes that do not increase the
residential density of any phase of an approved tentative plan or approved
final plan, and do not require variations from the village's subdivision
ordinance or zoning ordinance. The village shall determine whether a change
is minor or major. A minor change may be approved by the Mayor. Major changes
shall require approval of the Village Board, and if a variation from the
zoning ordinance is required, then a public hearing must be held before the
PZC.



   (H)   Expiration of AMO plan approval. The tentative AMO plan
approval shall expire 50 years after the date of its approval unless an
application for Final AMO review has been submitted to the Village Clerk for
all or a portion of the parcel within the 50-year time period unless extended
by the Village Board.



   (I)   Permitted and conditional uses in AMO District.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Surface mining including earth materials
processing.



         (b)   In those areas where surface mining has been
completed parks, open space, recreational uses and all residential uses set
forth in § 22.066 of the village zoning ordinance are permitted.



         (c)   For that portion of parcels located within 400
feet of the right-of-way of Illinois Route 120, all Commercial Zoning
District uses allowable in C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-5.



         (d)   Agricultural uses except for the keeping of farm
animals and horses.



      (2)   Conditional uses.



         (a)   The keeping of farm animals and horses.



         (b)   Outdoor storage of equipment not used on site.



         (c)   Fill operations including but not limited to clean
construction and demolition debris (CCDD) operations and uncontaminated soil
fill operation (USFO).



   (J)   Bulk standards shall be in accordance with the village code.



   (K)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking, not otherwise modified
by this section, shall be required to comply with the parking regulations in
accordance with the off-street parking provision of the village zoning
ordinance.



   (L)   Application of other ordinances. All streets and related
street improvements and storm water control facilities shall be designed by a
registered professional engineer. All public streets and storm water control
facilities shall be constructed consistent with the subdivision regulations
and other ordinances of the village as amended from time to time unless
amended by this section.



      (1)   It is recognized that overlay district developments may
vary from the rigid guidelines of conventional zoning standards and from
certain engineering and subdivision regulations. In this respect the village
will reasonably consider and approve in its discretion any variations to the
subdivision control ordinance and other ordinances in order to effectuate the
implementation of the AMO tentative and final plans.



      (2)   Except as modified by this section, the property will be
developed in accordance with the village code and the village's zoning
ordinance and subdivision regulations and building code as amended from time
to time, and as uniformly applied within the village.



   (M)   Open space at final plan. Common open and recreational space
shall be schematically depicted specifically defined in the final plans. The
areas depicted in the tentative plans may be altered in context with the
progression of future tentative and final plans. Common open space is defined
as land used for pond, lakes, detention, floodplains and passive and active
recreational areas. The total provision of open space may be divided and
located within different phases of the entire development. The open space may
be owned either by the homeowners association or in the alternative by a
governmental unit with approval of the governmental unit.



      (1)   It is recognized that some final plans will have less
than 30% open space and others will have more than 30% open space, however,
in no event shall the overall AMO District have less than 30% open space when
fully developed.



      (2)   At a developer's cost improvements may include, but are
not limited to, planned landscaping, walkways, driveways, clubhouses,
swimming pools, tennis courts, and golf courses. Open space dedicated to a
governmental unit shall be maintained by that unit of government and
improvements by the owner, if any, shall be as required by the subdivision
control ordinance.



   (N)   Overlay District.



      (1)   The A-M Agriculture and Mining Overlay District (AMO) is
an "Overlay" District in addition to the underlying zoning classifications.
Any AMO zoning designation shall supplement other zoning districts
("Underlying Zoning District"). The uses allowed in the underlying zoning
district as well as the uses allowed in the AMO are permitted uses within
these areas.



      (2)   Upon final plat recording for AMO uses, only the uses
permitted in the AMO District shall be permitted as to the property described
in said final plat and the uses allowed in any other underlying zoning
district shall no longer be permitted as to the property described in said
final plat unless it is a permitted AMO use. Once an AMO parcel is platted
for the purpose of using the underlying zoning district, the AMO conditional
uses shall no longer be available for the parcel so platted.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-32, passed 10-3-2017; Ord. 18-O-08, passed
2-27-2018)



 


Table 8:  Office and Industrial District Regulations






 

O-1

 

O-2

 

I-1





Minimum lot area
 

5,000

 

40,000

 

15,000



Minimum lot width
 

-

 

100

 

100




   Along arterial street (a)

 

200

 

200

 

200



Minimum front yard and corner side yard setback (b)
 

30

 

30

 

40



Minimum interior side yard setback (b)
 

10

 

10

 

10




   Adjacent to Residential District (b)

 

15

 

25

 

35



Minimum rear yard setback (b)
 

15

 

15

 

15




   Adjacent to Residential District (b)

 

25

 

35

 

50



Maximum floor area ratio
 

1.0

 

2.5

 

3.0



Permitted use groups (c)
 

P

 

P,R

 

T



Conditional use groups (d)
 

Q

 

Q,S

 

U



Off-street parking and loading:   as provided in §§ 22.110 through 22.117

Landscaping and screening: as provided in §§ 22.130 through 22.135

Performance standards: as provided in §§ 22.195 through 22.207

Signs: as provided in §§ 22.145 through 22.148

Other requirements: as provided in general district regulations



(a)   Required front and corner side yards and frontages for any lot
abutting an arterial street designated in the village Comprehensive Plan or
in an annexation agreement or subdivision plat except for lots meeting
requirements under exceptions in general district regulations


(b)   Plus two feet for each one-foot of building height over 30 feet

(c)   See Table 9 for permitted and conditional uses by group

(d)   Subject to the provision of §§ 22.235 through 22.242: 
conditional uses




 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 18-O-14, passed 5-15-18; Ord. 19-O-02, passed 1-15-19)



Table 9:  Permitted and Conditional Uses in Office and Industrial Districts



Group P: Permitted Uses in all Office Districts



1.   Offices, medical and dental



2.   Offices, business and professional



3.   Offices, government, political and institutional



4.   Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife
sanctuaries and other publicly- owned open spaces



5.   Permitted public uses, as defined in § 22.011



6.   Temporarily buildings or trailers for construction purposes for a
period not to exceed the duration of construction



7.   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in
the district



Group Q: Conditional Uses in all Office Districts



1.   Cemeteries



2.   Child and adult day care centers, as defined in § 22.011



3.   Conditional public uses, as defined in § 22.011



4.   Educational institutions, as defined in § 22.011



5.   Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan
associations and savings banks, finance companies, and credit unions,
including drive-through facilities



6.   Golf courses and country clubs, private



7.   Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, group homes and mental health
centers



8.   Funeral home and mortuaries, as defined in § 22.011



9.   Philanthropic and charitable institutions, as defined in § 22.011



10.   Planned unit developments



11.   Recreations institutions, as defined in § 22.011



12.   Religious institutions, as defined in § 22.011



13.   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in
the district, including off-street parking and loading and signs as provided
in §§ 22.110 through 22.112 and 22.145 through 22.148



Group R: Additional Permitted Uses in O-2 District



1.   Automated teller machines, not including freestanding kiosks



2.   Blueprinting and photostatting establishments



3.   Business machines sales, rental, and service



4.   Commercial schools for business, trade, electronics, or data
processing



5.   Computer sales, rental, and service



6.   Currency exchanges



7.   Employment agencies



8.   Graphics and drafting services



9.   Hotels



10.   Laboratories, medical, dental, research, and testing



11.   Mail order houses and letter shops



12.   Meeting and banquet halls



13.   Newspaper distribution agencies for home delivery and retail trade



14.   Office, stationery or art supply stores



15.   Post offices



16.   Research and development facilities



17.   Restaurants, eat-in or carry-out, but not including live
entertainment, dancing, or drive-in



18.   Studios for artists, musicians and photographers



Group S: Additional Conditional Uses in O-2 District



1.   Convention and exhibit halls



2.   Off-street parking lots, public garages, or storage garages, other
than as accessory uses



3.   The following uses as accessory uses located totally within a
building housing a principal permitted use and with neither any separate
outside entrance nor any sign facing or visible from any public street:



   a.   Newspaper, magazine and tobacco shops



   b.   Gift or card shops



   c.   Flower shops



   d.   Drug stores



   e.   Barber shops and beauty shops



Group T: Permitted Uses in I-1 Industrial District



1.   Adult uses, as defined in § 22.011



2.   Bakery plants



3.   Commercial schools, such as for business or electronics



4.   Contractor and construction offices



5.   Dry cleaning plants and laundries



6.   Dwelling unit of caretaker or guard



7.   Golf courses and country clubs, private



8.   Internet sales



9.   Laboratories, medical, dental, research and testing



10.   Low-nuisance light manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing, repair and assembly facilities not listed elsewhere as
permitted or conditional uses that are able to conform to the performance
standards herein for light industrial uses



11.   Medical cannabis dispensary establishment



12.   Offices, business and professional



13.   Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife
sanctuaries and other publicly-owned open space



14.   Permitted public uses, as defined in § 22.011



15.   Printing and publishing establishments



16.   Radio and television stations and studios



17.   Recording studios



18.   Research and development facilities



19.   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed the duration of such construction



20.   Trailer and mobile home repair



21.   Warehousing, storage and distribution facilities



22.   Wholesaling



23.   Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in
district



Group U: Conditional Uses in I-1 Industrial District



1.   Automobile laundry



2.   Automobile service stations



3.   Batch asphaltic concrete, Portland cement or mortar mixing plants



4.   Conditional public uses, as defined in § 22.011



5.   Construction yards



6.   Creosote manufacture



7.   Feed, flour, and grain storage



8.   Fuel storage, bulk



9.   Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing,
repair or assembly facilities, that are not listed elsewhere as permitted or
conditional uses, including but not limited to facilities for abrasive
products; boilers, and tanks; chemicals; clay; coal, coke, and tar products;
fiberglass; foundries; glass; metal; textiles; transportation equipment; and
for any other facilities that are able to conform to the performance
standards herein for heavy industrial uses



10.   Medical cannabis cultivation center



11.   Motor, rail, or air freight terminals



12.   Motor vehicle repair, major and minor



13.   Off-street parking lots, public garages, or storage garages, other
than as accessory uses



14.   Outdoor storage associated with any permitted and conditional use in
the district



15.   Personal wireless telecommunications facilities



16.   Petroleum or coal oil processing or refining



17.   Planned unit developments



18.   Quarries



19.   Radio and television stations and studios, including radio and
television towers



20.   Recycling centers, solid waste



21.   Rubber, natural or synthetic



22.   Salt works



23.   Sand and gravel extraction



24.   Smelters



25.   Soap manufacture



26.   Synthetic polymer manufacture



27.   Tanning, curing, or storage of rawhides or skins



28.   Tar distilling



29.   Transfer stations, solid waste



30.   Utilization or storage of over five pounds of detonable materials as
provided under performance  standards in this chapter



31.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all conditional uses in
the district, including off- street parking and loading and signs as provided
in §§ 22.110 through 22.112 and 22.145 through 22.148



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 13-O-27,
passed 10-24-2013; Ord. 14-O-36, passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 15-O-33, passed
9-24-2015; Ord. 17-O-10, passed 3-9-2017; Ord. 17-O-32, passed 10-3-2017;
Ord. 19-O-06, passed 3-5-2019)



§ 22.098  MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY ESTABLISHMENT STANDARDS.



   All of the following shall be subject to the site plan review
procedures of this section unless otherwise expressly exempted:



   (A)   Site plan review.  Medical cannabis dispensary establishment
(retail sales and service use category) shall be a permitted use in the I-1
Industrial District and shall be subject to the following site plan review
procedures.



   (B)   Compliance with state regulations and rules.  All medical
cannabis dispensary establishments shall comply with the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (Public Act 098-0122) and any rules
adopted in accordance thereto.



   (C)   Single use property.  Medical cannabis dispensaries shall not
be established in multiple use or tenant property or on a property that
shares parking with other uses.



   (D)   Setbacks.  A medical cannabis dispensary shall be a minimum
of 30 feet from all property lines.



   (E)   Buffering from residential and other medical cannabis
dispensaries.



      (1)   A medical cannabis dispensary shall be a minimum of
1,000 feet from all other medical cannabis dispensaries measured from the
parcel boundaries.



      (2)   A medical cannabis dispensary shall be a minimum of
1,000 feet from the property line of a pre-existing public or private
pre-school or elementary or secondary school or day care center, day care
home, group day care home or part day child care facility.



      (3)   A medical cannabis dispensary shall be a minimum of 300
feet from any property zoned residential.



      (4)   A medical cannabis dispensary and/or dispensing
organization may not be located within a house, apartment, condominium or an
area zoned exclusively or predominantly for residential use.



   (F)   Parking.



      (1)   Client parking shall be located in an area which is
visible from a public road or a private road that is accessible to the
public. It cannot be screened from the roadway with vegetation, fencing or
other obstructions.



      (2)   Parking areas shall be well lit and monitored by video
surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by dispensary staff,
continually recorded and accessible to local law enforcement officials via
the internet.



      (3)   Parking shall be based on one space for every 300 square
feet of floor area.



   (G)   Exterior display.  No medical cannabis dispensary shall be
maintained or operated in a manner that causes, creates or allows the public
viewing of medical cannabis, medical cannabis infused products or cannabis
paraphernalia from any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way or any
property other than the lot on which the dispensary is located. No portion of
the exterior of the dispensary shall utilize or contain any flashing lights,
search lights or spot lights or any similar lighting system.



   (H)   Signage.



      (1)   All signage for the medical cannabis dispensaries shall
be limited to one flat wall sign not to exceed ten square feet in area, and
one identifying sign, which can only include the dispensary address, not to
exceed two square feet in area; such signs shall not be directly illuminated.
Exterior signs on the dispensary building shall not obstruct the entrance or
windows on the dispensary.



      (2)   Electronic message boards and temporary signs are not
permitted in connection with a dispensary.



      (3)   Signage should not contain cannabis imagery such as
cannabis leaves, plants, smoke, paraphernalia or cartoonish imagery oriented
towards youth.



      (4)   Signs shall not include or any wording that would
identify the property as a medical marijuana dispensary or use clinical,
botanical or slanging terms for cannabis, cannabis consumption, cannabis
intoxication or drug paraphernalia including but not limited to cannabis,
marijuana, weed, pot, 420, joint, Mary Jane, ganja, hash, herb, doobie, bong,
blunt, bowl, zoned, sloshed, burnt, stoned, green day, reefer, smoke, toke,
wacky tobaccy/baccy, spliff, roach, skunk and the like.



      (5)   A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near
all dispensary entrances and shall include the following language: “Only
cardholders, designated caregivers and staff may enter these premises.
Persons under the age of 18 are prohibited from entering.” The required
text shall be no larger than one-inch in height.



   (I)   Drug paraphernalia sales.  Medical cannabis dispensaries that
display or sell drug paraphernalia shall do so in compliance with the
Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 600) and the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (Public Act 098-0122)



   (J)   Product packaging.  Medical cannabis and cannabis infused
products shall be distributed in a sealed, tamper-evident medical cannabis
container. Any additional packaging, such as bags or boxes, shall be opaque
with no texts or graphics identifying the contents of packages.



   (K)   Age and access limitations.  It shall be unlawful for any
medical cannabis dispensary to allow any person who is not at least 18 years
of age on the premises. Dispensaries shall not employ anyone under the age of
18. Access shall be limited exclusively to dispensary staff, cardholders,
designated caregivers, and local and state officials.



   (L)   Hours of operation.  Medical cannabis dispensaries shall
operate between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Deliveries shall not occur after 7:00
p.m. or before 7:00 a.m.



   (M)   Drive-thru windows.  A medical cannabis dispensary may not
have a drive-through service.



   (N)   Security and video surveillance.



      (1)   The medical cannabis dispensary shall be an enclosed
locked facility and shall provide and maintain adequate security on the
premises, including lighting, video surveillance and alarms reasonably
designed to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from
theft.



      (2)   The medical cannabis dispensary parking area, client
entrance, sales area, back room, storage areas and delivery bay and entrance
shall be monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can be
viewed by dispensary staff, continually recorded and accessible to local law
enforcement officials via the internet.



      (3)   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which
includes the following language: “This area is under live/recorded video
surveillance to aid in the prosecution of any crimes committed against this
facility or its patrons.”



      (4)   The village shall review the adequacy of lighting,
security and video surveillance instillations with assistance from
appropriate local law enforcement officials.



      (5)   A medical cannabis dispensary shall report all criminal
activities to the police immediately upon discovery.



      (6)   Deliveries shall occur within a secure enclosed delivery
bay, no delivery shall be visible from the exterior of the building.



   (O)   Conduct on site.



      (1)   Loitering is prohibited on the dispensary property.



      (2)   It shall be prohibited to smoke, inhale or consume
cannabis products in the medical cannabis dispensary or anywhere on the
property occupied by the dispensary. A sign, at least 8.5 by 11 inches, shall
be posted inside the dispensary building in a conspicuous place and visible
to a client and shall include the following language: “Smoking, eating,
drinking or other forms of consumption of cannabis products is prohibited on
dispensary property.”



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.099  MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER STANDARDS.



   (A)   Site plan review.  Medical cannabis cultivation center
(manufacture and production use category) shall be a conditional use in the
I-1 Industrial District and shall be subject to the site plan review
procedures of this section unless otherwise expressly exempted.



   (B)   Compliance with state regulations and rules.  All medical
cannabis cultivation centers shall comply with the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (Public Act 098-0122) and any rules
adopted in accordance thereto.



   (C)   Single use property.  Medical cannabis cultivation centers
shall not be established in multiple use or tenant property or on a property
that shares parking with other uses.



   (D)   Bulk standards.



      (1)   A medical cannabis cultivation center shall comply with
all bulk standards outlined in Table 8. 



      (2)   A medical cannabis cultivation center shall have a
minimum lot area of 30,000 square feet.



   (E)   Parking.



      (1)   Parking areas shall be well lit and monitored by video
surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by cultivation center
staff, continually recorded and accessible to local law enforcement officials
via the internet.



      (2)   One parking stall shall be required for each employee.



   (F)   Signage.



      (1)   All signage for the medical cannabis cultivation center
shall be limited to one flat wall sign not to exceed ten square feet in area,
and one identifying sign, which can only include the dispensary address, not
to exceed two square feet in area; such signs shall not be directly
illuminated.



      (2)   Electronic message boards and temporary signs are not
permitted in connection with a cultivation center.



      (3)   Signs shall not include any realistic or stylized
graphical representation of the cannabis plant or its parts or any realistic
or stylized graphical representation of drug paraphernalia, and shall not
contain cannabis imagery such as cannabis leaves, plants, smoke,
paraphernalia or cartoonish imagery oriented towards youth.



      (4)   Signs shall not include or any wording that would
identify the property as a medical marijuana dispensary or use clinical,
botanical or slanging terms for cannabis, cannabis consumption, cannabis
intoxication or drug paraphernalia including but not limited to cannabis,
marijuana, weed, pot, 420, joint, Mary Jane, ganja, hash, herb, doobie, bong,
blunt, bowl, zoned, sloshed, burnt, stoned, green day, reefer, smoke, toke,
wacky tobaccy/baccy, spliff, roach, skunk and the like.



   (G)   Product packaging.  Medical cannabis and cannabis infused
products shall be shipped in a sealed, tamper-evident medical cannabis
container. Any additional packaging, such as bags or boxes, shall be opaque
with no texts or graphics identifying the contents of packages.



   (H)   Age and access limitations.  It shall be unlawful for any
medical cannabis cultivation center to allow any person who is not at least
18 years of age on the premises. Cultivation centers shall not employ anyone
under the age of 18. Access shall be limited exclusively to cultivation
center staff and local and state officials.



   (I)   Security and video surveillance.



      (1)   The medical cannabis cultivation center shall be an
enclosed locked facility and shall provide and maintain adequate security on
the premises, including lighting, video surveillance and alarms reasonably
designed to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from
theft. The facility shall be enclosed by high security. The fence must be
adequately secure to prevent unauthorized entry and include gates tied into
an access control system.



      (2)   The medical cannabis cultivation center parking area,
cultivation, production, warehousing areas and shipping bays and entrance
shall be monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can be
viewed by cultivation center staff, continually recorded and accessible to
local law enforcement officials via the internet.



      (3)   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which
includes the following language: “This area is under live/recorded video
surveillance to aid in the prosecution of any crimes committed against this
facility.”



      (4)   The director shall review the adequacy of lighting,
security and video surveillance instillations with assistance from
appropriate local law enforcement officials.



      (5)   Loading of product shall occur within secure enclosed
shipping bays and shall not be visible from the exterior of the building.



   (J)   Noxious odors.



      (1)   All cultivation centers shall operate in a manner that
prevents odor impacts on neighboring premises or properties and, if
necessary, the facility shall be ventilated with a system for odor control.



      (2)   All cultivation centers shall operate in conformance the
performance standards outlined in §§ 22.195 through 22.207.



   (K)   Conduct on site.



      (1)   Retail sales of medical cannabis or medical cannabis
infused products are strictly prohibited at medical cannabis cultivation
centers.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful to cultivate, manufacture, process
or package any product, other than medical cannabis and cannabis infused
products, at a cultivation center.



      (3)   All cultivation of cannabis for distribution to a
registered dispensing organization must take place in an enclosed, locked
facility.



      (4)   A cultivation center may not sell or distribute any
cannabis to any individual or entity other than a registered dispensary
organization.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



§ 22.110  PROVISIONS APPLYING TO PARKING AND LOADING.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the requirements in this section is
to further the appropriate provision and design of off-street and loading
areas that will:



      (1)   Provide access to land uses generating large traffic
volumes in a community dependent on automobile and truck transportation;



      (2)   Foster safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and
pedestrians both on private property and on adjacent public streets; and



      (3)   Minimize nuisance in residential areas from on-street
parking of large numbers of vehicles.



   (B)   Applicability.  The requirements in this section apply to any
provision, removal, enlargement or alteration of any off-street parking or
loading spaces or areas accessory to any building or structure existing as of
the effective date of this chapter or any new spaces or areas required to be
provided under this chapter or voluntarily provided in excess of the
requirements in this chapter. These provisions shall likewise apply to
parking that is the principal use of a parcel.



   (C)   Number and size required facilities.



      (1)   Numbers and sizes of off-street parking and loading
spaces shall be provided for all new uses and existing uses that are
enlarged, expanded or changed, in conformance with the standards of Tables
10, 11, 12 and 13.



      (2)   No additional spaces shall be required for expansion or
change of an existing use if the standards herein would require an increase
over the spaces already provided on the site of less than 15%.



      (3)   A required off-street parking stall shall be at least
nine feet in width and 18 feet in length, exclusive of access drives or
aisles, ramps, columns, or work areas.  The length of a parking stall may be
reduced to 17.5 feet including wheel stop if additional space of one and one
half feet in length is provided for car overhang.



   (D)   Preservation and replacement of existing spaces.  No
off-street parking or loading spaces either provided in conformity with the
provisions of this or a previous chapter or voluntarily provided in excess of
what such provisions require, shall be reduced in size or number below the
requirements herein, or further below such requirements, so long as the use
they serve continues in operation.



   (E)   Submission of site plan. 



      (1)   A site plan showing off-street parking and loading
facilities shall accompany an application for any of the following for any
use required to provide over four off-street parking space or one or more
off-street loading spaces:



         (a)   Building permit or certificate of occupancy;



         (b)   Conditional use permit;



         (c)   Rezoning;



         (d)   Preliminary or final plat approval as provided in
the subdivision control chapter;



         (e)   Variance from off-street parking or loading
requirements; or



         (f)   Planned Unit Development preliminary or final plan.



      (2)   The President and Board of Trustees may waive or defer
this requirement in any instance in which the specific use of the premise,
and therefore the specific parking and loading requirements applicable, are
not yet determined, such as in the case of a rezoning for an industrial
subdivision. The site plan shall meet the requirements of Table 2 in the
filing procedure section in this chapter.



   (F)   Storage and repair.  No storage of any kind, nor motor
vehicle repair work except for emergency services, is permitted in any open
off-street parking or loading area. 



   (G)   Access.  Each required off-street parking space and loading
space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design
as to provide a safe and efficient means of vehicular access, and shall have
vehicular access to a public thoroughfare in a manner that will least
interfere with traffic movement thereupon. Dimensions of aisles and driveways
shall be as provided in Table 10.



   (H)   Grading.  All parking and loading areas shall be graded for
proper drainage, and the volume of storm water runoff that exceeds that
existing prior to the installation of such areas shall discharge into an
approved drainage system.



   (I)   Maintenance.  All parking and loading areas shall be
maintained free of dust, trash and debris. The surfacing, curbing, lighting
fixtures, signage, and related appurtenances shall be maintained in good
condition so long as such areas are used for parking or loadings purposes.



   (J)   Landscaping and screening.  All parking and loading areas
shall be landscaped and screened as provided in the landscaping and screening
section of this chapter.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-32, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 22.111  OFF-STREET PARKING PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Use of parking spaces.  Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, required off-street parking shall be used solely for parking for
patrons, occupants, guests, visitors or employees of the premise on the same
lot.



   (B)   Collective and shared parking provision. 



      (1)   Off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be
provided collectively if the total number of spaces so provided collectively
is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use and
provided that all regulations governing location of accessory parking spaces
in relation to the use served are adhered to.  Further, no parking space or
portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use.



      (2)   Within the C-4, Downtown Commercial District, off street
parking spaces for separate uses may be provided collectively by shared
parking. Under the shared parking model, the number of parking spaces
required shall be based on the Urban Land Institute “Shared Parking”
publication (second edition). Specifically, Table 2-2 (Summary of Recommended
Base Parking Ratios), Table 2-5 (Recommended Time of Day Factors for
Weekends), and Table 2-6 (Recommended Time of Day.



   (C)   Computation. When determination of the number of off-street
parking spaces required by this chapter results in a requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction of less than one-half may be disregarded,
while a fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as a parking space. 



   (D)   Surfacing and curbing of parking areas.



      (1)   All open off-street parking areas and related vehicular
access drives and aisles shall be improved and/or surfaced with a hard
surfaced, all weather, dustless material such as blacktop, sealcoat, brick or
concrete. Pervious pavers may also be used, however, gravel and asphalt
shavings are prohibited.



      (2)   Perimeter curbing shall be required for all parking
areas providing space for five or more vehicles. 



   (E)   Wheel guards.  Where more than four spaces are provided,
wheel guards, bumper guards or curbs shall be installed so as to prevent
parked vehicles form extending beyond the parking surface.



   (F)   Location of parking spaces.



      (1)   Control of off site parking facilities. Required
off-street parking for single- family detached and attached dwellings shall
be provided on the same lots as the use served. No parking spaces accessory
to a multi-family use shall be located in a single-family detached or
attached district. Required parking for other uses may also be provided on a
separate lot that is in the same possession, by deed or lease, or perpetual
agreement, so long as the nearest point of the parking area thereupon is
within 500 feet walking distance of the nearest entrance to the use served.



      (2)   Driveways and parking in residential yards.  Required
off-street parking for single-family detached and attached and townhouse
dwellings may be located in front, side, and rear yards, subject to the
following:



         (a)   Interior residential lots shall only be allowed
one curb cut to a public street, whereas a residential corner lot, may be
allowed one curb cut per street frontage, subject to Village Board approval.



         (b)   Except as set forth in subsection (c), no
driveway, parking area and/or sidewalk contiguous thereto in a single-family
detached or attached zoning district shall exceed a width of 24 feet.



         (c)   For three-car garages, a driveway, parking area
and/or sidewalk contiguous thereto in a single-family detached or attached
zoning district shall be allowed a maximum of 27 feet in width within 18 feet
of the garage’s front elevation when, in the opinion of the Village
Engineer, the installation of such driveway will not be detrimental to
drainage.



         (d)   For side loaded garages (when the door(s) face a
side lot line), the driveway pavement dimension shall be a maximum of 24 feet
from the face of the garage to the edge of the driveway pavement along the
side lot line.



         (e)   When the garage or parking stall is located to the
rear of the residence, the side drive shall be a minimum of nine feet wide.
Projections (chimney’s, awnings and the like) shall not be allowed to
overhang this measurement.



         (f)   All driveways must be setback at least three (3)
feet from the side or rear lot line (whichever lot line applies).



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 19-O-06, passed 3-5-2019)



§ 22.112  FRONT YARD IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE.



   For a zoning lot with a lot width of 50 feet or less, the maximum
impervious surface coverage shall not exceed 55% of the front yard area. For
zoning lots that are greater than 50 feet, the maximum impervious surface
coverage shall not exceed 50% of the front yard area. 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 19-O-06, passed 3-5-2019)



§ 22.113  PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   In Residential Districts. Only one RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is as
defined in § 22.011 may be parked or stored in a Residential District
provided that:



      (1)   It is at no time occupied for living or sleeping
purposes except as may be allowed by the President and Board of Trustees on a
temporary basis;



      (2)   It is not connected to natural gas, water or sanitary
sewer service;



      (3)   It is stored in its collapsed position if it is a
vehicle of the collapsible type not stored in garage; or



      (4)   It is parked and stored on a hard dust free surface and
in a location determined by the following:



         (a)   No recreational vehicle(s) may be parked in the
front or corner side yard; or



         (b)   The vehicle may be parked in a garage, or side
loaded carport, where one is available on the premise large enough to
accommodate the vehicle.



   (B)   In other districts. There shall be no restrictions on parking
of recreational vehicles in non-residential districts, other than those
concerning outdoor storage.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.114  PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   n Residential Districts. No COMMERCIAL VEHICLES defined in §
22.011 may be parked or stored in a Residential District other than in a
completely enclosed garage except for loading or unloading of household
belongings between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. for the purpose of moving a
personal residence or for deliveries, repairs, construction, maintenance, or
service calls.



   (B)   In Business Districts. No COMMERCIAL VEHICLES as defined in
§22.011 may be parked or stored in a Commercial or Office District other
than in a completely enclosed garage unless it is used in a business located
on the same premises or is being parked temporarily by a customer, supplier,
contractor, or visitor of for loading, unloading, moving, or construction,
maintenance, or repair of the premise.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 19-O-06, passed 3-5-2019)



§ 22.115  HANDICAPPED AND BICYCLE PARKING.



   Parking for the handicapped shall be provided at a size, number and
location, as specified by the current Illinois Accessibility Code.



 

Total Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
 
Required Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces




1 to 20
 

1



21 to 50
 

2



51 to 75
 

3



76 to 100
 

4



101 to 150
 

5



151 to 200
 

6



201 to 300
 

7



301 to 400
 

8



401 to 500
 

9



501 to 1,000
 

2% of total number



Over 1,000
 

20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000





 



   (A)   Dimensions of handicapped spaces and access aisle. Each
parking shall be at least 16 feet wide and stripped in conformance with the
current State of Illinois Accessibility Standards. Adjacent parking spaces
shall not share a common access aisle. All access aisles shall blend to a
common level with an accessible route and shall be diagonally stripped. 



   (B)   Signage of handicapped spaces. Each parking space designated
for handicapped persons shall comply with the current state statute as
amended and meet the requirements of the current U.S. Department of
Transportation Standards for the required sign. Signs shall be vertically
mounted on a post or a wall at a the front of the parking space, no more than
five feet from the front of the parking space, and set a minimum of four
feet, maximum six feet from grade level to the bottom of the sign.  Each
sign designating a parking facility for persons with disabilities shall also
exhibit sign specifying the fine.



   (C)   Bicycle parking. All uses providing over 25 spaces shall
provide space and facilities for bicycle parking.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.116  LAND-BANKED PARKING.



   (A)   Except for single family uses, up to 25% of the required
parking spaces of an off-street parking lot may be land-banked during the
site plan review process as follows:



      (1)   Sufficient evidence must be provided by the applicant
that supports the deferment of the reduced parking needs.



      (2)   The area proposed for land-banking of parking spaces
must be an area suitable for conversion to parking at any time as may be
required by the Village or at such time when the needs arises.



      (3)   The land-banked parking area must be landscaped.



      (4)   The land-banked parking area cannot be used for any
other use, such as storage, and cannot be used to fulfill other landscape
requirements of this ordinance.



      (5)   As part of the site plan review process, the applicant
must show the location of the land-banked parking area and demonstrate
compliance with the parking standards outlined in this ordinance.



(Ord. 19-O-06, passed 3-5-2019)



 

Table 10: Parking Dimensions



 

Parallel

 

30 Degrees

 

45 Degrees

 

60 Degrees

 

90 Degrees




Depth

 

Width

 

Depth

 

Width

 

Depth

 

Width

 

Depth

 

Width

 

Depth

 

Width





Single row parking
 
9
 
22
 
17
 
9
 
19
 
9
 
20
 
9
 
18
 
9



   Drive aisle

 
13
 
 
 
13
 
 
 
13
 
 
 
18
 
 
 
24
 
 



   Minimum modular width

 
22
 
 
 
30
 
 
 
32
 
 
 
38
 
 
 
42
 
 


Two row parking
 
18
 
22
 
34
 
9
 
38
 
9
 
40
 
9
 
36
 
9



   Drive aisle

 
13
 
 
 
13
 
 
 
13
 
 
 
18
 
 
 
24
 
 



   Minimum modular width

 
31
 
 
 
47
 
 
 
51
 
 
 
58
 
 
 
60
 
 




 







(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.117  OFF-STREET LOADING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Location of loading spaces. All required loading spaces shall
be located:



      (1)   On the same lot as the use to be served, except when
collectively provided as central loading facilities in conformance with the
requirements in this chapter;



      (2)   Twenty-five feet or more from the right-of-way lines of
the nearest point of intersection of any streets;



      (3)   Outside of required front and corner side yards;



      (4)   In such a manner that no portions of a vehicle shall
project into a street; and



      (5)   Loading berths must be screened from the public view and
along the side and rear yards, and pursuant to the screening requirements
outlined in § 22.132 of this chapter.



   (B)   Surfacing of loading areas.  All open off-street loading
spaces and related vehicular access drives and aisles shall be surfaced with
a hard-surfaced all-weather dustless material, such as asphalt or concrete.
Asphalt shavings and other similar material shall be prohibited.



   (C)   Collective provision.  Loading spaces required for individual
lots may be collectively provided in central facilities provided that all of
the following requirements are met:



      (1)   The number of spaces provided is not less than that
required by the total floor space for each category of use served;



      (2)   Each lot served has direct access to the central
facilities without crossing streets at grade;



      (3)   The central facilities are not more than 500 feet from
any lot they serve;



      (4)   Any tunnel or ramp between the central facilities and
any lot served is at least seven feet wide and has a vertical clearance of at
least seven feet;



      (5)   Written covenants and easements approved by the village
and recorded with the county provide for the retention, maintenance and use
of such facilities;



      (6)   No space shall at the same time fully or partially serve
to meet the requirements for both off-street parking and loading facilities;
and



      (7)   Uses smaller than the smallest values given for each
category, shall be provided with other receiving facilities for motor
vehicles judge adequate by the President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 19-O-06, passed 3-5-2019)



 


Table 11:  Off-Street Loading Requirements




Type of Use

 

Building Size in Sq. Ft.*

 

No. of Spaces**





Offices
 

10,000-100,000

 

1



Public uses


Institutional uses


Manufacturing
 



 






   Warehousing and storage

 

5,000-40,000

 

1




   Cartage and express

 

40,001-100,000

 

2



Retail and service
 

5,000-10,000



10,001-25,000



25,001-40,000



40,001-100,000

 

1



2



3



4



 
 

Tractor-trailers

 

For other trucks***



Minimum depth
 

60

 

25



Minimum width
 

14

 

10



Vertical clearance
 

14

 

14




*   Building size measured by net floor area, as defined in § 22.001



**   One additional space shall be provided for every 100,000 square feet
over 100,000 square feet, with fractional spaces rounded to the nearest
integer



***   Permitted for uses not normally serviced by tractor trailers





 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 


Table 12: Required Parking Spaces for Residential and Lodging Uses






 

Minimum Number of Spaces Required Per Dwelling or Lodging Unit





Residential (a)
 
 


Single-family attached and detached dwelling unit
 

2.0



Multi-family dwelling unit
 

2.0



Lodging (b) (d)
 





Hotel
 

1 (c)



Motel
 

1 (c)



Apartment hotel
 

1



Boarding house
 

1



Congregate care housing    
 

1/employee + 0.66/resident bed



See also Table 13 for required spaces for other uses

Fractional spaces shall be rounded to the nearest integer


(a)   In the C-4 District, the minimum number of parking spaces required
shall be based on 50% of the number of spaces required outside the district.
Includes single-family detached or attached, townhouses, apartments, and
mobile homes. Required spaces include .25 spaces per unit for visitor parking
but shall be increased by 1 space for each roomer or lodger. No more than 4
spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit.



(b)   Plus 1 parking space per employee on largest shift.



(c)   Plus spaces for restaurant, retail, meeting rooms, if any, as
provided in Table 13.



(d)   One space for each truck or business vehicle employed by an
establishment on the premise shall be provided in addition to the number of
spaces indicated in this table.





 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 


Table 13: Required Parking Spaces for Non-Residential and Non-Lodging Uses




Minimum Number of Spaces Required (a)

 

Per Employee (b)

 

Per 1,000 Square Feet Floor Area

 

Per Person Design Capacity (c)





Schools
 
1
 
-
 
-


Elementary
 
1
 
-
 
-


Junior high
 
1
 
-
 
.125 (d)


High school
 
1
 
-
 
.25 (d)


College or university
 
1
 
-
 
.25 (d)


Recreational
 
 
 
 
 
 


Indoor theatre
 
-
 
-
 
.33


Bowling alley
 
 
 
 
 
 



   Per lane

 
-
 
-
 
- (h)



   Restaurant/bar

 
-
 
3
 
-


Arena or stadium
 
-
 
-
 
.25


Auditorium (non-school)
 
-
 
-
 
.25


Skating rink
 
-
 
-
 
.25


Swimming pool
 
-
 
-
 
.25


Dance or meeting hall
 
-
 
-
 
.25


Community center
 
 
 
 
 
 


Institutional
 
 
 
 
 
 


Church
 
-
 
-
 
.25


Public utility and service
 
1
 
-
 
-


Philanthropic and charitable institution
 
-
 
1
 
-


Library, museum gallery
 
-
 
2.5
 
-


Nursing home
 
1
 
-
 
- (f)


Child day care center
 
-
 
2
 
-


Medical
 
 
 
 
 
 


Hospital
 
1
 
-
 
- (e)


Clinic
 
-
 
5
 
-


Animal hospital
 
-
 
5
 
-


Automotive
 
 
 
 
 
 


Auto laundry
 
1
 
-
 
- (i)


Service station
 
1
 
5
 
- (k)


Vehicle sales
 
-
 
5
 
-


Office building
 
-
 
 
 
-


Professional
 
 
 
4
 
 


Medical and dental
 
 
 
5
 
 


Retail
 
-
 
4
 
-


Supermarket or food store
 
-
 
5
 
-


Bank of financial institution
 
-
 
3.5
 
-


Restaurant
 
 
 
 
 
 


Carry-out only
 
-
 
10
 
-


Drive-in and sit-down
 
-
 
1 space/45 square feet of seating area
 
- (g)


Sit-down, no drive-in
 
-
 
-


Mortuary
 
1
 
10
 
- (l)


Contractor or construction office (a)
 
1
 
3.0 -
 
-


Furniture and appliance
 
 
 
 
 
 


Sales or repair store
 
-
 
1.5
 
-


Other retail and personal service
 
-
 
4.5
 
- (g)


Industrial
 
 
 
 
 
 


Cartage and express firms
 
1
 
-
 
-


Warehousing and wholesaling
 
1
 
.5
 
- (j)


Radio or tv station or studio
 
1
 
1.5
 
- (j)


See also Table 12 for required spaces for residential and lodging uses.
Parking for uses not listed shall be as provided for the most similar listed
use.

In the C-4 District, the minimum number of parking spaces required shall be
based on 50% of the number of spaces required outside the district.


(a)   Once space for each truck or business vehicle employed by an
establishment on the premise shall be provided in addition to the number of
spaces specified in this table.



(b)   Maximum number of full- and part-time employees on duty on the
premise at any one time.



(c)   Per seat in main auditorium or meeting room per person of design
capacity of the facility. Eighteen inches of seating space shall be
considered a seat for purposes of this requirement where individual seats are
not discernable.


(d)   Design capacity in students.

(e)   Plus one space for every two beds.

(f)   Plus one space for every four beds.

(g)   Plus three stacking spaces per drive-in window.

(h)   Seven spaces per bowling lane.


(i)   Plus stacking spaces equal to five times the capacity of the car
wash. The capacity shall be calculated as the number of vehicles that can be
accommodated at any one time in any phase of the washing or waxing process




(j)   Use employment standard or floor space standard, whichever is
greater. If employment is not known when plans are drawn, floor space
standard may be used. If upon occupancy the employment standard yields a
greater number of required spaces, the President and Board of Trustees may
require the provision of additional parking before granting a certificate of
occupancy.


(k)   Plus two spaces per service bay.

(l)   Employee spaces exclude employees resident on premise.




 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING



§ 22.130  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   This section establishes ecological and environmental requirements to
reduce air and noise pollution and to improve the appearance of the
village.  The requirement applies to all new construction and to all
enlargements or expansions of any structure, related parking or paved service
areas that abut a residential district or street, taking place after the
effective date of this chapter. 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.131  APPLICABILITY.



   All development shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter and
shall provide landscaping in accordance with the provisions of said
subchapter, except for the following:



   (A)   Single-family lots. Development of a dwelling in any
single-family residential district.



   (B)   Previously approved development. Development pursuant to plans
that received all required final approvals of the village prior to the
effective date of this code.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.132  LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS .



   (A)   Transitional screening requirements.  In any non-residential
zoning district where a rear lot line or side lot line coincides with a rear
or side lot line of property in an adjacent residential district, buffering
and screening shall be required. Such buffering shall consists of landscape
planting area that is at least ten feet wide, as well as a single or
combination thereof of the following types of screening that must be at least
six feet in height at the time of installation.



      (1)   Well maintained masonry wall or board on board fence;



      (2)   An offset double row of evergreen trees;



      (3)   An offset double row of densely planted landscape
material; and



      (4)   A combination of items (1) through (3).



   (B)   Parking lot screening.  All paved service areas, drive aisle
and off-street parking areas abutting a Residential District or street shall
be effectively screened on each side adjoining a Residential District or
adjoining a public way, by a landscape planting area that is at least eight
feet wide and includes a well- maintained wall or densely planted compact
hedge designated to provide year round opacity.



      (1)   Along the frontage of a public way, said screening shall
consists of a three-foot high continuous row of shrubs that provides year
round opacity. In the interest of safety, so that the line of sight will not
be obstructed, the minimum height shall be lowered at street intersections
and driveways to not less than 18-inches as determined by the Director of
Community and Economic Development or designee. 



      (2)   Adjoining a Residential District, said screening shall
be at least six feet in height.



   (C)   Parking lots and garages islands.



      (1)   All parking lots shall be setback at least eight feet
from the side and rear property lines. This open green space shall consist of
trees and shrubs in an amount and arrangement that will create an aesthetic
visual situation as determined by the village administration.



      (2)   Landscape islands that are at least nine feet in width
and planted with one live shade tree that has a trunk caliper size of two and
one-half inches at the time of installation shall be required after every 20
parking stalls and at the end of each row of parking.  Open parking areas
larger than four spaces but smaller than 20 parking spaces shall provide
proportional amounts of open green space and live greenery.



      (3)   Parking lot islands within garage structures shall be
stripped and a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in
depth.



   (D)   Refuse areas, outdoor storage lots, off street loading areas,
and ground based mechanical equipment.



      (1)   All refuse areas, containers, off street loading areas,
and outdoor storage areas must be located in the rear or side yard and shall
be screened within an enclosure that is no taller than six feet within a
commercial or office district, or up to eight feet in the industrial district
and provides year round opacity. 



      (2)   Ground based mechanical equipment shall be screened by
an architecturally compatible screen wall or dense landscaping that provides
year round opacity.



   (E)   Detention and retention basins.  Landscaping shall be
required along the perimeter of detention and retention basins in order to
minimize their negative visual impact.  Such landscaping shall consist of
trees and shrubs in an amount and arrangement that will create an aesthetic
visual situation as determined by the village administration.



   (F)   Foundation landscaping.  Foundation landscaping shall be
provided on those sides of the building which face a public right-of- way.
The foundation landscaping shall be located in a planting bed that is at
least five feet in width. Such landscaping shall consist of trees and shrubs
in an amount and arrangement that will create an aesthetic visual situation
as determined by the village administration.



   (G)   Ground cover.  Grass or other ground cover shall be planted
over all landscaped areas including berms, except in areas planted in
flowers, shrubs or trees, so as to present a finished appearance. Non-living
landscaping materials such as stone, rocks, or barks may be substituted for
living ground cover.



   (H)   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment.  All mechanical equipment
located on the roof of any building shall be fully screened by a parapet wall
or structure that is architecturally compatible with the principal building.
The screening shall not be less than 12 inches higher than the highest point
of such equipment.  The parapet wall or similar structure shall be made of
the same materials as the principal façade of the building except only if
other materials are approved in advance in writing by the village
administration.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-32, passed 10-3-2017; Ord. 18-O-14, passed
5-15-2018; Ord. 19-O-06, passed 3-5-2019)



§ 22.133  LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED.



   (A)   A landscape plan shall be filed with an application for:



      (1)   Rezoning;



      (2)   Conditional use permit;



      (3)   Any variance from landscaping or screening requirements;



      (4)   Planned Unit Development preliminary or final plan
approval;



      (5)   Preliminary or final plat approval as provided in the
subdivision control ordinance; and



      (6)   Building permit or certificate of occupancy.



   (B)   The President and Board of Trustees may waive or defer this
requirement in any instance in which the specific use of the premises, and
therefore the specific landscaping and screening requirements applicable, are
not yet determined, such as in the case of a rezoning for an industrial
subdivision.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.134  GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Varieties of living landscape materials used shall be healthy,
hardy and drought-resistant; be suitable for the climate and environmental
influences on the site, such as exposure to sun, wind, water, heat,
automobile exhaust fumes and road salt; and be compatible with the slope of
the site, with existing vegetation to be preserved, and with utilities above
or below ground level. Where appropriate, landscape materials shall be
protected from damage from pedestrian or vehicular traffic by tree grates,
pavers or other measures.



   (B)   All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition at all
times. All dead, diseased or damaged plant material shall be replaced
promptly with live plant material in good condition and in quantities and
sizes so that the requirements of this subchapter are met at all times.



   (C)   All yards and open space shall be kept free of accumulations
of garbage, trash, refuse, debris and other unsightly or nuisance creating
materials.



   (D)   All landscaping shall be continually maintained by the owner
or other person responsible for maintenance of the premises, and all
plantings areas shall be kept free of weeds and debris.



   (E)   Undeveloped areas shall be mowed and kept free of
accumulations of garbage, trash, refuse, debris and other unsightly or
nuisance creating materials.



   (F)   All landscape areas located within a parking lot or adjacent
to any public right-of-way shall be designed to properly contain all
landscape materials and to prevent encroachment by vehicles and vehicle
overhang.



   (G)   No artificial materials shall be used to satisfy the
requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.135  PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF EXISTING TREES.



   (A)   Intent and purpose.  This part of the landscape section
establishes requirements to protect and preserve existing trees throughout
the village. The requirement only applies to all public and private new
construction on lots or parcels greater than five acres. Lots and parcels of
land that are less than five acres, and existing developed or contiguous
single-family subdivided residential lots and public rights-of-way shall be
excluded from the requirements of this section.



   (B)   Tree removal.  No tree having a trunk size of three inches or
greater in diameter, as measured six inches above the established ground
level shall be removed from unimproved or partially improved land prior to
receiving approval of a tree survey and preservation plan from the village
administration.



   (C)   Protection of existing trees.



      (1)   Tree survey. A tree survey shall be submitted to the
Director of Community and Economic Development for review, by anyone planning
any site development.  The tree survey shall indicate the location, size and
species (both common and botanical name) of all trees located on the parcel
with a trunk size of three inches or greater, as measured six inches above
the established grade.



      (2)   Integration of existing tree in site and landscape plan.
Subject to the determination by the village administration, a reasonable
effort shall be made to retain existing trees on the tree survey through the
integration of those trees into the site and landscape plan for a proposed
development. If a reasonable effort integration into the development plan is
not possible, the developer may choose to mitigate the trees in dispute based
upon the exchange rate set forth in § 22.135(D).  In the event that a
development plan is not required but a landowner desires a to clear the site
of trees, a tree survey is still required. In such an instance, quality trees
will be required to be preserved. 



      (3)   Tree preservation plan.  A tree preservation plan
indicating the location and species of those trees to be preserved and the
methods which are to be used to preserve such trees shall be submitted to the
Director of Community and Economic Development. A tree preservation plan
shall specify the following preservation techniques: 



         (a)   Grading and construction equipment. All grading
and construction equipment shall be prohibited from encroaching upon the
tree’s drip line.



         (b)   Material detrimental to trees. Crushed limestone
and other materials detrimental to trees shall not be dumped within the drip
line of any tree nor at any higher location where drainage towards the tree
could conceivably affect the health of the tree.



         (c)   Installation of snow fencing. Snow fencing shall
be installed during construction at the periphery of the tree’s drip line.
In areas where a tree is in the construction zone and fencing the drip line
is not possible, two by six inch by eight foot long boards banded or wired
around each trunk shall be provided as protection to adequately prevent
scarring.



         (d)   During construction. If trees have their roots
exposed, the roots are to be pruned. If exposed roots are greater than two
inches, the tree crown is to be pruned to compensate for the root loss. 
Also, the tree shall be watered and fertilized. 



      (4)   Preservation methodology. The methods which are to bused
to preserve those trees shall be clearly specified on the preservation
plan.  These shall, at a minimum, include the preservation techniques listed
above, although alternative methods may be considered.  If in the opinion of
the village administration, the necessary precautions as specified in the
preservation plan for the development were not undertaken before or during
construction to ensure the preservation of those trees, the building permit
for the parcel shall not be issued, or if previously issued may be revoked
until such time as these precautions have been complied with. 



   (D)   Removal of trees designated for preservation.  If a tree
designated for preservation on the preservation plan is destroyed or razed
during the construction or removed without receiving approval, a permit or in
the field adjustment, such trees shall be replaced with new trees in
accordance with the following:



      (1)   Exchange rate.



 


Existing Tree (diameter in inches)

 

Number of Replacement Trees




3-11

 

1




12-20

 

2




21-29

 

3




30 or greater

 

4




 



      (2)   Minimize size of replacement trees. All replacement
trees shall have a minimum trunk caliper size of two and one-half inches as
measured six inches above the established grade, upon installation.



      (3)   Species of replacement trees. The following are examples
of replacement trees (ash trees are specifically prohibited):



         (a)   Linden;



         (b)   Maple (excluding silver maple and other similar
softwood species);



         (c)   Hackberry;



         (d)   Ginko;



         (e)   Oak;



         (f)   Thornless honey locust; and



         (g)   Kentucky coffee tree.



      (4)   Amended landscape and tree preservation plan.  Removal
of trees designated for preservation shall be allowed only by amending the
landscape and tree preservation plan and with the approval of the village
administration.  The amended plan shall indicate the location, species and
size of all replacement trees in accordance with the recommendations of the
village administration.



      (5)   In the field adjustments. In the field adjustments to
trees designated for preservation on the preservation plan may be necessary
during the course of construction.  In such instances, the developer or
property owner shall not remove any trees designated for preservation prior
to site inspection and/or consultation with the village. If it is agreed that
any tree designated for preservation substantially impedes the development,
in the field adjustments may be approved by the village administration.



      (6)   Replacement/relocated trees. Any relocated or replaced
tree shall be guaranteed survival for up to one growing season.  In the
event a relocated or replaced tree dies or is in declining condition, the
tree shall be replaced with a two and one-half inch caliper shade tree. 



      (7)   Compliance guarantee. Upon application for a building
permit, the owner or developer shall furnish a letter of credit in the amount
of 30% of the value of the landscape improvements on the approved landscape
plan and $200 for each tree designated to remain or be transplanted on the
approved tree preservation plan.  A cost estimate of landscape improvements
shall be submitted to the village, and will be used to calculate the letter
of credit amount based upon the percentages above. The owner or developer
shall agree that the letter of credit shall by the village for a period of 18
months after the final completion of such work. This will be held for the
purpose of guaranteeing the securing the correction of any defect or death of
plant material furnished, transplanted or preserved on site, which was not
discernable at the time of final inspection or acceptance by the village. If
such defects have developed, then the letter of credit may be applied by the
village for any amounts incurred in correcting such defects; and that the
balance of such letter of credit, if any held at the end of such 18-month
period shall be returned by the village to the owner or developer, or paid to
the order of the depositor, without interest. 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



SIGNS



§ 22.145  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to regulate commercial and
non-commercial signs and advertising displays designed to be visible outdoors
in a manner that without significantly restrict the content thereof:



   (A)   Recognizes the mass communications needs of both businesses
and other parties;



   (B)   Protects property values and neighborhood character;



   (C)   Creates a more attractive business climate; and



   (D)   Promotes pedestrian and traffic safety by reducing sign
distractions, obstructions and other hazards.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.146  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Applicability.  No SIGN as defined in § 22.011 shall
hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged,
converted or structurally altered except in conformance with the provisions
of this section and after issuance of a sign permit by the village, except as
provided under exempt signs and exempt changes to signs in this section.



   (B)   Exempt signs. 



      (1)   The types of signs listed below, and any change thereto
that does not convert them into non-exempt signs, shall be exempt from:



         (a)   The requirements for a sign permit; and



         (b)   The sign standards provided in Table 18.



      (2)   All other provisions in this section shall apply to the
following signs except as otherwise provided:



         (a)   Real estate signs.  REAL ESTATE SIGNS as defined
in § 22.011 that:



            1.   Advertise one to five residential units or no
more than one vacant residential lot;



            2.   Do not exceed five square feet in area;



            3.   Are displayed a minimum of five feet from all
lot lines;



            4.   Are removed one week after the consummation
of the sale or rental of all property to which the sign pertains; and



            5.   No other real estate signs are exempt.



         (b)   Governmental and utility signs.  Informational
signs or displays maintained by a government body of public utility,
including traffic or parking regulatory devices, legal notices, warning of
hazards and similar displays.



         (c)   Government-mandated signs.  Street address
numerals and other signs or exterior displays required to be maintained by
government order or regulation, provided that the content and size thereof
does not exceed that required by such order or regulation.



         (d)   Name plates.  NAME PLATE SIGNS as defined in §
22.011 no larger than two square feet in area.



         (e)   Non-profit organization displays.  The flag,
pennant or insignia of any governmental unit or religious, civic,
educational, or philanthropic organization, or temporary signs announcing
events or campaigns of such organizations.



         (f)   Memorials.  Memorial signs and tablets.



         (g)   No trespassing of dumping signs.  A maximum of
two no-trespassing, no-dumping, or no-hunting signs or the like per lot, each
not larger than two square feet in area.



         (h)   Seasonal decorations.  Decorations temporarily
displayed in connection with a local festivity approved by the President and
Board of Trustees or a state or national holiday.



         (i)   Garage sale signs.  Garage or rummage sale signs
not exceeding two square feet in area displayed for no more than four
consecutive days and no more than four days in any 90-day period.



         (j)   Window signs.  One or more temporary or permanent
window signs that have an aggregate area not greater than 50% of the total
display window area of a business premise.



         (k)   Help wanted signs.  A single temporary sign of
five square feet or less in the window of an establishment offering
employment on the premise.



         (l)   Election campaign signs.



            1.   Is not illuminated.



            2.   Temporary political signs may be erected on
any lot in the village subject to the conditions below and as may be
permitted by the owner of such property.  Signs in the public right-of- way
shall not interfere with or obstruct access, activity or vision along any
such public right-of-way.



            3.   On residential property, temporary political
signs shall not exceed 32 square feet, and a height, as measured from average
grade of six feet.  In the public right-of-way, each temporary political
sign shall not exceed a signable area of six square feet or project higher
than six feet, as measured from grade. 



            4.   There shall only be one sign per candidate,
party or referenda question allowed per frontage of any lot.



            5.   Each political campaign sign may include
information regarding political candidates seeking public office, political
parties and/or political/public issues set forth on a ballot.



         (m)   Scoreboards.  Scoreboards for athletic fields.



         (n)   Small non-illuminated directional signs. 
Non-illuminated directional signs not over three square feet in area or three
feet in height. Directional signs exceeding either dimension and illuminated
directional signs of any size are not exempt.



         (o)   Flags-non-residentia l/commercial. One flag with
the name or logo of a business or corporation located on-site and not
exceeding a display height of 25 feet and size of three feet by five feet.



   (C)   Exempt changes to signs.  No sign permit shall be required
for the following changes to exempt or non-exempt signs, but such changes
must conform to all applicable sign regulations of this chapter:



      (1)   A change in the copy on a sign designed for replaceable
copy, including painted and printed signs; and



      (2)   Painting, cleaning, repair, maintenance or face
replacement of a sign not involving structural change and made necessary by
breakage or deterioration but not by a change in advertiser.



   (D)   Prohibited signs.  The following signs and displays as
defined in § 22.011 are prohibited in all zoning districts:



      (1)   Flashing signs;



      (2)   Temporary signs, except as otherwise permitted by or
exempted from these regulations, but not to include public notice signs
required under this chapter;



      (3)   Projecting signs, except in the C-4 Downtown Commercial
District;



      (4)   Roof signs;



      (5)   Signs on otherwise vacant land other than real estate
signs, construction signs or outdoor advertising signs, as defined and
regulated in this chapter;



      (6)   Signs on or within parked motor vehicles and designed to
be conspicuously visible for advertising or informational purposes from
outside the vehicle, other than trailer signs, lettering on trucks or other
commercial vehicles, transit advertising on buses and election campaign
signs; and



      (7)   All other signs not expressly permitted by this chapter.



   (E)   Conditional use signs.  The following are allowed only as
conditional uses:



      (1)   Outdoor advertising signs in C-5 and I Districts,
provided that at no time shall there be more than eight conditional use
permits issued for outdoor advertising signs;



      (2)   Murals or signs painted on exterior walls; and



      (3)   Search lights and beacon lights.



   (F)   Non-conforming signs.



      (1)   Temporary and portable signs.  All non-exempt temporary
signs and portable signs shall be either removed or brought into full
conformity with the requirements of this chapter within 45 days of the
adoption thereof or of any amendment thereto.



      (2)   Other signs. 



         (a)   All other non-exempt signs lawfully existing, or
holding sign permits issued, prior to the date of adoption of this chapter,
but which are not in conformance with these regulations, may be continued as
nonconformities.



         (b)   Poster panels, painted boards and copy on
nonconforming changeable copy signs may be changed, provided that there has
been no change in occupancy or use of the premises and that the change does
not create any further nonconformity. No nonconforming sign may otherwise be
replace with another nonconforming sign.



         (c)   Nonconforming signs shall be subject to all
requirements governing the continuation of nonconforming structures as
provided in the regulations governing nonconformities in this chapter.



   (G)   Maintenance and repair required.  The appearance and safety
of a sign shall be maintained at all times. The sign shall be repainted as
necessary to prevent rust, corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in the
appearance or structural safety of the sign. The source of illumination shall
be kept in safe working order at all times.



   (H)   Attachments to be secured.  All letters, figures, characters
and sign embellishments on a sign shall be safely and securely attached to
the sign structure.



   (I)   Service station signs and displays.  In addition to other
signs and displays permitted in this chapter, the following displays are
permitted as accessory to automobile service stations:



      (1)   Oil racks.  Racks for the orderly display of cans of
motor oil located on or at the ends of each pump island.



      (2)   Tire racks.  Up to two tire racks-each not more than
eight feet high, six feet long and five feet deep and conforming to all yard
requirements-to display new tire casings.



      (3)   Product displays and portable signs. 



         (a)   Items for sale on the premises openly displayed
within 20 feet of the principal building but not within any required yard, as
well as under pump island canopies or between pumps within the area of the
pump island base.



         (b)   Up to two portable signs within 20 feet of the
principal building advertising products for sale on the premises with a
combined sign area not greater than 30 square feet.



      (4)   Pricing signs.  Free standing signs providing only
pricing information that have a sign are not greater than 12 square feet and
that conform to all other requirements for main free standing signs in
commercial areas in Table 18.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-32, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 22.147  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Permits.



      (1)   Contents of sign permit application.  An application
for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the information provided for in Table 1 in
the filing procedures section of this chapter.



      (2)   Issuance of sign permits.  The Zoning Administrator
shall issue a sign permit for any sign for which a complete and accurate sign
permit application has been filed when he or she has determined that the sig
is in compliance with this and other applicable village ordinances.



      (3)   Suspension, revocation and denial.  A sign permit shall
become void if the sign authorized thereby has not been completely installed
within six months of the date of the permit was issued.



      (4)   Removal of unsafe, abandoned or unlawful signs.



         (a)   Any sign other than an OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN as
defined in § 22.011 that no longer identifies a business activity, event or
service conducted or product, service or entertainment sold on the premises
where the sign is located shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed.



         (b)   If upon inspection the Zoning Administrator finds
that a sign in abandoned, unsafe or in any way not in compliance with village
ordinances, he or she shall issue a written order to the permittee stating
the nature of the violation and requiring the repair, replacement or removal
of the sign within 14 days of the date of the order.



         (c)   If after 14 days of issuance an order has not been
complied with, or if the sign constitutes an immediate hazard to the public
safety, the Zoning Administrator may recommend to the  President and Board
of Trustees that it authorize judicial process to cause the sign to be
removed or repaired pursuant to the provisions concerning unsafe buildings of
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5.



         (d)   After any removal of a sign through judicial
process, the Zoning Administrator shall send a notice to the sign owner
stating the nature of the removal work performed and demanding payment of the
cost thereof plus 10% for inspection and administration costs. If said amount
is not paid within 30 days of the notice, it shall become a lien against the
property of the sign owner.



   (B)   Relief. 



      (1)   Petitions for relief from the sign regulations shall be
heard and decided by the President and Board of Trustees. Submission
requirements shall be as determined by the Board and no public notice shall
be required.



      (2)   The President and Board of Trustees shall grant such
relief only by a vote of a majority of its members and only if it finds that
such relief:



         (a)   Will not be materially detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity; and



         (b)   Will not impair an adequate supply of light and
air to adjacent property, increase the danger of fire, endanger public
safety, or substantially impair property values in the neighborhood.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.148  SIGN STANDARDS.



   All exempt and non-exempt signs shall conform to the following
standards, except as otherwise provided in this chapter:



   (A)   Location and placement.



      (1)   Within public right-of-way.  No sign or associated
light fixture shall be located within, project into or overhang a public
right-of-way, such as a sign upon a tree or utility pole therein, except as
otherwise permitted in this chapter.



      (2)   Obstructions.  No sign may obstruct a fire escape,
door, window or other entrance or exit way, nor any window surface required
for ventilation by any village code.



      (3)   Traffic hazards.  No sign may but reason of location or
location and size obstruct the vision of drivers or obstruct or detract from
the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic signal or control device.



      (4)   Proximity to electric wires.  No metal sign shall be
located within a vertical distance of eight feet, or a horizontal distance of
four feet, of electric wires or conductors, even if such wires or conductors
are insulated or otherwise protected.



      (5)   Clearance for metal electrical signs.  A minimum sign
clearance of one and one-half feet shall be maintained for all metal signs
with electrical wiring.



      (6)   Vision clearance.  Any sign located within the VISION
CLEARANCE TRIANGLE as defined in § 22.011 shall have a minimum sign
clearance of eight feet unless the sign height is two and one-half feet or
less.



   (B)   Illumination.



      (1)   Bare bulb or flame illumination.  Illumination by bare
bulbs or flames is prohibited, except that bare bulbs are permitted on
changing signs or on theatre marquees.



      (2)   Projecting light fixtures.  Gooseneck reflectors or
other arms projecting from the sign mounted with lights to illuminate the
sign are permitted on freestanding and wall signs.



      (3)   Constant illumination.  Sign illumination shall be
constant in intensity and color.



      (4)   Non-glaring.  The light for any illuminated sign shall
be shaded, shielded or directed so as not to cause glare in surrounding
properties or in public streets.



      (5)   Traffic hazards.  No direct or reflected light from a
light source for an illuminated sign shall create a traffic hazard for
operators of motor vehicles.



   (C)   Sign design.



      (1)   Resemblance to traffic devices.  No sign shall by
reason of shape, color, content or use of lighting be similar in appearance
to any traffic signal or traffic sign in a way that may interfere with
traffic movement or safety.



      (2)   Obscenity.  No sign or display shall contain words or
pictures of obscene, indecent or immoral character that offend the public
morals and decency of the village.



      (3)   Permit number.  The sign permit number shall be
displayed in a conspicuous place on every non-exempt sign.



   (D)   Construction standards.



      (1)   Building and electrical code apply.  All signs shall
conform to the buildings and buildings regulations ordinance of the village,
including the Electrical Code adopted therein. Any required building or
electrical permits shall be obtained at the same time as the sign permit.
Conductors for all illuminated signs shall be enclosed in rigid conduit or
other approved raceways and shall be controlled with an external disconnect.
All sign circuit conduit shall where possible be concealed from public view.



      (2)   Wind pressure and dead load requirements.  All
non-exempt signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of surface area and to
receive dead loads as required in the village buildings and building
regulations ordinance or other village ordinances.



      (3)   Structural safety.  All non-exempt signs shall be
designed and constructed in a safe manner and shall be free of any exposed
extra bracing, angle iron, guy wires or cables.



      (4)   Glass requirements.  Any glass used on a non-exempt
sign shall be heavy safety glass at least one-fourth inch thick. All single
pieces of glass over three square feet in areas shall be wired glass.



      (5)   Framework.  All non-exempt signs shall be designed so
that all framework for the lateral support of the sign, other than supporting
poles for a free standing sign, shall be contained within or behind the face
of the sign, or within the building to which it is attached, in such a manner
as not to be visible to public view.



   (E)   Other standards.  All non-exempt signs shall conform to the
applicable standards in Table 18.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 


Table 18:  Standards for Non-Exempt Signs






 

Number Permitted Per Lot

 

Maximum Area in Square Feet*

 

Maximum Height in Feet

 

Other Requirements





All uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Directional signs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



   At entrance or exit

 

1 (b)

 

5

 

2.5

 

(13)




   All other locations

 

1

 

10

 

3

 

(13)



Real estate signs
 

1 (a)

 

32

 

10

 

(14)



Construction signs
 

1 (a)

 

32

 

10

 

(15)



Outdoor advertising signs
 

1 (a)

 

300

 

25

 

(16)



Residential uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Apartment building identification signs
 
1
 
5
 
-
 
-


Development entrance signs   
 
1 (b)
 
32
 
6
 
(5)


Institutional uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Special event signs
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
(5)


Other signs   
 
1 (b)
 
32
 
6
 
(7)


Commercial, office and industrial uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Wall signs
 
1 (d)
 
(c)
 
-
 
(8)


Freestanding signs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Office/industrial uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



   Main sign

 
1 (a)
 
(4)
 
6
 
(4)



   Park entrance sign

 
1 (b)
 
100
 
6
 
(9)



   Directory signs   

 
1 (a)
 
-
 
-
 
(12)


Commercial uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



   Main sign

 
1 (a)
 
(3)
 
25
 
(11)



      In C-4 district

 
1 (a)
 
(21)
 
25
 
(21)



   Display boards or changing signs

 
1 (a)
 
(2)
 
-
 
(11)


In shopping centers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



   Main center sign

 
1
 
200
 
25
 
(10)



   Directory signs

 
1
 
-
 
-
 
(12)


Other signs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Canopy signs
 
1 (d)
 
(17)
 
-
 
(17)


Under canopy signs
 
1 (d)
 
5
 
-
 
(18)


Menu board signs
 
1 (d)
 
32
 
-
 
(19)


Portable signs
 
1
 
50
 
10
 
(20)


Projecting signs   
 
1 (d)
 
5
 
-
 
(22)


Please also see exempt signs for types of signs to which the standards in
Table 18 do not apply.


-   Indicates no restriction



*   Maximum area is per side of each sign


(a)   Maximum one sign per street frontage per lot. In shopping center,
one sign per frontage shopping center, not per lot.

(b)   Per street or alley entrance or exit.


(c)   One and one-half square feet cumulative area for all wall, under
canopy, and permanent window signs per foot of building frontage. For
buildings housing multiple businesses, wall sign area for each business shall
be determined by building frontage of individual business.



(d)   Per street frontage per business establishment, not per lot.

   (1)   Permanent window signs:  Both permanent and temporary window
signs together must not exceed 50% of area display windows. Total area of
permanent window signs, under canopy signs, and wall signs must not exceed
maximum area for wall signs. Permanent window signs may contain only business
name and type, logo, address, phone number, major product and business hours.

   (2)   Display boards or changing signs:  Total area of display
board or changing sign plus main sign shall not exceed maximum permitted area
for main free standing sign.

   (3)   Freestanding commercial signs:  Maximum area is one-half
square foot per foot of lot frontage up to 200 feet plus three-fourths square
foot per foot of lot of frontage over 200 feet up to a maximum of 200 square
feet.

   (4)   Main Freestanding industrial and office signs: one-half square
feet of area per foot of lot frontage. Shall contain only building or tenant
names and location. May project seven feet into required yard.

   (5)   Development entrance signs:  shall not be illuminated. Shall
contain name of development only.

   (6)   Institutional special event signs:  displayed only on
property controlled by the institution and a maximum of 15 days before and
three days after the event.

   (7)   Other institutional signs:  set back from street lines a
minimum of one-third of applicable required yard.

   (8)   Wall signs:  May locate on principal building walls facing
public streets or off-street parking areas only. May project one foot into
required yard. Internal illumination only permitted.

   (9)   Industrial or office park entrance sign:  minimum five feet
from lot lines.

   (10)   Shopping center main sign:  shall be the only free-standing
sign in the shopping center. May be located a minimum of seven feet from lot
line. Centers with frontage on two streets may substitute one ground sign as
defined in § 22.011 on each frontage for single main pole sign.

   (11)   May locate minimum seven feet from lot line.

   (12)   Shopping center, office park or industrial park directory
sign:  must be part of main sign for complex.

   (13)   Directional signs:  may be located in any required yard.

   (14)   Real estate signs:  shall be located minimum five feet from
lot lines and be removed within seven days of consummation of sale or rental
of all properties, lots or dwelling units to which the sign applies.

   (15)   Construction signs:  non-illuminated. Shall be removed
within two weeks of issuance of certificate of occupancy.

   (16)   Outdoor advertising signs:  allowed only as conditional uses
in C-5 and I Districts. Shall conform to yard requirements of district, and
be located a minimum of 500 feet from any other outdoor advertising sign and
from any Residential District. Any illumination shall be indirect.

   (17)   Canopy signs:  minimum sign clearance eight feet. Maximum
sign area two-thirds of face of canopy on which sign is placed.

   (18)   Under canopy signs:  maximum width of 75% of horizontal
canopy projection. Area is counted in maximum wall sign area. Minimum sign
clearance eight feet. Sign shall not project more than one and one-half feet
below canopy.

   (19)   Menu board signs:  shall be freestanding or wall signs
located in side or rear yards only.

   (20)   Portable signs:  including trailer signs. May be displayed
for a maximum of 45 days starting at least 180 days after expiration of any
permit for a portable sign on the same lot. Shall be removed within 24 hours
after permit expiration. Placement on lot is subject to approval of Zoning
Administrator to avoid traffic hazards or other safety problems.

   (21)   Freestanding sign in C-4 Downtown Commercial District:
maximum area one and one-half square feet per foot of lot frontage up to a
maximum of 32 square feet.

   (22)   Projecting commercial signs:  permitted in C-4 Downtown
Commercial District only. May project over public right-of-way but shall
project no more than three feet from vertical building façade and shall not
project above roof line. Minimum sign clearance shall be eight feet.


   (23)   Real estate signs in C-6 District: real estate signs and
construction signs with a maximum square foot area of 128 square feet per
sign face and a maximum height of 20 feet which may be erected at any time
and removed no later than six months after receipt of occupancy permits for
the entire regional shopping center.

   (24)   Wall signs in C-6 District: One wall sign on each wall of an
anchor store with a maximum of three signs per anchor store. Each such wall
sign may be a maximum size of one and one-half square feet per linear foot of
building wall.

   (25)   Freestanding sign in C-6 District: one pole entrance sign for
each major entrance to the regional shopping center and power commercial
center with a maximum of two such signs which can each be internally
illuminated, a maximum of 400 square feet per sign face, and a maximum height
of 30 feet. Six pole or monument signs of a maximum size of 48 square feet
per sign face.




 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



ACCESSORY USES, YARDS AND FENCES



§ 22.160  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Compatibility. 



      (1)   Accessory uses and structures shall be compatible with
the principal use of the lot on which they are located and shall not be
established prior to the establishment of the principal use. The keeping,
preparation or culture of poultry, pigeons or livestock shall not be an
accessory use.



      (2)   Where an accessory structure is structurally attached to
a main building it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations
of this chapter applicable to the main building.



   (B)   Location.  Accessory uses may be located in only as provided
in Table 19.



   (C)   Standards.



      (1)   All accessory uses shall conform to the standards in
Table 20. Except as noted in Table 19, an accessory structure shall only be
located in the rear yard. No more than three accessory structures shall be
permitted on any zoning lot less than 10,000 square feet and no more than
four accessory structures shall be permitted on any zoning lot 10,000 square
feet or greater.



      (2)   On a corner lot or reverse corner lot, no accessory
building shall be located in the front or corner side yard. When is
requirement will make it impossible to build, it will be permitted to
construct an accessory structure no closer to the side lot line abutting a
street than two thirds the required front yard on the adjoining lot. In no
case, shall it be permitted to construct an accessory structure beyond the
building line established for the main building.



      (3)   No accessory structure shall be constructed on any lot
prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory.



   (D)   Wind energy conversion systems.  No wind energy conversion
systems shall be permitted in the village.



   (E)   Dish antennas (earth stations).  Requirements for satellite
dish antennas shall be as provided in Chapter 49.



   (F)   Other television or radio towers or antennas.  Other radio or
television towers or antennas as accessory uses shall not have an antenna
height exceeding 55 feet, shall not be more than three feet from the
principal building and shall not be so position as to be a hazard to any
utility line.



   (G)   Decks, patios, porches, gazebos and sheds.



      (1)   Open decks shall be subject to the requirements of Table
19 and 20. Decks or patios that are enclosed by windows or screens and a
permanent roof shall be considered part of the principal building and shall
comply with the district bulk requirements set forth for the principal
building. 



      (2)   No open porch shall cover more than 20% of the front
and/or corner side yard.



      (3)   Playhouses, sheds and gazebos shall not exceed a maximum
area of 300 square feet.



   (H)   Dog runs.  No more than one enclosed dog run as defined in §
22.011 shall be permitted on any lot in a Residential District. The fence
enclosing the run shall be an OPEN FENCE as defined in § 22.011 a maximum of
six feet in height and 50 feet in total length on all sides and shall be
located at least ten feet from all lot lines.



   (I)   Garages, carports and parking. 



      (1)   A detached garage shall not exceed a maximum area of 720
square feet and shall be at least be at least ten feet from the principal
structure. Where a detached garage/carport is located in the rear yard, the
side driveway shall be constructed from a hard dust free surface such as
asphalt or concrete and shall be a minimum of nine feet wide as measured from
the exterior wall of the principal structure to the lot line.



      (2)   Garages, carports and open parking spaces as accessory
uses shall be subject to applicable provisions under the off-street parking
and loading section of this chapter.



      (3)   There shall be no more than two detached garages per
zoning lot in a Single-Family Residential District.



   (J)   Height of accessory structures.  No accessory structure or
portion thereof shall exceed a height of 15 feet above grade to the roof line
of said accessory structure, except that a tree house may be taller than the
highest point of a ground based accessory structure so long as the floor of
the tree house does not exceed a maximum height of 15 feet.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.161  YARDS.



   (A)   Obstructions.  Court yards and required yards may be
obstructed by accessory uses or building projections only as provided in
Table 19.



   (B)   Percentage of required rear yard occupied.  No accessory
structure or structures shall occupy more than 35% of the area of the
required rear yard.



   (C)   Vacant through lots.  On a vacant through lot, either of the
lot lines abutting a street may be established as the front lot line, except
that where two or more through lots are contiguous and a front lot line has
been duly established by the construction of a building on one lot, the same
street lot line shall serve as the front lot line of all such contiguous lots.



   (D)   Corner side yards.  The corner side yard shall be defined as
the longer of the two frontages on which the property is located. In no case,
except as noted in Table 19, shall it be permitted to construct an accessory
structure beyond the building line established for the main building.



   (E)   Vision clearance triangle.  No building or structure
hereafter erected and no planting or other obstruction to the vision of
drivers of motor vehicles or pedestrians shall be located:



      (1)   Within a triangular area located at the at-grade
intersection of two streets, a street and a railroad or a street and a
driveway special restrictions apply;



      (2)   The triangular areas shall be formed by the right-of-way
lines of the streets or railroads between their intersection and points 12
feet from their intersection along each line, or from the intersection of a
street and a driveway, and by a straight line connecting these two points; and



      (3)   Within this triangle, no SOLID FENCE as defined in §
22.011 or any hedge, opaque landscaping or screening wall, or other solid
obstruction, having a height of over two and one-half feet, nor any OPEN
FENCE as defined in § 22.011 with a height of over three and one-half feet,
shall be permitted.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-32, passed 10-3-2017)



§ 22.162  FENCES.



   (A)   Standards.



      (1)   No fence shall be erected without having secured a
building permit.



      (2)   The use of barbed wire fencing is prohibited in all
zoning districts.



      (3)   All metal fences shall be of nine gauge woven wire or
its equivalent.



      (4)   Fence posts shall be of an approved material and shall
be embedded into tamped earth or concrete to a depth which would assure its
structural stability.



      (5)   All fences shall be erected with the finished side
facing the adjoining properties or public right-of-way.



      (6)   Solid fencing is allowed only between residential and
non-residential districts, and where otherwise specified in this chapter.



      (7)   Slatted chain link fence is prohibited, except in the
I-1 Industrial District in which slatted chain link fences may be allowed to
enclose garbage dumpsters, unless said dumpster is adjacent to a street or
residential property.



   (B)   Location of fences.



      (1)   Front yard. Fences shall not exceed a height of
36-inches and shall not contain any sharp points and must be an open design.



      (2)   Side and rear yard. Fence may be open, semi-open, or
solid and shall not exceed a height of six feet with the following
exceptions: on through lots that are adjacent to non-through lots, fences in
yards with road frontages may not exceed 36-inches and shall not contain any
sharp points and must be an open design.



   (C)   Corner side yard.



      (1)   When a rear lot line abuts the rear lot line of an
adjoining property, a six-foot tall, solid fence may be installed up to the
corner side property line.



      (2)   When a rear lot line abuts a side lot line of an
adjoining property, a six-foot tall solid fence may be installed so long as
it is no closer than half the distance between the corner side lot line and
the principal home. An open, semi-open or solid fence may be installed up to
the corner side property line so long as the height does not exceed four feet.



   (D)   Wire gauge.  All metal fences erected in the village shall be
at least nine gauge woven wire or its equivalent.



   (E)   Safety hazard prohibited.  The village may order any fence
removed at is a hazard to the public safety or to the free flow of traffic.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-32, passed 10-3-2017)



 

Table 19:  Permitted Obstructions


The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the
yards specified.



Projection of Accessory Use

 

All Yards

 

Rear Yards

 

Interior Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard





Arbors and trellises
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Awnings and canopies
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Balconies
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Bay windows
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Central air conditioning units and generators
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Chimneys
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Decks, open minimum setback of 10 feet from rear lot line and 5 feet from
side lot line
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Dish antennas, minimum setback of 10 feet from side and rear property lines
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 


Dog runs, minimum setback of 10 feet from side and rear property lines
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 


Eaves and gutters
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Fences  and walls
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Fire pit, minimum setback of 10 feet from any principal structure, side
and/or rear property lines
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 


Flagpoles
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Garages or carports
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Gardens, vegetable
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X


Gazebo, minimum setback of 10 feet from property lines
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Greenhouses
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Laundry drying lines
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 


Parking, off-street, open
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Patios, open
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Recreational equipment a minimum of 5 feet from property lines
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Sheds and storage buildings
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


Stairways, open unroofed
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Swimming pools, private a minimum of 10 feet from property lines, including
decks and appurtenances
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 


Television or radio towers/ antennas *
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X


Tree house, maximum area of 100 square feet
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 


Window wells; minimum setback of 3 feet from the property line and a maximum
projection of 6 feet out from the foundation
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


Other accessory uses
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 




 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 

Table 20:  Standards for Accessory Structures




Except as noted in Table 19, accessory structures shall conform to the
following bulk standards.


Maximum height
 
 



   Feet

 

15 feet




   Stories

 

1



Maximum coverage of required rear yard (a)
 

35%



Minimum side yard setback
 

3 feet



Minimum rear yard setback
 

5 feet



Minimum setback from principal or other accessory building in feet (c)
 

10 feet



Maximum size for shed, gazebo, storage building
 

300 square feet



Maximum size for detached garage
 

720 square feet





 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT



§ 22.175  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this section are intended for special
situations in which:



      (1)   Adequate space, light, air and other objectives of this
chapter relating to the public health, safety and welfare can be achieved
without the literal application of the detailed zoning and subdivision
requirements otherwise applicable; and



      (2)   Special amenities and benefits to the community beyond
those required by this and other village ordinances can be achieved by
allowing more flexible design than is otherwise permitted by village zoning
and subdivision regulations.



   (B)   These objectives can be achieved where a substantial area of
land is planned for development as an integrated unit where its design is
subject to more detailed review and approval by the village than is normally
required.



   (C)   The objective if Planned Unit Development (PUD) is therefore
not simply to allow exceptions to otherwise applicable regulations. It is
instead to encourage a higher level of design and amenity than it is possible
to achieve under the usual land developments requirements.



   (D)   It is therefore the intent of the village to suspend the
application of detailed zoning and subdivision standards as provided herein
only where such special amenity is achieved. In this way, the village may
grant the creative developer as desirable flexibility and at the same time
not only protect but enhance the welfare of the residents and other users of
a development as well as the rest of the community.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.176  QUALIFICATIONS FOR FILING AS A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   A Plan Unit Development may be developed in any district in
which Planned Unit Developments are allowed as conditional uses.



   (B)   No development shall be filed as a Planned Unit Development
unless it:



      (1)   Is at least two acres in size;



      (2)   Contains more than two detached buildings accommodating
principal uses; and



      (3)   Is initially under the same ownership and control.



   (C)   A Planned Unit Development may be residential, commercial,
office, industrial or a combination thereof. Flexibility to suspend
requirements imposed elsewhere is not conferred upon the PUD applicant as a
matter of right but is in all cases subject to a finding by the village that
the objectives of these provisions will be served thereby.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.177  INCENTIVES FOR PLANNED USE DEVELOPMENT.



   To further a superior level of design and amenity in new development,
the following incentives are offered in Planned Unit Developments:



   (A)   Variable density and dimensional zoning standards.



      (1)   Standards for minimum lot area, lot width, building
height, floor area ratio, yard dimensions, off-street parking and loading,
landscaping and screening, fences, and signs may vary from those established
elsewhere in this chapter.



      (2)   The applicable standard for minimum lot area per
dwelling unit may be reduced a maximum of 25%.



   (B)   More than one principal building per lot.  In a Planned Unit
Development more than one principal building may be located on a lot.



   (C)   Variable subdivision design standards.  Design standards for
subdivision and subdivision improvements such as streets, blocks, sidewalks
and parkways, and open space dedication, may vary from those established in
the village subdivision control ordinance.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.178  REQUIREMENTS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Site plan review.  Whether or not a land subdivision is
involved, preliminary and final plans for the development shall be filed and
approved by the village in conformance with the provisions of Table 2 in the
filing procedures section of this chapter.



   (B)   Required common open space.  A minimum of 20% of the net site
area in residential use in each phase shall be used for permanent common open
space as defined in § 22.011.



   (C)   Quality of design. 



      (1)   To be granted the flexibility permitted under these
regulations, a Planned Unit Development must evidence a level of design and
amenity exceeding that typical of conventional development.



      (2)   Among the features that may evidence such amenity are:



         (a)   Amount and quality of landscaping;



         (b)   Amount, quality and inter- connectedness of common
open space;



         (c)   Provision of pedestrian or bicycle paths separated
from streets;



         (d)   Preservation of drainage ways and other natural
features;



         (e)   Provision of common recreational facilities;



         (f)   Enclosed, underground, depressed or outstandingly
landscaped parking areas;



         (g)   Varied building setbacks or other measures to
reduce monotony in design; and



         (h)   Other features as determined by the President and
Board of Trustees.



   (D)   Underground utilities.  All utility lines within a Planned
Unit Development are required to be underground. Appurtenances to utility
systems that are effectively screened may be permitted above ground if the
President and Board of Trustees finds that they will not be detrimental to
the character of the development.



   (E)   Phasing of development.  Land designated for future
construction phases and other land not intended for immediate improvement
shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained with a neat and orderly
appearance as specified by the President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.179  APPROVAL PROCESS.



   Preliminary plans and final plans for Planned Unit Developments shall
be approved only in conformance with the approval process provided in the
filing procedures section of this chapter and the approval criteria provided
in Table 21.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.180  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PREVIEW COMMITTEE.



   (A)   A PUD Review Committee is hereby authorized to review filings
for Planned Unit Developments.



   (B)   The membership of the Committee may include the President, the
Village Attorney, the Zoning Administrator, the Building Commissioner, the
Village Engineer, the Superintendent of Public Works, the Chairman of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the Chairman of the Building and Zoning
Committee of the President and Board of Trustees, and any others appointed
thereto by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. The Committee may seek technical assistance from such other sources
as it deems necessary.



   (C)   The Committee may advise and assist applicants for Planned
Unit Development approval in meeting village objectives but shall have no
power to approve or disapprove any filing or in any way restrict the
applicant's right to seek formal approval thereof from the President and
Board of Trustees.



   (D)   The Committee shall, within 30 days after completing its
review of any filing, submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission the
complete filing together with a written report nothing any deficiencies in
compliance with the requirements herein and any recommendations for
improvement of the Planned Unit Development to better reflect the objectives
of these provisions. A copy of the Committee’s report shall also be sent to
the applicant.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.181  FINAL PLAN.



   (A)   Filing of final plan.



      (1)   Approval of a preliminary plan for a Planned Unit
Development shall become void unless the applicant submits a final plan
substantially in conformance therewith and meeting the requirements of Table
2 in the filing procedures section of this chapter within 12 months of the
date of approval of the preliminary plan, or within any extension beyond this
period granted by the President and Board of Trustees. The final plan may be
filed in phases, but the plan required within this period shall include no
less than 25% of the land area included in the preliminary plan.



      (2)   The final plan may be filed simultaneously with the
preliminary plan. The approval process for a final plan shall be provided
under approval process in the filing procedures section of this chapter.



   (B)   Recording of final plan.  The final plan as approved by the
President and Board of Trustees shall be filed with the County Recorder of
Deeds as the final plat for the PUD. No permit allowing the construction of
any improvement shall be issues before the Final Plat is recorded. The
applicant shall pay  all recording costs.



   (C)   Amendments to approve plan. 



      (1)   Approval of an amendment shall be required for:



         (a)   Any material change or addition made to:



            1.   An approved preliminary plan; or



            2.   An approved final plan.



         (b)   A final plan that does not conform to the
preliminary plan approved by the President and Board of Trustees.



      (2)   An applicant seeking approval of any amendment shall
file an application therefore with the Zoning Administrator. The application
shall describe the amendment sought and provide such other information as the
Planning and Zoning Commission may require. It shall be accompanied by 25
copies of the proposed amendment and a filing fee.



      (3)   If the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that
the amendment sought is a substantial change as defined in § 22.011, the
approval process set forth herein for preliminary plans and final within 60
days of receiving the application for amendments, file a written report with
the President and Board of Trustees including findings of fact and a
recommendation for action on the amendments.



      (4)   A substantial change to a Planned Unit Development shall
be any of the following changes from the previously approved plan:



         (a)   Any change in land use type or housing type;



         (b)   A changed in the location of any structure,
off-street parking or loading area, common open space area, or any area or
right-of-way to be conveyed to or reserved for a public body, by more than
ten feet in any direction, or a change in the spacing between any two
structures by more than 10%; or



         (c)   A change of more than 10% in any non-locational
quantitative specification of the previously approved plan, including:



            1.   Any dimension of any lot, yard, structure, or
pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfare;



            2.   Any residential density;



            3.   Amount of common open space acreage;



            4.   Utility line capacity;



            5.   Amount of floor area of non-residential
development;



            6.   Amount of land to be conveyed to or reserved
for any public body;



            7.   Size or capacity of any off-street parking or
loading area;



            8.   Amount or dimensions of existing or proposed
tree or ground cover, landscaping, or screening; or



            9.   Any other change that causes the development
to fall short of meeting the requirements of any applicable zoning district
to any greater degree than already provided on the previously approval plan.



      (5)   The President and Board of Trustees shall approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the amendment. An amend final plan shall
be recorded in accordance with the provisions governing recording of a final
plan.



   (D)   Revocation of approval of final plan.  The President and
Board of Trustees may revoke its approval of a final plan for a Planned Unit
Development or any phase thereof in any of the following circumstances:



      (1)   If construction does not being within one year after
approval of the plan;



      (2)   If construction is not completed within the time
specified in the approved construction schedule or any extension thereof
granted by the President and Board of Trustees;



      (3)   If applicable provisions of this chapter are not
complied with;



      (4)   If any such instance the President and Board of Trustees
shall give the applicant 15 days’ notice to appear before the President and
Board of Trustees to answer any charge of non-compliance; or



      (5)   If the President and Board of Trustees finds that the
applicant is not in compliance, it may revoke approval if the Planned Unit
Development is not brought into compliance within a period it specifies.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



Table 21:  Approval Criteria for Planned Unit Developments



In recommending approval or conditional approval for a preliminary of final
plan for a Planned Unit Development (PUD), the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall transmit to the President and Board of Trustees written findings of
fact that the application meets all of the criteria below or will meet them
when the Board’s conditions are complied with. The President and Board of
Trustees shall not be bound by the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, but in granting approval and conditional approval, the President
and Board of Trustees shall also find that all of the following criteria are
met or will be met when any conditions to which the approval is made subject
are complied with:



1.   Superior design.  The PUD represents a more creative approach to the
unified planning of development and incorporates a higher standard of
integrated design and amenity than could be achieved under otherwise
applicable zoning district and subdivision regulations, and that solely on
this basis modifications to the use and design standards established by such
regulations are warranted.



2.   Meets PUD requirements.  The PUD meets the requirements for Planned
Unit Developments set forth in this chapter and that no modifications to the
use and design standards otherwise applicable are allowed other than those
permitted herein.



3.   Consistent with city plan.  The PUD is generally consistent with the
objectives of the village Comprehensive Plan as viewed in light of any
changed conditions since the adoption thereof.



4.   Public welfare.  The PUD will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, morals or general welfare.



5.   Compatible with environs.  Neither the PUD nor any portion will be
injurious to the use and enjoyment of other properties in its vicinity,
seriously impair property values or environmental quality in the
neighborhood, nor impede the orderly development of surrounding property.



6.   Natural features.  The design of the PUD is as consistent as
practical with the preservation of natural features of the site such as flood
plains, wooded areas, natural drainage ways or other areas of sensitive or
valuable environmental character.



7.   Circulation.  Streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bicycle paths,
off-street parking and off-street loading as appropriate to the planned land
uses are provided. They are adequate in location, size, capacity and design,
to ensure safe and efficient circulation of automobiles, trucks, bicycles,
pedestrians, fire trucks, garbage trucks and snow plows as appropriate
without blocking traffic, creating unnecessary pedestrian-vehicular conflict,
creating unnecessary through traffic within the PUD, or unduly interfering
with the safety or capacity of adjacent streets.



8.   Open spaces and landscaping.  The quality and quantity of common
open spaces and landscaping provided are consistent with the higher standards
of design and amenity required of a PUD. The size, shape and location of a
substantial portion of total common open space provided in residential areas
render it useable for recreational purposes.



Open space between all buildings is adequate to allow for light and air,
access by firefighting equipment, and for privacy where walls have windows,
terraces, or adjacent patios. Open space along the perimeter of the
development is sufficient to protect existing and permitted future uses of
adjacent property from adverse effects from the development.



9.   Covenants.  Where individual parcels are to be later sold, adequate
provision has been made in the form of deed restrictions, homeowners or
condominium associations, or the like for:



   a.   The preservation and maintenance of any open spaces,
thoroughfares, utilities, water retention or detention areas, and other
common elements not to be dedicated to the village or another public body.



   b.   Such control of the use and exterior design of individual
structures as is necessary for continuing conformance to the PUD Plan, such
provision to be binding on all future ownership.



10.   Public services.  The land uses, intensities and phasing of the PUD
are consistent with the anticipated ability of the village, the school
districts and other public bodies to provide and economically support police
and fire protection, water supply, sewage disposal, schools, and other public
facilities and services without placing undue burden on existing residents
and businesses.



11.   Phasing.  Each proposed development phase of the PUD can, together
with any phases that preceded it, exist as an independent unit that meets all
of the foregoing criteria and all other applicable regulations herein even if
no subsequent phase should ever be completed.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 22.195  PURPOSE.



   The requirements in this subchapter are intended to provide a basis for
determining the compatibility of land uses that may produce measurable
adverse environmental effects on their surroundings.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.196  APPLICABILITY.



   The performance standards in this subchapter shall apply as follows:



 

Performance Standard For
 
Applies To


Heavy industrial uses
 
Conditional uses in I-1


Other uses
 
Conditional uses in all districts except I-1


Permitted uses in all districts


Unspecified
 
Permitted uses in all districts


Conditional uses in all districts



 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.197  NOISE.



   (A)   Maximum sound levels.  No operation or activity shall cause
or create noise above the sound pressure levels in Tables 22 and 23 at the
locations specified therein.



   (B)   Measurement.  A sound-level meter and associated octave band
analyzer shall be employed to measure the intensity and frequency of sound.
The flat network slow meter response of the sound level meter shall be used.



   (C)   Exemptions.  The following shall be exempt from noise
performance standards:



      (1)   Noises of construction or maintenance activities from
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.;



      (2)   Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency
relief valves;



      (3)   Transient noises of moving sources such as
transportation vehicles;



      (4)   Noises associated with snow plowing, street sweeping,
and mosquito abatement;



      (5)   Church bells, chimes, and carillons; and



      (6)   Other noises not under the direct control of the
property user.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 


Table 22:  Permitted Sound Levels




Preferred Center Frequency in Hertz

 

Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level in Decibels at Boundaries of Nearest
Residentially Zoned Lot





31.5
 
75


63
 
74


125
 
69


250
 
64


500
 
58


1,000
 
52


2,000
 
47


4,000
 
43


8,000
 
40



Above figures for octave band analyzers calibrated with preferred frequencies
(American Standards Association S1.6-1960, preferred frequencies for
acoustical measurement)



Sound levels above shall be modified where applicable by the adjustments in
Table 23





 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 


Table 23:  Adjustments to Permitted Sound Levels






 

Adjustment in Decibels





Duration of noise in any one-hour period (use one adjustment only):
 
 



   Under 12 minutes

 

Add 5 dB




   Under 3 minutes

 

Add 10dB




   Under ½ minute

 

Add 15dB



At boundaries of nearest office or commercial zoned lot
 

Add 5dB



Noise is impulsive in character (such as, hammering)
 

Subtract 5dB



Noise is periodic in character (such as, hum, screech)
 

Subtract 5dB



Noise may be heard between hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
 

Subtract 5dB





 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.198  VIBRATION.



   (A)   Maximum vibration.  Ground-transmitted vibration shall not
exceed the maximum permitted particle velocities in Table 24 at the locations
specified therein.



   (B)   Measurement. 



      (1)   A seismograph or other three-component measuring system
capable of simultaneous measurement of vibration in three mutually
perpendicular directions shall be used to measure vibration.



      (2)   Particle velocity may be measured directly or computed
by the following formula:



   PV = 6.28 x F x D



         PV:    Particle velocity in inches per second



         F:       vibration frequency in cycles per second



         D:       single amplitude displacement of the
vibration in inches



      (3)   The maximum particle velocity shall be the maximum
vector sum of the three mutually perpendicular components recorded
simultaneously.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 


Table 24:  Maximum Ground Transmitted Vibration






 

Maximum Permitted Particle Velocity*




Use

 

At Adjacent Lot Line

 

At Nearest Residentially Zoned Lot Boundary **



Heavy Industrial
 

0.2

 

0.02



Other
 

0.1

 

0.02




*   Where vibration is produced as discrete impulses (impact vibrations)
not exceeding 100 per minute, maximum permitted velocities may be doubled



**   Between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., maximum permitted velocity at
residentially zoned lot boundaries shall be reduced 50%




 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.199  SMOKE.



   Emissions of smoke shall not exceed the maximum permitted smoke units
as defined in § 22.011 and Ringelmann Number ratings in Table 25.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 


Table 25:  Maximum Smoke Emissions






 

During One-Hour Per 24-Hour Day*

 

All Other Times






 

Heavy Industrial

 

Other

 

Heavy Industrial

 

Other



Maximum permitted smoke units *** per hour per stack
 

32

 

16

 

16

 

8



Highest Ringelmann number permitted
 

3**

 

2**

 

2

 

1




*   When blowing soot or cleaning fires



**   For a maximum duration of 3 minutes


***   The number of smoke units is the product of the Ringelmann Number
and the number of minutes the smoke is visible



 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.200  PARTICULATE MATTER.



   (A)   Maximum emissions. 



      (1)   Particulate matter is fine sold or liquid particles
small enough to be carried in the air, including products of combustion such
as soot and fly ash, industrial dust and products of wind erosion.



      (2)   The rate of emission of particulate matter from all
sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed the values in Table
26 as adjusted by the factors in Table 27.



 


Table 26:  Particulates Standards




Use

 

Maximum Pounds Per Acre of Net Site Area Per Hour

 

Maximum Tonnage Per Acre of Net Site Acre Per Year



Heavy Industrial
 

5

 

10



Other
 

1

 

5




 



   (B)   Measurement.  The emission rate in pounds per hour from any
single stack shall be determined by selecting the continuous four-hour period
which will result in the highest average emission rate.



   (C)   Control of wind erosion.  Emission of particulate matter from
materials, products or surfaces subject to wind erosion shall be minimized by
paving, oiling, wetting, covering, landscaping, fencing or other means. This
shall apply to vacant lots; unpaved roads, yards and storage piles of bulk
materials such as coal, sand, cinders, slag, and sulfur; and similar sources
of windborne particulates.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 


Table 27:  Adjustments to Particulates Standards






User should interpolate for values not listed. Minus sign indicates value is
to be subtracted from particulate standard.




Height of Emission

 

Velocity of Emission

 

Temperature of Emission




Height of Emission Above Grade in Feet

 

Adjustment in Lbs./Hr./Acre

 

Exit Velocity in Feet per Second

 

Adjustment in Lbs./Hr./Acre

 

Temperature in Degrees Fahrenheit

 

Adjustment in Lbs./Hr./Acre




50

 

-0.01

 

0

 

-

 

200

 

-




100

 

-0.06

 

20

 

-0.03

 

300

 

-0.001




150

 

-0.1

 

40

 

-0.09

 

400

 

-0.002




200

 

-0.16

 

60

 

-0.16

 

500

 

-0.003




300

 

-0.3

 

80

 

-0.24

 

1,000

 

-0.01




100

 

-0.5

 

100

 

-0.5

 

1,500

 

-0.04






 



 



 



 

2,000

 

-0.1





 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.201  TOXIC MATTERS.



   (A)   Maximum emissions.  Release of any airborne toxic matter
shall not exceed the permitted standards in Table 28 at the locations
specified therein.



 


Table 28:  Permitted Emission of Toxic Matter




Use

 

Maximum Fraction of Threshold Limit Value

 

Location Where Applicable



Heavy industrial
 

1/30

 
At district boundary


Other
 

1/30

 
At lot lines


*Threshold limit value adopted by American Conference of Government and
Industrial Hygienists



 



   (B)   Measurement.  Measurement of toxic matter shall be at ground
level or habitable elevation and shall be the average of any 24-hour sampling
period.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.202  ODOR.



   (A)   Maximum emissions.  Odorous material released shall not
exceed the odor threshold concentration at the following locations:



 


Heavy Industrial Uses

 

Other Uses



At boundaries of nearest residential zone lot
 
At lot lines



 



   (B)   Measurement.



      (1)   Odor shall be measured by odor threshold concentrations
with the American Society of Test and Materials Method D1 397-57, Standard
Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres (Dilution Method), or its
equivalent.



      (2)   Odor shall be measured at ground level or habitable
elevation.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.203  FIRE AND EXPLOSION.



   (A)   Other regulations applicable.  In addition to the
requirements in this chapter, all materials regulated in this section shall
be utilities, stored, manufactured and handled in accordance with the
appropriate Fire District Protection Code and the standards of the National
Fire Protection Association.



   (B)   Detonable materials.



      (1)   Detonable materials are all materials or products that
decompose by detonation, including, among other materials:



         (a)   All primary explosives such as lead azide, lead
styphnate, fulminates and tetracene;



         (b)   All high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN
and picric acid;



         (c)   Porpellants and components thereof such as dry
nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, and hydrazine and its
derivatives;



         (d)   Pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium
powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate;



         (e)   Blasting explosives such as dynamite and
nitroglycerine;



         (f)   Unstable organic compounds such as acetylides,
tetrazoles and ozonies;



         (g)   Strong unstable oxidizing agents such as
perchloric acid, perchlorates and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater
than 35%; and



         (h)   Nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products,
and reactor elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.



      (2)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of detonable
materials shall be permitted only as licensed by the village or as incidental
to a principal use subject to requirements of Table 29.



 


Table 29:  Standards for Detonable Materials




Storage, Utilization or



Manufacture of 5 Lbs. or Less

 

Storage or Utilization of Over 5 Lbs.

 

Manufacture of Over 5 Pounds



Permitted use
 
Conditional use
 
Prohibited



 



   (C)   Flammable solid materials.  The utilization, storage, and
manufacture of flammable solid materials are permitted subject to the
following restrictions:



 

Rating
 
Restrictions


Incombustible to moderate burning
 
None


Free to active burning to intense burning
 
Only in completely enclosed buildings with minimum 2-hr. fire-resistive
construction that are either:


1.   Protected with an automatic fire extinguishing system, or



2.   Located at least 40 feet from all lot lines




 



   (D)   Flammable liquids and gases. 



      (1)   The storage, utilization and manufacture of flammable
liquids or gases that produces flammable or explosive vapors shall be limited
to the quantities specified in Table 30.



 


Table 30:  Standard for Flammable Liquids and Gases






 

Maximum Gallons Above Ground

 

Maximum Gallons Below Ground




Open Cup Flash Point in Degrees Fahrenheit

 

Heavy Industrial

 

Other

 

Heavy Industrial

 

Other



Under 100
 

62,000

 

3,000

 

No maximum

 

100,000



100-139
 

100,000

 

10,000   

 

No maximum

 

100,000



140 and over
 

200,000

 

20,000

 

No maximum

 

100,000




 



      (2)   Storage of finished products in original sealed
containers of 55 gallons or less is exempt from above standards. Maximum
cubic feet of flammable gases at standard temperature and pressure shall be
30 times the gallonage figures above.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.204  GLARE.



   No operation shall produce direct or indirect illumination greater than
0.5 foot-candles in any Residential District.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.205  HEAT.



   No heat from operations or processes shall be sensed at any lot line to
the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than 5º F.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.206  RADIOACTIVE RADIATION.



   (A)   No operations shall be permitted that causes any individual
outside of the lot lines to be exposed to radiation exceeding the lowest
concentration permitted for the general population by federal and state laws
and regulations in effect as of the day of application for a certificated of
occupancy.



   (B)   Radioactive materials shall be contained in a fireproof
container at or below ground level if they are stored, utilized or
manufactured in a quantity exceeding 100,000 times the quantity listed in
Section 3, paragraph b, of the Radiation Installation Registration Law of the
state or any amendment thereto.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.207  ADMINISTRATION.



   The procedures in this subchapter are intended to enforce the
performance standards, to protect businesses from arbitrary enforcement, and
to protect the public from unnecessary enforcement costs.



   (A)   New uses. 



      (1)   An application for a conditional use permit or a
building permit for an industrial use within the I-1 Industrial District
shall include a certification by a licensed engineer, licensed architect or
scientific laboratory that the use involved in the application is able to
meet all applicable performance standards to the extent that this can be
judged based on the submitted building plans and other information available
prior to construction.



      (2)   This certification shall be accompanied by copies of all
data or information supplied by the applicant and used as the basis of the
certification. The Zoning Administrator may refer the certification and date
to the Village Engineer for review.



      (3)   The Zoning Administration may also require such
certification for a land use in any other zoning district when in his or her
judgment the use has potential to exceed any performance standard in this
subchapter. Such certification may include all performance standards or only
individual standards specified by the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   Existing uses.



      (1)   In enforcing performance standards on existing uses, the
Zoning Administrator may issue a written notice of violation to an alleged
violator.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall, before issuing such
notice, make technical determinations of violation when such determinations
can be made using equipment and trained personnel normally available to the
village or obtainable without extraordinary expense.



      (3)   In other cases, however, technical complexity or
extraordinary expense may make it unreasonable for the village to maintain
personnel or equipment for making determinations of violation prior to
issuing a notice of violation. In such cases, a notice of violation may be
issued when the Zoning Administrator has other reason to believe there is
probable violation.



      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall give notice of violation
by any means that ensures a signed receipt for such notice to the party
responsible for the alleged violation.



      (5)   The notice shall describe the alleged violation and the
results of technical determinations or the other reasons why the Zoning
Administrator believes there is a violation. The notice shall require either
an answer or correcting of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Administrator and within a time limit he or she shall specify in the
notice.



      (6)   The notice shall also state that failure to provide an
answer or correct the alleged violation within this time limit shall
constitute admission of a violation.



      (7)   The notice shall further state that, if technical
determinations have not already been made, upon request of the alleged
violator such determinations will be made. If a violation is found as a
result of such determinations, the cost of the determinations will be
assessed against the properties or parties in addition to any other penalties
provided for. If no violation is found, the village will play the cost of the
determinations.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



SURFACE MINING AND FILL OPERATIONS



§ 22.220  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to recognize that surface
operations in urban areas are land uses with unique environmental effects
calling for special regulatory controls to ensure that:



      (1)   Extraction, processing, and fill operation areas shall
operate in a manner that is compatible with the natural and man-made
environment;



      (2)   Adverse impacts on nearby residential and institutional
areas and on property values are minimized; and



      (3)   Mined and filled areas are restored to productive use
compatible with their surroundings.



   (B)   Applicability.  Any surface extraction or processing, CCDD,
USFO, or other type of filling  of earth materials shall be permitted only
as a conditional use in only those districts that so provide, and/or as a
permitted or conditional use in the Agriculture and Mining Overlay (AMO)
District. Earth materials shall include topsoil, earth, clay, gravels, sand,
stone and other minerals. Provisions of this chapter applicable to
conditional uses, such as a required public hearing, shall apply to surface
mining and fill operations except as otherwise provided herein.



   (C)   Exemptions.  Any operation legally begun prior to the date of
adoption of this chapter shall be exempt from all requirements of this
section as applicable to the property being mined and/or filled as of this
date. Except that such operation shall not be exempt from:



      (1)   Meeting requirements herein concerning:



         (a)   Hours of operation;



         (b)   Spillage;



         (c)   Fencing, landscaping, and screening;



         (d)   Safety;



         (e)   Notice; and



         (f)   Maintenance of site.



      (2)   Meeting all requirements herein on any expansion or
enlargement of the operation onto additional property not being mined and/or
filled on the date of adoption; and



      (3)   Meeting such requirements on the original property as a
prerequisite to such expansion to the extent the President and Board of
Trustees shall judge practical.



      (4)   No permit shall be required for the following classes of
excavation, grading, or filling operations:



         (a)   Building permit. Under provisions of a duly issued
building permit.



         (b)   Incidental excavation, grading or filling.
Excavation and removal of excavated material, and filling shall be permitted
in any zone provided such operation is clearly incidental to the improvement
of the property, and consists of less than two (2) cubic yards of material
and the area is graded and covered by revegetation or other suitable means.



         (c)   Excavation for streets and drains. Necessary
grading, removal or excavation of topsoil or other materials shall be
permitted within the limits of the right of way or slope rights of any
existing street, or for the purpose of constructing streets and other related
improvements within the area of subdivision or final engineering plans
approved by the Village Board, which plans shall establish the elevations and
grades of said street and/or the location of the improvements, and for which
a construction permit has been issued for such street or drain.



         (d)   Other construction work. Construction work
relating to drains and utilities that have secured a construction permit from
the village and/or other required oversight agencies.



         (e)   Farming. The provision of this section shall be
construed as prohibiting or limiting the lawful use of land for farming,
nurseries, or gardening, or similar agriculture or horticulture use an any
agriculturally zoned district where said uses are permitted.



   (D)   Maximum term of conditional use permit.  No conditional use
permit for an extraction and/or filling operation shall be issued or renewed
for a period to exceed ten years. All permits shall be renewable.



   (E)   Contents of conditional use application.  In addition to
other requirements herein for conditional use applications, all applications
for conditional use permits for extraction and/or fill operations shall
include the following:



      (1)   A map or maps at a scale of 1 inch to 100 feet showing:



         (a)   Existing topography at two-foot contour intervals;



         (b)   Locations of existing watercourses and drainage
systems;



         (c)   Location and extent of flood hazard areas;



         (d)   Boundaries of the area to be excavated, graded,
and/or filled and of each phase thereof if excavation, grading, and/or
filling is to proceed in phases;



         (e)   Locations of structures, equipment and materials
storage and stockpiling areas, equipment repair areas and processing areas;



         (f)   Locations of equipment used for grading, crushing,
sorting, filling  and other purposes;



         (g)   Location, orientation, and dimensions of proposed
landscaping, berming, screening, fencing and gates;



         (h)   Locations, dimensions and surface treatment of
proposed entrance and exit drives, on-site haul roads, acceleration or
deceleration lines and parking areas;



         (i)   Access routes between the property and the nearest
arterial street as designated on the village Comprehensive Plan;



         (j)   Location, width and grade of all rights-of-way or
easements on or abutting the property;



         (k)   Typical cross- sections showing extent of
overburden, extent of deposits of materials to be extracted, graded, and/or
filled, and water table; and



         (l)   North arrow, scale, date of preparation and name
of registered civil engineer, landscape architect or surveyor that prepared
the map.



         (m)   The portion of the property that is to be
excavated, graded or filled.



         (n)   When applicable, the location and depth of any
well situated within 50 feet of the proposed excavation and/or filling.



      (2)   Descriptions of:



         (a)   Types and disposition of earth products to be
mined and/or used as fill. No new fill operation shall be conducted with any
material except clean, non-burnable fill containing no trash, refuse, or
harmful matter;



         (b)   Character and composition of vegetation and
wildlife on land to be affected;



         (c)   Nature, depth and proposed disposition of
overburden;



         (d)   Estimated depth, type and quantity of material to
be excavated, graded, or filled, and the estimated part thereof that will be
used for grading or filling;



         (e)   Techniques of extracting and processing and
filling to be used;



         (f)   Equipment to be used;



         (g)   Practices to be used to minimize environmental
effects such as noise, dust, vibration and pollution of air and surface and
underground water;



         (h)   Recycling of water used for washing and grading
and proposed usage and drainage of excess water;



         (i)   Proposed days and hours of excavating and
processing, grading and filling; and



         (j)   Estimated dates of beginning and completion of all
operations on the site.



      (3)   A reclamation plan meeting the requirements herein; and



      (4)   A bond meeting the requirements herein.



      (5)   Upon written request of the applicant, application
information concerning subsections (2)(a) and (d) shall be held confidential.



   (F)   Contents of reclamation plan.  The reclamation plan required
hereunder shall include a map at a scale of one inch to 100 feet showing the
final condition of the site after extraction and processing, and/or filling
activities have been completed conforming with the provisions on finished
site conditions herein, including:



      (1)   Locations of proposed watercourses, water features and
drainage systems;



      (2)   Future structures, land uses, roadways and open spaces;



      (3)   Staged schedule of reclamation actions by area detailing
dates of completion and reclamation methods and materials;



      (4)   Future landscaping and ground cover; and



      (5)   Final grading.



   (G)   Compliance with state and federal regulations.  In addition
to the requirements herein, all operations shall comply with the Illinois
Surface-Mined Land Conservation and Reclamation Act, the Illinois Clean
Construction and Demolition Debris standards, the Illinois Uncontaminated
Soil Fill Operations standards, the regulations of the Illinois and U.S.
Environmental Protection Agencies, and other applicable state and federal
laws and regulations.



   (H)   Abandonment or termination.  A new conditional use permit
shall be required for any operation where the operator has not demonstrated
an intent to resume operations during a period of 12 months after on-site
extraction and processing and/or fill operations have ceased.



   (I)   Inspection.  The village or duly appointed representative
shall inspect each operation for compliance with the provisions herein at
least semi-annually.



   (J)   Staged reclamation action.  Reclamation according to the
reclamation plan shall be pursued and completed in stages as excavation and
filling progress. All reclamation provided for hereunder shall be carried out
to completion by the operator prior to the expiration of three years after
active use has ceased. When an extension of the reclamation period is
necessary to allow continued mining operations and to accomplish acceptable
reclamation, such extension shall be made at the discretion of the village
and subject to the approval of all applicable state agencies.



   (K)   Prohibited excavation, grading, or filling. No excavation,
grading or filling shall be permitted which would interfere with the natural
drainage of the general area surrounding the site. All existing watercourses
shall be preserved, except that such watercourses may be relocated or piped,
provided that it will not create any interference with the riparian and
drainage rights or easements of other property owner, and provided further
that no drainage shall be made onto public land or connected with public
facilities without the express approval of the Village Board, except with
respect to land controlled by any other separate governing body that does not
fall under village jurisdiction, in which even such approval shall be
obtained from those other governing bodies.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 18-O-14, passed 5-15-2018; Ord. 19-O-02, passed
1-15-19)



§ 22.221  STANDARDS FOR OPERATIONS.



   (A)   Water table.



      (1)   Maximum excavation depth shall not be below existing
groundwater except where the reclamation plan provides for a water feature or
for refilling of such excavation. Any such refilling shall be in conformance
with applicable state and federal laws and regulations governing ground water
pollution.



      (2)   No extraction operation shall permanently and harmfully
lower the water table of surrounding inhabited properties.



      (3)   Water pumped from the site for washing shall be retained
in a pond until the silt and clay settles and then recycled in the area
affected.



   (B)   Hours of operation.  To reduce the harmful impact of noise on
surrounding properties, all surface mining, CCDD, USFO and other related fill
operations shall be conducted only during the hours indicated below except
during periods of public emergency in which material excavated at the site
are needed.



 

 
 
Sundays or Legal State or National Holiday
 
All Other Times


Operation of crushers
 

At no time

 
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.


Washing of gravel
 

At no time

 
All hours (electric pumps only)


All other operations including loading and maintenance
 

At no time

 
6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.



 



   (C)   Spillage.  Trucks hauling excavated and/or fill material
shall be loaded or covered so as to prevent spillage onto public streets. Any
spillage on such streets shall be removed by the operator at least once every
24 hours.



   (D)   Barrier screening requirements.



      (1)   A barrier screening plan must be approved by the Village
Board. Said plan to include, but not be limited to an earth berm, a solid or
sound attenuating fence or wall, landscaping, or a combination thereof. Said
barrier must be sufficient to:



         (a)   Screen the operation from view of a public
streets, public park, and/or adjacent properties developed as residential; and



         (b)   Discourage trespass by the public; and



      (2)   The barrier screening plan may pursuant to Village Board
approval defer or waive the implementation, construction and/or installation
of the required barrier screening measures, if:



         (a)   Mineral extraction, CCDD, USFO, and/or fill
activity is adjacent to property that is owned or under the control of the
mining, CCDD, USFO, and/or fill operator; or



         (b)   Mineral extraction activity is 1,000 feet or more
from the abutting property and does not create an impact based upon the
barrier screening requirements set forth in division (D)(l) through (7)
herein.



      (3)   In cases where an earth berm is required, the minimum
slope shall be three to one and said berm shall be planted with trees a
minimum of ten feet tall at time of planting and spaced a maximum of 25 feet
apart. The earth berm shall also include ground cover over its entire
surface—except for portions planted in trees, shrubs, flowers—no later
than the next growing season after its installation.



      (4)   Where the required screening abuts property used as a
public park, public right of way or developed with residential dwelling
units, the berm or other approved screening improvements shall be a minimum
of 50 feet from said boundary line.



      (5)   Entrances and exits to the property shall be provided
with gates that shall be securely locked during hours of in operation.



      (6)   Existing trees and ground cover within the required
yards shall be preserved wherever possible. Weeds shall be cut or trimmed as
necessary to present a reasonably neat appearance, to prevent seeding on
adjoining property, and to reduce the hazard of grass fires.



      (7)   As long as the earthen berms and/or required screening
measures are proceeding pursuant to an approved construction schedule,
mineral extraction, CCDD, USFO, and/or fill operations may occur.



   (E)   Entrances.



      (1)   A maximum of one driveway onto public streets shall be
provided.



      (2)   Where possible, the driveway shall avoid routing of
vehicles used in the operation over streets primarily serving residential
areas. Where necessary in the judgment of the President and Board of
Trustees, paved acceleration and deceleration lanes at least 100 feet in
length shall be provided on either side of an entrance or exit.



      (3)   To minimize airborne dust and the deposit of dirt and
gravel on public streets, a drive into the site of not less than 300 feet
from the public streets right-of-way at each entrance or exit shall be either
paved or oiled or sprayed with calcium chloride or a similar product to
create a dust-free surface.



   (F)   Safety.  All operations shall be conducted in a safe manner
so as to prevent harm to the public and damage to adjacent properties or
adjacent public streets.



   (G)   Staged removal of overburden.  Overburden shall not be
removed from more land than is to be mined or filled within one year, except
that an operator may remove overburden from more land than is to be mined or
filled within one year in order to build the berms as required by Village
Ordinance. Removal of overburden shall comply with all applicable erosion
control and drainage standards as outlined in the County Watershed
Development Ordinance, and with all applicable performance standards as
outlined in §§ 22.195 through 22.207 of this chapter.



   (H)   Yards.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, the
following minimum distances shall be observed for surface mining, CCDD,
and/or fill  operations:



 

Operation
 
Minimum Distance in Feet
 
Measured From Operation To


Crushing below grade
 

400

 
Boundary of any non-industrial district or property line of any school or
hospital


All other crushing
 

750

 
Boundary of any non-industrial district or property line of any school or
hospital


All other operations
 

100

 
Boundary of any non-industrial district or property line of any school or
hospital



50

 
All other property lines



 



   (I)   Noise.  Performance standards for noise herein applicable to
heavy industry shall apply to all operations. Operations producing the
highest levels, such as crushing machines or haul roads for truck movement,
shall be located as far from lot lines as practical.



   (J)   Maintenance of site.  The site shall be maintained in a neat
and orderly condition, free of junk, trash or unnecessary debris. Buildings
shall be maintained in good repair and appearance. Salvageable equipment
stored in non-operating condition shall be screened or enclosed.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 18-O-14, passed 5-15-2018; Ord. 19-O-02, passed
1-15-19)



§ 22.222  FINISHED SITE CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Removal of materials after completion.  Stockpiled materials
and structures and equipment needed for removal thereof shall be removed
within two years after the completion of production in any area. All other
structures, except structures shown on the reclamation plan and fences, shall
be removed within one year after the completion of production in the area, as
shall stumps, boulders and other debris resulting from excavation and related
activities.



   (B)   Replacement of topsoil.  Areas not under water shall be
covered with arable topsoil at least six inches deep or as deep as was
present on the land prior to excavation, whichever is less. Such topsoil
shall contain at least 10% organic material, or the percentage present prior
to excavation, whichever is less.



   (C)   Replacement of ground cover.  To avoid erosion, vegetative
ground cover in conformance with the reclamation plan shall be planted upon
all areas on which topsoil has been replaced.



   (D)   Grading and drainage.



      (1)   After production is completed, sufficient drainage shall
be provided to avoid water pockets, undue erosion, and increased runoff onto
erosion, and increased runoff onto erosion of surrounding properties or
public streets. To the extent possible, points of drainage and drainage
volume off the site shall be the same as they were before the operation began.



      (2)   All open excavation shall be back-filled with earth or
other suitable fill material approved by the Village Engineer to the grades
indicated on the reclamation plan. No pits with side slopes greater than 30
degrees shall remain on the site when finished unless such slopes are under
water.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 19-O-02, passed 1-15-19)



CONDITIONAL USES



§ 22.235  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Certain uses cannot be allowable generally in a particular
zoning district, or in any zoning district, because of the impact their
special character creates on surrounding areas.



   (B)   Some such uses may, however, be allowed under special
conditions. These uses are provided for in this chapter as conditional uses.



   (C)   Because a conditional use is compatible with the applicable
zoning district only under special conditions, a conditional use permit is
required before any use authorized herein as a conditional use may be
established.



   (D)   Except as specifically provided herein, all regulations of the
applicable zoning district, and all other applicable regulations of this and
other village ordinances, shall apply to conditional uses.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.236  APPROVAL PROCESS.



   Conditional uses shall be approved only in conformance with the
approval process provided in the filing procedures section of this chapter
and the approval criteria in Table 31.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.237  EXISTING SPECIAL USES.



   Conditional uses provided in this subchapter shall be considered the
same as special uses provided under state statute. Lawful special uses
granted to a property prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be
considered lawful conditional uses without the need for approval of a
conditional use permit hereunder, whether or not such special use is
authorized as a conditional use in the applicable zoning district herein.
Where such a use is a permitted use in the applicable district, conditional
use status shall not be applicable.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.238  REVIEW OF CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   In evaluating the suitability of a proposed conditional use,
the Planning and Zoning Commission and President and Board of Trustees shall
examine the following characteristics of the proposed use and its individual
structures or components:



      (1)   Location and orientation;



      (2)   Lot size;



      (3)   Size of facility, including floor area, structure
height, design capacity and anticipated employment;



      (4)   Site design and arrangement;



      (5)   Provisions affecting on- and off-site pedestrian and
traffic movement, vehicle storage and the passage of emergency vehicles;



      (6)   Appearance;



      (7)   Screening or landscaping;



      (8)   On- or off-site buffering from incompatible uses with
open spaces or transitional uses;



      (9)   Operations factors, such as hours of use or
environmental controls; and



      (10)   Other characteristics of the proposed use pertinent in
the judgment of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the President and Board
of Trustees to an assessment of the impact of the use of the area.



   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Commission or the President and Board
of Trustees may call upon technical experts or have studies performed to
determine specific development standards or conditions for any particular
conditional use with the expense thereof to be paid by the applicant.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.239  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The Zoning Administrator shall issue a conditional uses permit after
approval thereof by the President and Board of Trustees unless the President
and Board of Trustees directs otherwise. Such permit shall specify any
conditions, restrictions and time limits to which the President and Board of
Trustees has made its approval subject.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.240  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   A conditional use permit may be revoked by the President and Board of
Trustees:



   (A)   If any conditions or restrictions are not complied with within
the time limit specified by on the permit;



   (B)   If after they are initially complied with, compliance with
such conditions or restrictions is not maintained at any time;



   (C)   If the conditional use is not established, or a required
building permit is not obtained and building started, within one year of the
date the permit is issued; or



   (D)   If the conditional use shall cease for more than one year.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.241  EXPANSION OR ALTERATION.



   Any expansion, enlargement or structural alteration of a conditional
use shall require an additional conditional use permit.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.242  CONDITIONAL USE WAIVER FOR OUTDOOR STORAGE.



   (A)   The conditional use requirement for outdoor storage may be
waived administratively if said use:



      (1)   Is associated with a permitted use in the C-5, C-6, and
I-1 districts;



      (2)   Does not exceed a maximum area of 5,000 square feet;



      (3)   Is located only in the required rear or side yard and is
not adjacent to property that is zoned residential;



      (4)   Is fully enclosed by a solid fence that is at least six
feet tall.



   (B)   The petitioner shall submit detailed plans and application to
the Community and Economic Development Department for an administrative
review to determine if the conditional use public hearing can be waived.
Applicant shall comply with application review criteria established by the
Department. After review by the Community and Economic Development
Department, the village reserves the right to add other restrictions if there
are impacts to surrounding property owners.



(Ord. 15-O-26, passed 6-25-2015)



   Table 31:  Approval Criteria for Conditional Uses



In recommending approval or conditional approval of a conditional use, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the President and Board of
Trustees written findings of fact that on the bases of the characteristics
cited under review of conditional uses herein, or changes to such
characteristics that the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends, the
proposed use will be compatible with existing uses in the area, and with
permitted uses in the zoning district, in the ways specified below. The
President and Board of Trustees shall not be bound by the recommendation of
the Planning and Zoning Commission. However, in granting approval or
conditional approval, the President and Board of Trustees shall find that the
proposed use will be compatible with such uses in the following ways:



1.   Traffic.  Any adverse impact of types or volumes of traffic flow not
otherwise typical in the zoning district has been minimized.



2.   Environmental nuisance.  Any adverse effects of noise, glare, odor,
dust, waste disposal, blockage of light or air or other adverse environmental
effects of a type or degree not characteristic of permitted uses in the
zoning district, have been appropriately controlled.



3.   Neighborhood character.  The proposed use will fit harmoniously with
the existing natural or man-made character of its surroundings, and with
permitted uses in the zoning district. The use will not have undue
deleterious effect on the environment quality, property values or
neighborhood character already existing in the area or normally associated
with permitted uses in the district.



4.   Public services and facilities.  The proposed use will not require
existing community facilities or services to a degree disproportionate to
that normally expected of permitted uses in the district, nor generate
disproportionate demand for new services or facilities, in such a way as to
place undue burdens upon existing development in the area.



5.   Public safety and health.  The proposed use will not be detrimental
to the safety or health of the employees, patrons, or visitors associated
with the use nor of the general public in the vicinity.



6.   Other factors.  The proposed use is in harmony with any other
elements of compatibility pertinent in the judgment of the President and
Board of Trustees to the particular conditional use or its particular
location.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



VARIANCES



§ 22.255  PURPOSE.



   Because of special characteristics of particular properties in the
village, the literal application of the general provisions of this chapter
may in certain instances create hardships not intended by these regulations.
The President and Board of Trustees may accordingly grant variances from the
literal application of the provisions of this chapter based on findings of
fact as provided in this section.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.256  APPROVAL PROCESS.



   Variances shall be approved only in conformance with the approval
process provided in the filing procedures section of this chapter and the
approval criteria in Table 3.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.257  MINOR VARIANCES.



   (A)   The purpose of minor variance procedures is to reduce the time
and expense to homeowners of obtaining approval of simple variances that are
likely to have minimal adverse impact in residential neighborhoods.



   (B)   The fee owner, contract purchaser or option holder of a
single-family detached or attached dwelling or single-family detached or
attached building lot that wishes to request a variance for that dwelling or
lot may apply under minor variance procedures.



   (C)   Filing submissions shall be as determined on a case-by-case
basis by the Zoning Administrator and may be less that required for other
variances in Table 1 of the filing procedures section of this chapter. Other
procedures and requirements shall be as provided for variances in the filing
procedures section. Minor variance procedures shall not apply to an
application involving more than one dwelling or more than one building lot.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.258  EXISTING VARIATIONS.



   Variance as provided in this subchapter shall be considered the same as
variations provided under state statute. Lawful variations granted to a
property prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be considered
lawful variances without the need for approval of a variance hereunder.
Except that where such a variation is not needed under this chapter, variance
status shall not be applicable.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



Table 32:  Approval Criteria for Variances



In recommending approval or conditional approval of a variance, Planning and
Zoning Commission shall transmit to the President and Board of Trustees
written findings of fact that all of the conditions below apply to the
application. The President and Board of Trustees shall not be bound by the
recommendation of the Board of Appeals. However, in granting approval, the
President and Board of Trustees shall similarly find that all of the
following conditions apply:



1.   Special circumstances not found elsewhere.  Special circumstances,
fully described in the written findings, exist that are peculiar to the
property for which the variance is sought ad that do not apply generally to
other properties in the same zoning district. And these circumstances are not
of so general or recurrent a nature as to make it reasonably practical to
provide a general regulation to cover them.



2.   Circumstances relate to the property only.  Since a variance will
affect the character of its surroundings long after a property changes hands,
the special circumstances referenced herein relate only to the physical
character of the land or building(s) for which a variance is sought, such as
dimensions, topography or soil conditions. They do not concern any business
or activity the present or prospective owner or tenant carries on, or seeks
to carry on, therein, nor to the personal, business or financial
circumstances of such owner or tenant or any other party with interest in the
property.



3.   Not resulting from applicant action.  The special circumstances that
are the basis for a variance have not resulted from any act of the applicant
or of any other party with interest in the party.



4.   Unnecessary hardships.  For reasons fully set forth in the written
findings, the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship upon the applicant, as distinguished
from mere inconvenience.



5.   Preserves rights conferred by district.  A variance is necessary for
the applicant to preserve and enjoy a substantial property right possessed by
other properties in the same zoning district and does not confer a special
privilege ordinarily denied to other properties in the district.



6.   Necessary for use of property.  The grant of a variance is necessary
not because it will increase the applicant’s economic return, although it
may have this effect, but because without a variance the applicant will be
deprived of any reasonable use or enjoyment of the property.



7.   Not alter character.  The granting of the variance will not alter
the essential character of the locality nor substantially impair
environmental quality, property values, or public safety or welfare in the
vicinity.



8.   Consistent with ordinance and plan.  The granting of a variance will
be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and of the
Comprehensive Plan of the village, as viewed in light of any changed
conditions since their adoption.



9.   Minimum variance recommend.  The variance recommended by the Board
of Appeals and approved by the President and Board of Trustees is the minimum
required to provide the applicant with reasonable use and enjoyment of his
property.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.259  ADMINISTRATIVE VARIATIONS.



   The village administration may recommend, and the Village President may
approve an administrative variation without requiring a public hearing.



   (A)   Procedure.



      (1)   Residential remodeling. Building permits for
single-family homes and their accessory structures which would allow for
existing nonconforming setbacks to continue. This includes, but is not
limited to: additions of up to 50% of the existing floor area, garage or shed
replacement.



      (2)   Parking location. Commercial or residential construction
for which the existing parking setback is nonconforming. Does not include
reductions in overall parking or increasing the extent of a nonconforming
setback.



      (3)   Permitted obstructions. Single-family residential corner
lot in which the front elevation of the principal building fronts the corner
side yard as defined by the code, accessory structures as outlined in §§
22.160 through 22.162 may be located within alternate yards from those
specified in Table 19: Permitted Obstruction, so long as said accessory
structure within the alternate yard complies with the applicable bulk
requirements that would have otherwise been require by code and outlined in
Table 20: Standards for Accessory Structures.



   (B)   Eligible actions.



      (1)   Residential remodeling. Building permits for
single-family homes and their accessory structures which would allow for
existing nonconforming setbacks to continue. This includes, but is not
limited to: additions of up to 50% of the existing floor area, garage or shed
replacement.



      (2)   Driveway, accessory structures, and accessory uses.
Minor variations may be granted for deviations of driveways not in excess of
25% of the maximums allowed in the applicable bulk regulations of the Zoning
Ordinance. Waivers may be granted to allow the construction of swimming
pools, fences, or other accessory structures in a manner not inconsistent
with the intent of the Zoning Ordinance, and to otherwise allow such uses
irrespective of the principal use or situs of the principal structure on the
property in question.



      (3)   Parking location. Commercial or residential construction
for which the existing parking setback is nonconforming. Does not include
reductions in overall parking or increasing the extent of a nonconforming
setback.



      (4)   Permitted obstructions. Single-family residential corner
lot in which the front elevation of the principal building fronts the comer
side yard as defined by the code, accessory structures as outlined in §§
22.160 through 22.162 may be located within alternate yards from those
specified in Table 19: Permitted Obstruction, so long as said accessory
structure within the alternate yard complies with the applicable bulk
requirements that would have otherwise been require by code and outlined in
Table 20: Standards for Accessory Structures.



   (C)   Ineligible actions.  Actions which increase the extent of the
nonconforming setback (unless expressly authorized as an exception elsewhere
within this Title).



(Ord. 16-O-11, passed 5-12-2016)



AMENDMENTS AND REZONINGS



§ 22.270  PURPOSE.



   To adapt to changing development conditions and provide for the phased
implementation of the village Comprehensive Plan, the President and Board of
Trustees may from time to time amend the provisions of the text of this
chapter, or the zoning district map, as provided by the state statutes.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.271  APPROVAL PROCESS.



   Amendments shall be approved only in conformance with the approval
process provided in the filing procedures section of this chapter and the
approval criteria in Table 33.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.272  PROTEST.



   (A)   A written protest may be filed with the Village Clerk against
a proposed amendment that is signed by the owner or owners of at least 20% of
the frontage of:



      (1)   The property to be affected by the proposed amendment;



      (2)   The property immediately adjacent thereto or across an
alley therefrom; or



      (3)   The property having frontage directly opposite the
frontage be affected by the proposed amendment.



   (B)   If such a protest is filed, the proposed amendment shall not
be approved except by a vote of two-thirds of the aldermen currently holding
office.



   (C)   The protestor shall serve a copy of the protest upon the
applicant and upon his or her attorney, if any, by certified mail.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.273  AMENDMENT AFTER ORDINANCE ADOPTION.



   As provided in the state statute, no amendment to this chapter shall be
approved within six months of its adoption except by a two-thirds vote of the
President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



Table 33:  Approval Criteria for Zoning Amendments



In recommending approval or conditional approval of an amendment, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the President and Board of
Trustees written findings of fact that all of the conditions below not apply
to the application. The President and Board of Trustees shall not be bound by
the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. However, in
granting approval or conditional approval, the President and Board of
Trustees shall similarly find that all of the following conditions apply:



1.   Compatible with use or zoning of environs.  The proposed use(s) or
the uses permitted under the zoning classification are compatible with
existing uses or existing zoning of property in the environs.



2.   Supported by trend of development.  The trend of development in the
general area since the original zoning of the affected property was
established supports the proposed use or zoning classification.



3.   Consistent with comprehensive plan objectives.  The proposed use or
zoning classification is in harmony with the objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan of the village as viewed in light of any changed conditions since the
adoption of the Plan.



4.   Furthers public interest.  The proposed use or zoning classification
promotes the public interest and  not solely the interest of the applicant.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



NONCONFORMITIES



§ 22.285  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The intent of this section is to provide for the continuation
and, under appropriate circumstances, elimination of existing uses of
property that do not conform to the requirements of this chapter or that may
not conform to future amendments thereto.



   (B)   The provisions in this subchapter are designed to accomplish
this intent in a way that:



      (1)   Recognizes the rights and interests of owners of
individual properties that have been rendered non-conforming by village
action to upgrade zoning policies and standards;



      (2)   Allows the property owner or lessee to recover his or
her investment in the nonconformity, while also recognizing that by virtue of
the nonconformity he or she enjoys a special right not available to other
property owners in the same zoning district; and



      (3)   Minimizes the nuisance, reduction in neighboring
property values and other adverse effects of properties that do not conform
to their environs.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.286  TYPES OF NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   A nonconformity is any characteristic of a building,
structure, or lot or parcel of land, or of the use thereof, which was lawful
prior to the date of enactment of this chapter or any amendment thereto but
that does not currently conform to the requirements applicable to the zoning
district in which it is located.



   (B)   The lawful issuance of a building permit prior to the dates
specified above shall be considered to establish the lawfulness of any
building or structure.



   (C)   There are three categories of nonconformities:



      (1)   Activity nonconformities.



         (a)   A property with an activity nonconformity is being
used for a purpose not allowed in its zoned district.



         (b)   Activity nonconformities are any activities or
functions carried on at a premises (as either a principal or accessory use)
that are not allowed by the permitted and conditional uses of the zoning
district in which the premises is situated, irrespective of the use for which
the premises was designed.



         (c)   The use of a dwelling now located in a Residential
District as the site of a previously legal business is an example of an
activity nonconformity. The design if such a structure is conforming, but its
use is not.



         (d)   The provisions herein recognize that activity
nonconformities can generally be eliminated more easily and at less cost than
other kinds of nonconformities.



      (2)   Design nonconformities.



         (a)   A property with a design nonconformity was
designed for a purpose not allowed in its zoning district. Its present use
may or may not be for a purpose allowed in that district.



         (b)   A design nonconformity is the design or intended
use of all or substantially all of a premises for any principal or accessory
use not allowed by the permitted and conditional uses of the zoning district
in which it is located, irrespective of the nature of the activities
currently carried on at that premise.



         (c)   A previously legal premises now located in a
Residential District that was designed and intended as an automobile service
station or an open sales lot, would be an example of a design nonconformity,
even if no service station or sales business were currently operated on the
premises. A store building in a Residential District presently used as an
elementary school would be another example. In both cases, the use or
activity on the premises is conforming but the design or appearance of the
premises is not.



      (3)   Standards nonconformities. 



         (a)   Standards nonconformities are all other
nonconformities with the requirements of this chapter, including
nonconformities involving:



            1.   Yards;



            2.   Building height;



            3.   Lot area or lot area per dwelling unit;



            4.   Lot width;



            5.   Floor area ratio;



            6.   Off-street parking and loading;



            7.   Signs; and



            8.   Landscaping and screening.



         (b)   An undeveloped lot not meeting the minimum width
required by its zoning district, or an otherwise conforming business with a
sign does not meet requirement of the sign regulations, would be examples of
standards nonconformities.



         (c)   The provisions herein recognize that certain types
of standards nonconformities are difficult and costly to eliminate while
other types can be eliminated more easily and at relatively modest expense.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.287  ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   Repair and restoration.



      (1)   Routine maintenance and minor repairs within any
12-month period costing 33% or less of the value of the improvements on a
property with a nonconformity may be performed without elimination of any
nonconformity.



      (2)   Reconstruction or repairs costing over 33% of the value
of the improvements on a property with a nonconformity that is damaged or
destroyed may be performed so long as:



         (a)   The new construction does not exhibit any greater
degree of nonconformity than existed before the damage or destruction; and



         (b)   Existing design or standards nonconformities
conform to the requirements on partial elimination of nonconformities in
division (I), except that partial or complete elimination shall not be
required of any nonconformity with the requirements for minimum lot area or
minimum lot area per dwelling unit.



   (B)   Additions, enlargements and alterations to structures.



      (1)   Activity nonconformity.  No addition, enlargement or
structural alteration shall be made to a structure on a property having an
activity nonconformity without the elimination of such nonconformity.



      (2)   Design or standards nonconformity.  No addition,
enlargement or structural alteration as defined in § 22.011 shall be made to
any structure on a property having a design or standards nonconformity
without both:



         (a)   The conformance of any new addition or enlargement
portion of the structure to all requirements of the zoning district; and



         (b)   The conformance of all design or standards
nonconformities to the requirements on partial elimination of nonconformities
in division (I).



   (C)   Expansion within structures.



      (1)   Activity nonconformity.  Any expansion within a
structure on a property having an activity nonconformity shall require
elimination of the nonconformity.



      (2)   Design nonconformity.  Expansion of activities within a
structure on a property having a design nonconformity is permitted if the
expansion involves no STRUCTURAL ALTERATION as defined in § 22.01. Any other
expansion shall require elimination of the nonconformity.



      (3)   Standards nonconformity.  Expansion of activities
within a structure on a property having a standards nonconformity is
permitted conditioned upon the conformance of all standards nonconformities
to the requirements on partial elimination of nonconformities in division (I).



   (D)   Expansion of use of land.  Expansion of the use of land
having any nonconformity, whether involving a principal or accessory use, is
permitted beyond the land area presently occupied only provided that the
nonconformity is eliminated and no new nonconformity is created.



   (E)   Moving of structures.  No structure with any nonconformity
shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the same of any
other lot unless in the new location it will conform to all regulations of
the applicable zoning district.



   (F)   Change in activity.



      (1)   Activity nonconformity.  No activity creating an
activity nonconformity shall be changed to another activity that creates an
activity nonconformity.



      (2)   Design or standards nonconformity.  If a design or
standards nonconformity would continue after a change in use or activity, or
if further such nonconformity would be created, then such nonconformity shall
conform to the requirements on partial elimination of nonconformities in
division (I).



   (G)   Discontinuance of activity.



      (1)   Activity nonconformity.  If an activity nonconformity
is voluntarily and intentionally discontinued no subsequent use of the same
property shall resume or establish any such nonconformity.



      (2)   Design or standards nonconformity.  If use of a
property after discontinuation as provided above would reinstate, continue,
or create a standards nonconformity, or a greater such nonconformity than
existed previously, then such nonconformity shall conform to the requirements
on partial elimination of nonconformities in division (I) of this section.



   (H)   Nonconforming residential lots of record.  Any lot of record
as of the effective date of this chapter that is located in a Residential
District, that has no substantial structure upon it, and that has a standards
nonconformity, may be used for a single-family detached dwelling without
eliminating the nonconformity.



   (I)   Partial elimination of nonconformities.  Where specifically
provided herein, nonconformities shall be reduced or eliminated to the extent
the President and Board of Trustees determines physically and economically
feasible, particularly where this can be done without relocation of sound
major structures, acquisition of additional land, or expenses
disproportionate to the cost of the expansion, enlargement, change or
resumption of activity, or other action taken.



   (J)   Value of improvements.  For purposes of this section, the
value of improvements on a property shall be the most recent equalized
assessed valuation for property tax purposes divided by the assessment ratio
of assessed to true value.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.288  CONDITIONAL OR INTERMITTENT USES.



   Conditional uses approved by the village shall not be considered to
have activity or design nonconformities but shall require an additional
conditional use permit for any alteration, enlargement or extension. The
casual, intermittent or temporary use of land or structures shall not be
sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconformity.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.289  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   A certificate of occupancy shall be required for the
continuation of all nonconformities created by this chapter or any amendment
thereto.



   (B)   When the Village Zoning Administrator determines that a
property has any nonconformity, he or she shall notify the owner or lessee
thereof of such nonconformity and of the regulations applicable thereto.



   (C)   Such notice shall require that the recipient file with the
Zoning Administrator, within 90 days of the date thereof, either satisfactory
evidence that the property is not nonconforming or a completed application
for a certificate of occupancy to continue the nonconformity.



   (D)   Upon timely receipt of a complete and accurate application
therefor, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of occupancy for
the nonconforming property.



   (E)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a file of all
nonconformities of which he or she has sent notice and of all nonconformities
issued certificates of occupancy.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



 

Table 34:  Summary of Nonconformity Regulations




Nonconformities that must be eliminated when action is taken



Action

 

Activity Nonconformities

 

Design Nonconformities

 

Standards Nonconformities



Maintenance or minor repair (§ 22.287(A))
 

None

 

None

 

None



Rebuilding or major repair (§ 22.287(A))
 

None

 

Some

 

Some



Addition or enlargement of building (§ 22.287(B))
 

All

 

Some

 

Some



Expansion within building (§ 22.287(C))
 

All

 

None

 

Some



Expansion of use of land (§ 22.287(D))
 

All

 

All

 

All



Moving of structure (§ 22.287(E))
 

All

 

All

 

All



Change of activity (§ 22.287(F))
 

All

 

Some

 

Some



Resumption of activity after discontinuation (§ 22.287(G))
 

All

 

Some

 

Some



Building upon nonconforming vacant residential lot (§ 22.287(H))
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

None



See regulations for detailed requirements




 



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 22.300  PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   Building permit.  It shall be unlawful to commence the
construction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any structure in
the village without obtaining a building permit from the village. The
Building Officer shall issue no building permit unless her or she has
determined that the plans for the property for which the permit is sought
comply with all applicable codes and ordinances of the village.



   (B)   Certificate of occupancy.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to occupy or use any structure,
land, water, or premises in the village, or change the occupancy or use
thereof, in whole or in part, without obtaining a certificate of occupancy
from the village.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall issue no certificate of
occupancy for a new or remodeled premises unless he or she  has inspected
the premises after completion of all construction and certified that the
premises is in conformity with the plans on which the building permit was
based. He or she shall likewise issue no certificate of occupancy for a
change of occupancy without certifying that the proposed occupancy will be in
conformance with all applicable regulations herein.



      (3)   The following shall be exempt from the requirements for
a certificate of occupancy:



         (a)   Land used for agricultural cultivation; and



         (b)   Residential buildings in which there is a change
of occupancy that does not involve a change to a different permitted or
conditional use.



      (4)   A temporary certificate of occupancy for a period not to
exceed six months may be issued, consistent with the safety of the occupants,
for occupancy or partial occupancy pending completion of construction or
alterations.



      (5)   The Zoning Administrator shall either issue or deny a
certificate of occupancy within 20 days of application therefor. The
Administrator shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for any
denial.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.301  VIOLATION, PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated and authorized to enforce
this chapter. Any party that violates any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each
offense. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.302  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Authority.



      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission of the village is the
“Plan Commission” and “Zoning Board of Appeals” referred to in this
chapter and all other ordinances of the village.  The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall consist of nine members, or such number as the Board of
Trustees may determine is necessary, from time to time.



      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby vested with
the power and responsibility to:



         (a)   Conduct hearings and make recommendations to the
Village President and Board of Trustees on all:



            1.   Amendments to this chapter, excepting
adoption of a new ordinance;



            2.   Conditional uses, including Planned Unit
Developments;



            3.   Variances, including minor variances; and



            4.   Zoning reclassifications.



         (b)   Hear and make final determinations on all zoning
appeals;



         (c)   Keep written minutes of its proceedings, which
shall be a public record;



         (d)   Adopt by-laws and any other procedural rules
consistent with this and other village ordinances and state statutes;



         (e)   Recommend to the President and Board of Trustees
the employment of such professional zoning, legal, engineering, or
administrative assistance as is necessary to fulfill its responsibilities;



         (f)   Hear all other matters referred to it by the
President and Board of Trustees;



         (g)   Prepare and recommend to the President and Board
of Trustees a Comprehensive Plan and any additional plans for the development
and redevelopment of the village and its extraterritorial planning
jurisdiction;



         (h)   File an annual report with the President and Board
of Trustees setting forth its transactions and recommendations;



         (i)   Prepare and recommend to the President and Board
of Trustees changes in any village plan or part thereof;



         (j)   Prepare and recommend to the President and Board
of Trustees proposals for specific improvements to carry out village plans;



         (k)   Cooperate with county and regional planning
commissions and other groups to promote coordinated planning; and



         (l)   Carry out any other function concerning land
subdivision or other matters that may be conferred upon it by the village
subdivision control ordinance or any other village ordinance.



   (B)   Appointments.  The President shall, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees:



      (1)   Appoint all members;



      (2)   Appoint one member to serve as Chairman and another to
serve as Vice Chairman, who will serve as Acting Chairman in the absence of
the Chairman;



      (3)   Appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term of any
member whose place has become vacant and appoint a new Chairman should that
office be vacated;



      (4)   Have the power to remove any member with a majority vote
of approval by the Board of Trustees;



      (5)   Appoint such alternate Board members as may be necessary
to act as alternates to the regularly appointed members who may be conflicted
out of consideration of certain issues or as may be necessary to ensure that
a quorum is present at each scheduled hearing; and



      (6)   Original appointments shall be made with staggered terms
of two and four years, however, the original appointment of the Chairman
shall be for a four-year term.  All successor appointments shall be for a
four-year term.



   (C)   Meetings.



      (1)   All meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman
and at such other times as the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
determine.  All meetings shall be open to the public and shall be called and
held in compliance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 120
et seq.



      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep minutes of
its proceedings.  The minutes shall show the vote, or absence or abstention,
of every member upon every official action, and shall be a public record on
file in the office of the Village Clerk.



      (3)   Any Commission member absent during the proceedings
before the Commission who certifies that he or she has read the meeting
minutes, transcript or listened to a tape recording of said proceedings may
vote on any question heard at such proceedings.



   (D)   Compensation.  Commission member shall be paid quarterly for
each meeting attended at the rate of $40 per meeting for the Chairman and $40
for all other members or at such other rates as the President and Board of
Trustees may hereafter establish.



   (E)   Sub-committees.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may
create subcommittees and adopt policies and procedures deemed advisable to
fulfill its power, duties and responsibilities. All such policies and
procedures shall be recorded and transmitted to the Village Board. The three
primary sub-committees of the Planning and Zoning Commission include:



      (1)   Comprehensive Plan Subcommittee shall review and forward
recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission on matters pertaining
to the Comprehensive Plan and official map. The Comprehensive Plan is a
description of long-range public policy affecting community character,
economic well-being, cultural and social amenities, ease and convenience of
circulation in the village, and orderly development of various land uses, and
serves as a policy guide in all decisions related to community growth. The
official map identifies the location of present and future public service
facilities and improvements, thoroughfare system improvements, park and
school sites and land for other public purposes.



      (2)   Ordinance Review Committee reviews and forwards
recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission on matters pertaining
to this chapter and Chapter 29 (Subdivision Regulations) text amendments.



      (3)   Land Use Committee reviews and forwards recommendations
to the Planning and Zoning Commission on matters pertaining to current and
long range planning and individual petitions for a PUD, a rezoning, a
conditional use, a variation to Chapter 22 and/or 23, an amendment to the
comprehensive plan, a plat of subdivision, and such other matters as may be
referred to the Plan Commission by the Village Board.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 13-O-27,
passed 10-24-2013; Ord. 14-O-36, passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-11, passed
3-9-2017)



§ 22.303  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR AND VILLAGE CLERK.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator of the village shall be charged with
the enforcement of this chapter. In discharging this responsibility, he or
she shall:



      (1)   Issue temporary use permits and other permits or
certificates provided for herein;



      (2)   Conduct inspections of structures and uses to determine
compliance with this chapter;



      (3)   Notify in writing any party believed to be responsible
for violating a provision of this chapter and order action to correct the
violation;



      (4)   Prepare and cause to be published on or before March 31
of each year a Zoning District Map as amended through the preceding December
31;



      (5)   Attend all meetings of the Planning and Zoning
Commission;



      (6)   Provide clerical or technical assistance to the Planning
and Zoning Commission;



      (7)   Request the assistance and cooperation of other village
officials, departments, boards, or commissions, or other agencies as
necessary in the discharge of his or her duties; and



      (8)   Procure such engineering, planning, or legal assistance
from technical experts outside the village government as may be necessary to
discharge his or her duties and as is authorized by the President and Board
of Trustees



   (B)   The Village Clerk shall have the responsibility to:



      (1)   Receive and forward to the Planning and Zoning
Commission all applications and notices required by this chapter; and



      (2)   Maintain records of applications filled, public hearings
held, permits, and certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered,
and notices and orders issued under the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-11, passed 3-9-2017)



§ 22.304  APPEALS.



   (A)   Applicability.  Any party aggrieved by an administration
order, requirement, decision or determination made under this chapter by the
Zoning Administrator, Building Officer, or other authorized administrative
official, board, commission, or department of the village other than the
President and Board of Trustees may appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.



   (B)   Notice of appeal.  A notice of appeal shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator within 45 days of the order or decision being appealed.
The notice shall contain:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the party
filing the appeal;



      (2)   The location of the property affected by the decision
being appealed;



      (3)   Identification of the provision of the ordinance
governing the decision being appealed;



      (4)   A statement of the grounds on which the appeal is based;



      (5)   The reason given by the administrative official or body
for the decision;



      (6)   A brief summary of the factual evidence upon which the
appeal is based; and



      (7)   A plot plan and verbal description of the use affected
by the decision being appealed.



   (C)   Stay of proceedings.  The filing of a notice of appeals shall
stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the
Zoning Administrator certifies to the Planning and Zoning Commission that in
his or her judgment a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such cases, no proceedings shall be stayed without issuance of a restraining
order by the Planning and Zoning Commission or a court record.



   (D)   Hearing and action.



      (1)   Upon receipt, the Zoning Administrator shall forthwith
transmit the notice of appeal and the complete record of the decision to the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall fix a reasonable time
for a hearing on the appeal and give a minimum of ten days’ notice to the
party filing the notice.



      (2)   After the hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall take final action on the appeal, whereby a majority of Planning and
Zoning Commission member votes are needed to reverse the village’s
decision. If such majority of such votes is not obtained, the village’s
decision stands.



      (3)   A petitioner at a Planning and Zoning Commission hearing
shall he responsible for retaining a court reporter to attend and record the
proceedings of the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing. If no court
reporter is retained, the record of the proceedings will not include a
transcript of the hearing.



      (4)   A petitioner who files a complaint for administrative
review of a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
responsible for the cost of preparation of the record of proceeding,
including but not limited to costs for photocopying and for transcription of
a hearing.



      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be
obligated to provide the record of proceedings until the petitioner pays the
cost of preparation of the record.



   (E)   Approval criteria for appeals.  The Board shall reverse the
order appealed only if it finds that the action taken or decision appealed:



      (1)   Was arbitrary or capricious;



      (2)   Was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact;



      (3)   Constituted an abuse of discretion; or



      (4)   Was based on erroneous interpretation of this chapter or
zoning law.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014; Ord. 17-O-11, passed 3-9-2017)



PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



§ 22.315  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the location and
construction of telecommunications carrier facilities. The provisions of this
chapter are not intended and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or have the
effect of prohibiting the provisions of personal wireless services, nor shall
the provisions of this chapter be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably
discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless
services.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.316  DEFINITIONS.



   See § 22.011.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.317  REGULATIONS.



   The following provisions shall apply to all personal wireless
telecommunications facilities:



   (A)   No facility shall be constructed on residentially zoned lots.



   (B)   No building or tower that is part of a facility should
encroach onto any recorded easement prohibiting the encroachment unless the
grantees of the easement have given their approval.



   (C)   Lighting shall be installed for security and safety purposes
only. Except with respect to lighting required by the FCC or FAA, all
lighting should be shielded so that no glare extends substantially beyond the
boundaries of a facility. 



   (D)   No facility should encroach onto an existing septic field.



   (E)   Any facility located in a special flood hazard area or wetland
should meet the requirements of the Village Watershed Development Code.



   (F)   Existing trees more than three inches in diameter should be
preserved if reasonable feasible during construction.  If any tree more than
three inches in diameter is removed during construction a tree three inches
or more in diameter of the same or similar species shall be planted as a
replacement if reasonably feasible.  Tree diameter shall be measured at a
point three inches above ground level.



   (G)   All electronic and other related equipment and appurtenances
necessary for the operations of any personal wireless services antenna shall,
whenever possible, be located within a lawfully pre-existing structure or
completely below grade.



   (H)   If any elevation of a facility faces an existing, adjoin
residential use within a residential zoning district, low maintenance
landscaping should be provided on or near the facility lot to provide at
least partial screening of the facility. The quantity and type of that
landscaping should be in accordance with any Village landscaping regulations
of general applicability except that division (F) shall control over any tree
related regulation imposing a greater burden.



   (I)   Fencing shall be installed around a facility. The height and
materials of the fencing should be in accordance with any village fence
regulations of general applicability.



   (J)   Any building hat is part of a facility shall be designed with
exterior materials and colors that are reasonably compatible, harmonious with
and blend with the natural features, buildings and structures surrounding the
facility.



   (K)   Every personal wireless services antenna and antenna support
structure shall be protected against unauthorized climbing or other access by
the public.



   (L)   A facility may be located on the same zoning lot as one or
more other structures or uses without violating any ordinance or regulations
that prohibits or limits multiple structures building, or uses on a zoning
lot.



   (M)   No minimum, lot area, width, or depth shall be required for a
facility, and unless the facility is to be manned on a regular, daily basis,
no off-street parking spaces shall be required for a facility. If the
facility is to be manned on a regular, daily basis, one off-street parking
space shall be provide for each employee regularly at the facility. No
loading facilities shall be required.



   (N)   No portion of a facility’s supporting structure or equipment
housing shall be less than 50 feet from the lot line of the facility lot or
less than 25 feet from any other lot line. 



   (O)   No bulk regulations or lot coverage, building coverage or FAR
limitations shall be applied to a facility or to any existing use or
structure coincident with the establishment of a facility.



   (P)   The village’s review of a building permit application for a
facility shall be completed within 30 days. If a decision of the Village
Board is required to permit the establishment of a facility, the village’s
review of the application shall be simultaneous with the process leading to
the Village Board’s decision.



   (Q)   The improvements and equipment comprising the facility may be
wholly or partly freestanding or wholly or partly attached to, enclosed in,
or installed in or on a structure or structures.



   (R)   Any public hearing authorized under this section shall be
conducted in a manner determined by the Village Board. Notice of any such
public hearing shall be published at least 15 days before the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation published in the village.



   (S)   Any decision regarding a facility by the Village Board or a
village agency or official shall be supported by written findings of fact.
The Circuit Court shall have jurisdiction to review the reasonableness of any
adverse decision and the plaintiff shall bear the burden of proof, but there
shall be no presumption of the validity of the decision.



   (T)   The height of any facility shall not exceed 150 feet.



   (U)   The horizontal separation distance to the nearest principal
residential building shall not be less than the height of the supporting
structure; except that if the supporting structure exceeds 99 feet in height,
the horizontal separation distance to the nearest principal residential
building shall be at least 100 feet or 80% of the height of the supporting
structure, whichever is greater.  Compliance with this division shall only
be evaluated as of the time that a building permit application for the
facility is submitted. If the supporting structure is not an antenna tower
this division is satisfied.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.318  PERMITTED USE.



   (A)   Personal wireless telecommunication facilities may be located
on any lot owned by or leased to the village and said facilities shall be
exempt from the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Personal wireless telecommunication facilities are not
permitted, as of right, in any zoning district. However, such use is a
conditional use in districts C-1 and I-1.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)



§ 22.319  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Personal wireless telecommunications facilities require the issuance of
a conditional use permit under provisions of §§ 22.235 through 22.242,
except that:



   (A)   On judicial review of an adverse decision, the issue shall be
the reasonableness of the Village Board’s decision in light of the evidence
presented on the siting consideration and the well-reasoned recommendation of
the hearing officer or any other body that conducted the public hearing. 



   (B)   Every ordinance granting approval of a conditional use permit
for a personal wireless services antenna support structure shall state that
any assignment or transfer of the conditional use permit or any of the rights
thereunder may be made only with the approval of the Board of Trustees.



   (C)   When one or more antennas, an antenna support structure, or
related equipment are not operated for the provision of personal wireless
services for a continuous period of 12 months or more, such antenna, antenna
support structure, or related equipment may be deemed to be abandoned by the
village. The owner of such an antenna, antenna support structure or related
equipment shall remove such items within 90 days following the mailing of
written notice that removal is required. Such notice shall be sent by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the village to
such owner at the last known address of such owner. If two or more providers
of personal wireless services use the antenna support structure or related
equipment to provide personal wireless services, then the period of non-use
under this provision shall be measured from the cessation of operation at the
location of such antenna support structure or related equipment by all such
providers.



(Ord. 480B, passed 8-21-1953; Ord. 90-O-036, passed 11-8-1990; Ord. 14-O-36,
passed 11-14-2014)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 23:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



   23.01   Subdivision regulations



§ 23.01  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.



   The subdivision regulations of the village, established by ordinance
passed and approved 9-25-1980, and subsequent amendments and supplements
thereto, are continued in full force and effect.



(Ord. 19-O-02, passed 1-15-2019)



CHAPTER 24:  BUILDING CODE



Section



   24.01   Adoption of Building Code



   24.02   Amendments to Building Code



   24.03   Rights continued



   24.04   Piers



   24.05   Permit fees



   24.06   Carbon monoxide detector systems



   24.07   Dumpsters and roll-off containers for construction,
demolition, and renovation



§ 24.01  ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   (1)   The village hereby adopts and incorporates by
reference the 2009 International Building Code, 2009 International Commercial
Building Code, 2008 Illinois Plumbing Code and the 2011 National Electrical
Code and subsequent amendments as the Building Codes of the village for the
regulation of building construction in the village.



      (2)   The section numbers used in the respective codes adopted
hereunder shall be identical to those section numbers in the village’s
Building Code.



   (B)   Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties and
conditions and terms of herein listed codes are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 93-O-23, passed 8-12-1993; Ord. 96-O-02, passed 1-25-1996; Ord.
13-O-03, passed 2-14-2013)



§ 24.02  AMENDMENTS TO BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   Section 114.91, Expiration of Permits.




1. Building permits shall expire if work is not completed within the time
designated after the issuance of the permit:





a) New homes, one year





b) Garages, 6 months (180 days)





c) Remodeling and additions, 6 months (180 days)





d) Fences, sidewalks, patios, etc., 6 months (180 days)





2. If after the expiration of the building permit, the work for which the
building permit was issued has not been completed, the permit holder must
appear before the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Lakemoor
at its regularly scheduled meeting to request an extension of said permit.
Permits may be extended for no more than ninety (90) days upon a showing by
said permit holder that said work was not completed in the prescribed time
through no fault of his own. The fee for an extension shall be 10% of the
original cost.




   (B)   Section 115.6, Property Damage Deposits and Bonds.




1. Before issuing a building permit for any new residential or commercial
construction, the Building Inspector will review the plans submitted for said
permit and require the building contractor obtaining the permit to make a
cash deposit or bond (with the Village Clerk).





The deposit shall be in the amount of $5,000.00. The bond shall be in the
penal sum of $5,000.00, with a surety to be approved by the corporate
authorities. The deposit or bond shall cover the cost of repairing any damage
to public or private property during construction, including, but not limited
to the cost to indemnify, keep and save harmless the Village against any
loss, costs, damage, judgment of liability of any kind whatsoever which the
Village may suffer or be put to or which may accrue against it, be charged to
or be recovered from the Village or any of its officials by reason of any act
or thing done or neglected to be done under or by virtue of the authority
given to such contractor.





For purposes of this section, the term “building contractor” shall mean
any person engaged in constructing, altering or repairing buildings or other
structures or sidewalks or streets or pavements, including but not limited to
general contractors, plumbing contractors, electrical contractors, cement or
paving contractors, roofing contractors, steam fitting contractors, masonry
contractors, carpentry contractors, lathing contractors, heating contractors,
air conditioning contractors, refrigeration contractors, house moving, house
raising or shoring contractors, sheet metal contractors, glazing contractors,
excavating contractors, sewer contractors, plastering contractors, dry wall
contractors, painting contractors, razing, shearing or moving contractors,
landscaping contractors, tuckpointing contractors, and insulating contractors.





2. Within twelve months from the date of issuance of the occupancy permit,
provided the Building Inspector has performed an inspection and the condition
of the property is satisfactory, and provided that no damage has been done to
public or private property during construction, the total amount of the
deposit shall be returned to the parties making the deposit upon request, or
the bond shall be released.





3. In the event that property sustains damage during construction, that
portion of the deposit necessary to effect repairs shall be retained by the
Village, and the balance, including interest (set by state law) shall be
returned to the party making the deposit, or the remainder of the bond shall
be released.





4. If the cost of repairs to the property exceeds the amount of the deposit
or bond, such additional costs shall be charged to the person who applied for
the permit, and it shall become immediately due and payable upon that person
receiving written notice of the amount of which the cost of repairs exceeds
the amount of deposit.”




   (C)   Section 115.7, Sign Boards.




The sign contractor, the erector or the owner of every sign or billboard for
which a permit is required shall be bonded in an amount not less than
$1,000.00 for the erection and maintenance of all such signs or bi11boards in
accordance with the provisions of Section 1408.




   (D)   118.1, Special Fees.




The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or
demolition and for all work done in connection with or concurrently with the
work contemplated by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant, or
holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that may be prescribed by
law or ordinance for water taps, sewer connections, electrical permits,
erection of signs and display structures, marquees or other appurtenant
structures, or fees for inspections, certificates of use and occupancy or
other privileges or requirements, both within and without the jurisdiction of
the department of building inspection. Permit fees entitle applicant to
inspection and re-inspection. More inspections will cost $20.00 minimum.
Maximum will be cost recovery of inspections.




   The building permit fee is by separate ordinance.




Improved construction includes any wiring, plumbing,, etc., on or between
studs which can include an attic, basement or a portion of a basement. Said
improved construction includes al1 living areas; garages are specifically
excluded.




   (E)   Section 118.4, Demolition.




The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or structure shall be
$150.00.




   (F)   Section 122.3, Violation Penalties.




Any person who shall violate a provision of the Basic Code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct,
alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or
directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of the Basic Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 or by
imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.




   (G)   Section 123.2, Unlawful Continuance.




Any person who shall continue any work in or about the building after having
been served with a stop order, except such work as he is directed to perform
to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not
less than $75.00 nor more than $500.00.




   (H)   Section 319.0, Driveways.




A driveway shall be constructed of a material which will not erode, shall
extend from the garage to the street, shall be at least twelve (12) feet in
width, and if deemed necessary by the Building Inspector or Village Engineer,
a culvert shall be installed under the driveway, at the owner’s expense the
culvert shall be a minimum if 15 feet in diameter and 20 feet in length. The
Superintendent of Roads or Superintendent of Public Works or the Village
Engineer may, in his discretion, grant exceptions for modification.




   (I)   Section 320.0 Trenches.




All trenches across proposed or existing streets, driveways shall be
backfilled with No. 2 sand to a point not less than five (5) feet from the
outside edge of the proposed or existing pavement. The sand shall be
compacted thoroughly in place by jetting or in a manner and with the use of
equipment acceptable to the Village Engineer or Superintendent of Public
Works or the Building Commissioner. This compacted sand shall be brought to
within ten (10) inches of the proposed or existing final grade. At this
point, eight (B) inches of State of Illinois specification grade CA-6 gravel
shall be placed to a width twelve (12) inches greater than the trench. When
the gravel has been completed to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer or
the Superintendent of Public Works or the Building Commissioner, a two (2)
inch bitumous surface (B-5 or Class 1) shall be placed over the entire
trench”equal in width to the existing or proposed pavement.





All excess materials shall be removed and the rights of way shall be restored
to its original condition and to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer or
the Superintendent of Public Works or the Building Commissioner.




   (J)   Section R-106, Violations and Penalties.




It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation whether as owner,
lessee, sub-lessee or occupant to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any one
and two family dwelling in the jurisdiction or cause or permit the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code.





It is hereby declared that any violation of this Code constitutes a public
nuisance, and in addition to any other remedies provided by this Code for its
enforcement, the Village may bring civil suit to enjoin the violation of any
provisions of this Code.





Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shal1 be deemed guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which
any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued
or permitted, and upon conviction of such a violation, such person shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $15.00 nor more than $500.00 or by
imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment as established by local
applicable laws.





Any person, firm or corporation who undertakes to construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip or otherwise perform work
on a structure within the Village without having first secured a building
permit through the Village shall immediately cease work on any such premises
and make application for a proper permit. If any such work is performed prior
to permit issuance, such building permit shall be an “after the fact”
permit and shall be issued at a rate of 150% of the applicable permit fee, as
amended from time to time. Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from
exercising all available remedies, including injunctive release.




   (K)   Section 15.06, Conduit.




The provisions of the National Electric Code as adopted herein,
notwithstanding, all single family dwellings constructed in the Village of
Lakemoor, shall be designed and built with Romex, BX, or Conduit, and whips
when necessary shall not exceed 12 feet. All other than single family
dwellings shall be built with Conduit only. Minimum size wire to be used for
all electrical catagories to be a minimum of 12 gauge.




(Ord. 96-O-14, passed 8-8-1996; Ord. 15-O-40, passed 11-12-2015)



§ 24.03  RIGHTS CONTINUED.



   Nothing in this chapter or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquitted, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.



§ 24.04  PIERS.



   (A)   Definition. As used herein, the term PIER shall mean any
structure built over water and intended to support persons or objects from
sinking.



   (B)   Permit required. No pier shall be erected, reconstructed,
relocated or structurally altered unless a building permit is first applied
for and obtained in accordance with the Village Building Code.



   (C)   Anchoring. All piers must be securely anchored to the
shoreline. No pier shall be anchored such that its furthermost point in the
water is further than 20 feet from the shoreline.



   (D)   Size. No pier shall exceed 20 feet in length, nor 20 feet in
width.



§ 24.05  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Residential fees. The residential construction permit fees for
the village shall be and are hereby designated as follows:



 



Additions



   Up to 200 sq. ft.

 

$40 +




   Over 200 sq. ft.

 

$0.35 /sq. ft.



Central air
 

$35



Concrete slabs, sidewalks, patios, barbecue pits
 

$20



Demolition
 

$20



Driveways
 

$20



Ductwork and piping
 

$0.10 sq. ft.



Duplex residence
 

$0.35 sq. ft.



Electrical service
 

$40 +




   Per opening

 

$1



Fence (residential)



   Up to 200 lin. ft.

 

$30 +




   Over 200 lin. ft.

 

$0.10 per lin. ft.



Heat
 

$40



House raising, preliminary inspection
 

$30



Multiple residence (more than 2 units)
 

$0.35 sq. ft.



New garages (1-, 2- and 3-car)
 

$0.40 sq. ft.



Plan review - new residence
 

$75 per unit




   Outside consultant review. In the event that the village has elected to
use the services of an outside consultant for residential building and
mechanical plan review and inspection services, the building permit fees due
to the village shall be equal to the actual amount charged by outside
consultant, plus 35%.




   Re-inspection fee

 

$30 when more than 1 re-inspection per stage of construction is required due
to lack of proper correction



Plumbing



   Each fixture

 

10 +




   Piping

 

$0.10 per lin. ft.



Porch and decks



   Up to 150 sq. ft.

 

$20 +




   Over 150 sq. ft.

 

$0.20 per sq. ft.



Raising and foundation
 

$45



Remodeling



   Up to 150 sq. ft.

 

$25




   Over 150 sq. ft.

 

$0.35 sq. ft.



Reroofing - permit required, no more than 2 roofs
 

$20



Roofing (new) structure change
 

$30



Siding, brick and stone veneer
 

$45



Single-family residence
 

$0.35 sq. ft.



Sprinkler system (lawn)
 

$50



Swimming pools (above ground) up to 24 ft. diameter
 

$25



Swimming pools (above ground) over 24 ft. diameter
 

$30



Swimming pools (below ground and/or indoor)
 

$0.60 sq. ft.



Television and CB radio towers, satellite dish, flag poles
 

$25



Utility shed (no larger than 12 x 12)
 

$25



Woodbumer or fireplace
 

$35





 



   (B)   Industrial and commercial permit fees. The industrial and
commercial construction permit fees for the village shall be and hereby are
as follows:



 



Additions



   Up to 250 sq. ft.

 

$50 +




   Over 250 sq. ft.

 

$0.30 per sq. ft.



Air-conditioning



   0-50 tons

 

$30




   50- 75 tons

 

$50




   75 - 1000 tons

 

$100



Boiler/furnace



   100 horsepower

 

$50




   100 - 500 horsepower

 

$100




   Over 500 horsepower

 

$500



Concrete slabs
 

$30



Driveway
 

$30



Ductwork and piping
 

$0.10 lin. ft.



Electrical services
 

$80 +




   200 to 400 amps.

 

$30




   400 to 600 amps.

 

$60




   Over 600 amps.

 

$200




   Plus per circuit

 

$7 ea.



Fence



   Up to 100 lin. ft.

 

$35 +




   Over 100 lin. ft.

 

$0.10 per lin. ft.



New construction
 

$0.40 per sq. ft.



Parking lots
 

$30 + $0.10 sq. ft.



Piping (all)
 

$0.10 lin. ft.



Plan review (new building)
 

$100




   Outside consultant review. In the event that the village has elected to
use the services of an outside consultant for commercial building and
mechanical plan review and inspection services, the building permit fees due
to the village shall be equal to the actual amount charged by the independent
consultant, plus 35%.




   Re-inspection fee

 

$30 when more than 1 re- inspection per stage of construction is required due
to lack of proper correction



Plumbing



   Each fixture

 

$10 +




   Piping

 

$0.10 lin. ft.



Remodeling (affected area)
 

$0.30 sq. ft.



Signs



   Illuminated

 

$50




   Non-illuminated

 

$40



Solar collector (per 500 sq. ft.)
 

$30



Sprinkler system



   Lawn

 

$50




   Fire protection

 

$100



Tanks - propane



   Above ground

 

$30




   Under ground

 

$40



Television or radio towers
 

$50



Utility shed
 

$30





 



   (C)   Extension of permit. A fee of 25% of the original permit fee
shall be paid to extend the original permit one time (for 90 days): minimum
fee of $30.



   (D)   Reinstatement of permit. A fee of 50% of the original permit
fee shall be paid to reinstate a permit suspended as defined by the Building
Codes.



   (E)   Expiration of permit.



      (1)   If, after the expiration of the first extension of a
permit, the work for which the building permit was issued has not been
completed, the permit holder must appear before the President and Board of
Trustees of the village at its regularly scheduled meeting to request a
further extension of said permit.



      (2)   Permits may be additionally extended for no more than 90
days; provided that, the second extension shall be contingent upon the
applicant’s completion of the exterior of the structure during the first
extension period.



      (3)   The fee for each additional extension shall be
calculated at the full rate for work not completed following a new
application and plan review by the Building Department.



   (F)   Indebtedness to village. The processing of a permit shall not
commence and no permit shall be issued if the applicant therefore is indebted
to the village for any sum or if the applicant is in violation of any village
code, regulation or ordinance at the time of application.



(Ord. 94-O-2, passed 2-10-1994; Ord. 98-O-03, passed 2-12-1998; Ord. 99-O-01,
passed 3-25-1999; Ord. 07-O-01, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 07-O-33, passed
11-15-2007)



§ 24.06  CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with one carbon monoxide
detection and alarm device in an operating condition installed within 15 feet
of every room used for sleeping purposes. The required carbon monoxide
detection device may be either battery powered, plug-in with battery back-up,
or wired into the structure’s AC power line with battery back-up. If the
carbon monoxide detector is interconnected to the 110-volt smoke alarm
system, it shall be proven to be compatible with that system and installed in
addition to any required smoke alarms. Every structure that contains more
than one dwelling unit shall contain at least one approved carbon monoxide
alarm in operating condition within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping
purposes.



   (B)   It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to supply
and install all required alarms. It is the responsibility of a tenant to test
and provide general maintenance for the alarms within that tenant’s
dwelling unit, and to notify the owner or the authorized agent of the owner
in writing of any deficiencies that the tenant cannot correct. The owner is
responsible for providing one tenant per dwelling unit with written
information regarding alarm testing and maintenance. The tenant is
responsible for replacement of any required batteries in the carbon monoxide
alarm in that tenant’s unit; except that, the owner shall ensure that the
batteries are in operation condition at the time the tenant takes possession
of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the owner or authorized agent
of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to correct any deficiencies in
the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported in writing to the owner or
authorized agent of the owner.



(Ord. 07-O-02, passed 1-25-2007)



§ 24.07  DUMPSTERS AND ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS FOR CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION,
AND RENOVATION.



   (A)   Provisions for use.



      (1)   No dumpster, roll-off container, or temporary storage
unit used in conjunction with construction, demolition, renovation,
relocation, or related activity, shall be placed upon any property or within
the public right-of-way of the abutting street without a permit therefor
issued by the Village of Lakemoor.



      (2)   All such dumpster, roll-off container, or temporary
storage unit shall bear an identification number assigned by the state, and
the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible therefor.



      (3)   All such dumpster, roll-off container, or temporary
storage unit that remains within the public right-of-way during the hours
between sunset of one day and sunrise of the next day shall be equipped with
suitable reflectors or other warning devices.



      (4)   Rubbish, waste materials, and items to be temporarily
stored must be completely contained within the dumpster, roll-off container
or temporary storage unit. The accumulation of rubbish, waste materials, or
items to be temporarily stored will be not be permitted outside the confines
of dumpster or roll-off container, nor will it be permitted to accumulate so
that the attached cover cannot be firmly closed. In the event that the
dumpster, roll-off container or temporary storage unit does not have an
attached cover, the rubbish, waste material, or items to be temporarily
stored must not accumulate higher than the top of the sides of the dumpster,
roll-off container, or temporary storage unit and must be covered by either a
tarp or similar covering, except when rubbish and waste materials are being
deposited in the dumpster or roll-off container.



   (B)   Application, permit and fees.



      (1)   Any person desiring to place a dumpster, rolled-off
container, or temporary storage unit on a lot/parcel or within the public
right-of-way of the abutting street shall make written application therefor
to the Village Administration specifying the exact proposed location of such
dumpster, roll-off container or temporary storage unit, the size and capacity
therefor and any other information as required by the village on the form
identified for said purpose.



      (2)   Unless otherwise specified, any permit issued pursuant
to this section shall only be valid for a maximum of 90.



      (3)   A permit may be renewed for one additional 90 day period
at the discretion of the Board of Trustees for good cause upon written
application a minimum of 30 days prior to the expiration of the renewal
permit and the payment of a new permit fee.



      (4)   The application for a dumpster, rolled-off container, or
temporary storage unit permit that is to be located on private property or
within the public right-of-way of the abutting street shall be accompanied by
a fee of $25.



      (5)   Each renewal application for a dumpster, rolled-off
container, or temporary storage unit permit to be located on private property
or within the public right-of-way of the abutting street shall be accompanied
by a fee of $25.



   (C)   Refusal or revocation of permit; emergency removal.



      (1)   The Village Administration may, in its discretion,
refuse to issue a permit if he deems same to constitute a danger to public
safety or an unwarranted interference with the efficient movement of traffic.



      (2)   The Local Code Enforcement and Zoning Official may, in
his discretion, revoke a permit if he deems same to constitute a danger to
public safety or an unwarranted interference with the efficient movement of
traffic.



      (3)   If the Village Administration at any time determines
that an emergency situation exists with regard to said dumpster, rolled-off
container, or temporary storage unit, the village may remove same without
notice at the owner's expense.



      (4)   If a permit is revoked, the dumpster, rolled-off
container, or temporary storage unit shall be immediately removed from the
property or the public right of way.



      (5)   Upon the expiration of a permit, the applicant shall
immediately cause the removal of the dumpster, rolled-off container, or
temporary storage unit from the property or the public right-of-way.



   (D)   Violations and penalties. Any person or persons, partnership
or corporation who shall violate the terms of this section shall be subject
to a penalty of not more than $750 per day, and each day's continuance of the
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.



   (E)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DUMPSTER or ROLL-OFF CONTAINER. A bulk storage container for
waste materials that can be hauled directly to the point of disposal or
emptied into a large compactor-type truck for disposal.



      RUBBISH. Combustible paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood,
excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture and bedding dunnage
or non-combustible metal, metal furniture, dirt, glass, and crockery.



      TEMPORARY STORAGE UNIT. Portable and transportable storage units
that are designed and used primarily for temporary storage of building
materials, household goods, personal items and other materials for use on a
limited basis on residential property.



      WASTE MATERIALS. Shall include all other categories of materials
to be disposed of, excluding garbage or recyclable materials.



(Ord. 15-O-45, passed 12-17-2015)



CHAPTER 25:  PLUMBING CODE



Section



   25.01   State Plumbing Code adopted



   25.02   Plumber’s license



   25.03   Plumber’s bond



   25.04   Plumbing fees



   25.05   Cross-connection control



§ 25.01  STATE PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   The 2008 Illinois Plumbing Code, published by the State
Department of Public Health, and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted
by reference and made a part of this section. Any person who violates any
provision of the State Plumbing Code shall be subject to the penalties
provided for violation of this code.



   (B)   In addition to the Code, all underground plumbing, drains,
waste and vents are to be installed in cast iron, with the minimum diameter
being four inches.



(Ord. 96-O-03, passed 1-25-1996; Ord. 13-O-13, passed 2-14-2013)



§ 25.02  PLUMBER’S LICENSE.



   No person shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or
altering of plumbing unless the plumbing work performed in the course of such
business is under the direct supervision of a plumber licensed under ILCS Ch.
225, Act 320.



§ 25.03  PLUMBER’S BOND.



   All persons engaged in the business of installing, repairing or
altering plumbing shall, before engaged therein in the village, deposit with
the village a bond in the sum of $1,000. Such bond shall be conditioned that
all plumbing work performed by the licensee or under his or her supervision
shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing Code
herein adopted, and that he or she will pay all fines and penalties properly
imposed upon him for violation of the provisions of this section.



§ 25.04  PLUMBING FEES.



   All fees for plumbing permits are by separate ordinance.



§ 25.05  CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.



   (A)   If, in accordance with the State Plumbing Code or in the
judgement of the Superintendent of Public Works, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the Superintendent of Public Works will give notice to the water
customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer
shall, at his or her own expense, install such an approved device at a
location and in a manner in accordance with the State Plumbing Code, State
Environmental Protection Agency and all applicable local regulations, and
shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon
installation and as required by the State Plumbing Code, State Environmental
Protection Agency and local regulations.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of village may enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and
the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by
the Superintendent of Public Works and the State Environmental Agency.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works to
cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other
properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or
potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated
at least every two years, or as often as the Superintendent of Public Works
shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and
available for review for a period of at least five years.



   (D)   (1)   The approved cross-connection control device
inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property
served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of
village for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of
cross-connections, and that the Public Works Superintendent or his or her
authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the village for the purpose of verifying information submitted by
the customer regarding the required cross-connection control inspection.



      (2)   On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any
property so served shall furnish to the Superintendent of Public Works any
information, which he or she may request regarding the piping system or water
use on such property.



      (3)   The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall,
within the discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works, be deemed
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this section.



   (E)   (1)   The Superintendent of Public Works of the village is
hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the
occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in
violation of the provisions of this section  is known to exist, and to take
such other precautionary measures as he or she may deem necessary to
eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution
mains.



      (2)   Water service to such property shall not be restored
until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with
the provisions of this section, and until a reconnection fee of $1,000 is
paid to the village.



      (3)   Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be
effected when the Superintendent of Public Works is assured that imminent
danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists.
Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of
disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party, can be
effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the
public water supply; provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the
Superintendent of Public Works or the State Environmental Protection Agency,
such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or
pollution of the public water supply.



      (4)   Neither the village, the Superintendent of Public Works
or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury,
damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said
customer’s water supply in accordance with the terms of this section,
whether or not said termination was with or without notice.



   (F)   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned or back pressured
material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable
water supply systems occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an
improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has
been bypassed, must bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply
system.



   (G)   The village shall from time to time adopt rules and
regulations to establish a general policy on cross-connection control and a
copy of the rules and regulations attached as Exhibit A to the ordinance
codified herein are hereby adopted by the village.



(Ord. 98-O-18, passed 8-13-1998)



CHAPTER 26: ELECTRICITY



Section



   26.01   Authorizing Commonwealth Edison Company (Public Service
Company Division), its successors and assigns, to construct, operate and
maintain an electric light and power system in and through the Village of
Lakemoor, McHenry and Lake Counties, Illinois



§ 26.01 AUTHORIZING COMMONWEALTH EDISON COMPANY (PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY
DIVISION), ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN AN
ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER SYSTEM IN AND THROUGH THE VILLAGE OF LAKEMOOR,
MCHENRY AND LAKE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS.



   (A)   The right, permission and authority be and the same are hereby
granted to Commonwealth Edison Company (Public Service Division), an Illinois
corporation, its successors and assigns, (hereinafter referred to as the
“grantee”), to construct, operate and maintain in and through the village
(hereinafter referred to as the “municipality”), in the Counties of
McHenry and Lake, and State of Illinois, for a term of 50 years, a system for
the production, transmission and other purposes within and outside the
corporate limits of the municipality, and to construct, operate and maintain
all such poles, wires, conduits and other apparatus and equipment as may be
necessary or convenient for such system in, upon, along, over, across, above
and under each and all of the streets, alleys, avenues and other public
places in the municipality, subject to the conditions and regulations
hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   (1)   All poles and wires erected hereunder shall be placed
in alleys wherever practical so to do, and shall be so placed, whether on
streets, alleys, avenues or other public places, as not to interfere
unnecessarily with travel on such streets, alleys, avenues and other public
places, and shall be erected under the supervision of the Committee on
Streets and Alleys of the municipality, or such other duly authorized agent
as the Village Board may from time to time designate. All poles erected under
this chapter shall be not less than 25 feet in height, and shall be so
located as not to injure unnecessarily any drains, sewers, catch basins,
water pipes, pavements or other like public improvements, but should any
drain, sewer, catch basin, water pipe, pavement or other like public
improvements, be injured by such location, the grantee shall forthwith repair
the damage caused by such injury to the satisfaction of the Committee on
Streets and Alleys of the municipality, or such other duly authorized agent,
and in default thereof the municipality may repair damage and charge the cost
thereof, to and collect the same from the grantee.



      (2)   Said Committee on Streets and Alleys, or such other duly
authorized agent, of the municipality is hereby authorized and directed to
call upon the grantee to, and the grantee may of its own accord, cause the
trees growing upon or overhanging all of the streets, alleys, avenues and
other public places in the municipality upon which electric light or power
line are erected hereunder to be trimmed from time to time in such manner
that there shall be a proper clearance between the nearest wires on said
lines and any portion of the trees. Said trees shall be so trimmed that none
of the branches, twigs or leaves of said trees shall come in contact with or
in any way interfere with the wires or other equipment upon said lines. Said
trees shall be trimmed under the supervision of said grantee and Committee on
Streets and Alleys, or such other duly authorized agent, of the municipality,
by and at the expense of the grantee.



      (3)   All abandoned poles shall be removed as soon as the use
thereof is discontinued. All poles shall be set in straight lines so far as
possible and practical, and all overhead wires, conductors and cables shall,
so far as practical, be kept at least 18 feet above the level of the ground.



      (4)   The municipality shall have the right to the use of one
cross arm on the poles of the grantee for the police and fire alarm service
wires of the municipality; provided that, any such cross arms and wires of
the municipality shall be so placed and maintained by the municipality, under
the direction of the grantee, as not to interfere with wires of said grantee.



      (5)   The grantee shall be subject to all reasonable
regulations which may now or hereafter be prescribed by general ordinance of
the municipality with respect to the use of the public streets, alleys,
avenues and other public places of the municipality.



   (C)   When, at any time hereafter, any house or building shall be
moved by permission of the municipality, or its proper officers, along,
across or upon any of the streets, alleys, avenues or other public places of
the municipality, the grantee, its successors and assigns, shall upon
receiving written notice from the municipality to that effect, and within 24
hours after receiving such written notice, so cut, remove or adjust its said
wires and/or poles that the same will in no way interfere with the moving of
any such house or building; provided, however, that, such cutting, removing
and/or adjusting of said wires and poles shall be done at such time of day or
night as will least interfere with the public use by the grantee of such
wires and poles for the benefit of the inhabitants of the municipality and
the successful operation of the grantee’s electric light and power system.
All questions as to the time when any of said wires and poles shall be so
cut, removed or adjusted for the purpose aforesaid shall be decided by the
municipality, or its proper officers and such decision shall be final.



   (D)   The grantee shall indemnify, become responsible for, and
forever save harmless the municipality from any and all judgments, damages,
decrees, costs and expenses, including attorney’s fees, which the
municipality may legally suffer or incur or which may be legally obtained
against the municipality by the grantee pursuant to the terms of this chapter
or legally resulting from the exercise by the grantee of any of the
privileges herein granted, and as additional security therefor, the grantee
shall during the life of this chapter, keep on file with the Village Clerk a
good and sufficient bond in the penal sum of $5,000 conditioned to protect
and indemnify the municipality as in this section provided, and said bond
shall be subject to the approval of the Village Board, and the municipality
shall have the right from time to time, whenever in the opinion of the said
Village Board the same may be necessary, to require the grantee to renew or
provide additional or other necessary security on said bond.



   (E)   After the passage of this chapter and within 30 days after
passage, this chapter, if accepted, shall be accepted by the grantee by its
filing with the Village Clerk an unconditional written acceptance hereof, to
be duly executed according to law, and a failure of the grantee to so accept
this chapter within said period of time shall be deemed a rejection hereof by
the grantee, and the rights and privileges herein granted shall after the
expiration of said period of 30 days, if not so accepted, absolutely cease
and determine, unless said period of time shall be extended by the
municipality by ordinance duly passed for that purpose and before the
expiration of said period of 30 days.



   (F)   All provisions of this chapter which are obligatory upon, or
which inure to the benefit of, said Commonwealth Edison Company (Public
Service Company Division) shall also be obligatory upon and shall inure to
the benefit of any and all successors and assigns of said corporation; and
the word “grantee” wherever appearing in this chapter shall include and
be taken to mean not only said Commonwealth Edison Company (Public Service
Company Division), but also each and all of such successors and assigns.



   (G)   This chapter, if accepted by the grantee as hereinabove
provided, shall be in full force and effect on and after its passage and
shall from and after the effective date, supersede, cancel and be in lieu of
any and all other existing or prior grants of right, permission and authority
to said grantee or any predecessor companies or assignors of the grantee to
construct, operate and maintain any system for the production, transmission,
distribution and sale of electricity for lighting, heating, power and other
purposes within the municipality.



CHAPTER 27: RESERVED



CHAPTER 28:  CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE



Section



   28.01   Granting a non-exclusive franchise to Lakes Cable Vision,
Inc., its successors and assigns, to own, operate and maintain a community
television system in the Village of Lakemoor; setting forth conditions
accompanying the grant or franchise; and providing for regulations and use of
the said system by said village



§ 28.01  GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO LAKES CABLE VISION, INC.,
ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, TO OWN, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A COMMUNITY
TELEVISION SYSTEM IN THE VILLAGE OF LAKEMOOR; SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS
ACCOMPANYING THE GRANT OR FRANCHISE; AND PROVIDING FOR REGULATIONS AND USE OF
THE SAID SYSTEM BY SAID VILLAGE.



   (A)   Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the “Cablevision Television Ordinance”.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
“shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.



      COMPANY. The grantee of rights under this chapter awarding a
franchise and is known as Lakes Cable Vision, Inc.



      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



      SYSTEM. The entire installation located in the village.



      VILLAGE. The Village of Lakemoor, in the State of Illinois.



   (C)   Grant of authority.



      (1)   The village, after due consideration in a public
proceeding in which interested person were given the opportunity to
participate, being satisfied as to the company’s legal, technical,
character, financial and other qualifications and the adequacy and
feasibility of the company’s construction arrangements, hereby grants to
the company a non-exclusive franchise, right and privilege to construct,
erect, operate and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under
the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated
and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the village, poles,
wires, cables and underground conduits, manholes and other television
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
village of cable television system for the purpose of distributing television
and radio signals, and other electronic impulses in order to furnish
television and radio programs, and various communications and other
electronic services to the public.



      (2)   The right so granted includes the right to use and
occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and public places and all manner or
easements for the purpose herein set forth.



      (3)   To the extent possible, the company shall make
attachments to poles already in existence within the village. To the extent
the existing poles are insufficient for its purposes, or if company is unable
to negotiate arrangements satisfactory to it for use of existing poles, the
company shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles, except in
areas of underground utilities, as necessary for the construction and
maintenance of its distribution system with the approval of locating such
poles by the village, the company shall extend to village free of expense,
joint use of any and all poles owned by it for any proper municipal purpose
insofar as may be accomplished without interference with the use and
enjoyment of company’s own cables and fixtures, the village shall hold
company harmless from any and all actions, causes of actions or damages
caused by the placement of village’s wires or appurtenances upon the poles
of the company.



      (4)   The company shall not erect or cause to be erected any
poles in any area where underground electric or telephone service is
furnished; in such service area, the company’s distribution system shall
also be installed underground.



   (D)   Standards and requirements.



      (1)   Construction and maintenance of the transmission
distribution system, including house connection, shall be in accordance with
the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code prepared by the
National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National
Board of Underwriters and such applicable ordinances and regulations of the
village affecting electrical installations which may be, from time to time,
in effect. The system shall be adequately grounded according to best cable
industry practices. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk,
driveway or other surface, the company shall, at its own expense and in a
manner approved by village, remove, replace and restore all pavement,
sidewalk, driveway or surface so disturbed in as good condition as before
said work was commenced. In the event the village shall elect to alter or
change any street, alley, easement or public way requiring the relocation of
the facilities of the company, the company, upon reasonable notice by
village, shall remove and relocate the same at its own expense.



      (2)   The company shall, when necessary, on the request of any
person holding an appropriate permit issued by village or other governmental
authority temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of any
building or other structure. The actual expense of such temporary removal
shall be paid by the person requesting the same and company shall have the
right to require such payment in advance of such temporary removal. Whenever
it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose of making
repairs, installations or adjustments, the company shall do so at such time
as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers.



   (E)   Liability and indemnification.



      (1)   The company shall pay, and by its acceptance of the
franchise the company expressly agrees that it will pay, all damages and
penalties which the village; and its inhabitants may legally be required to
pay as a result of the company’s negligence in the installation, operation
or maintenance of the cable television system authorized herein. The village
shall notify the company’s representative in the village within 15 days
after the presentation of any claim or demand to the village, either by suit
or otherwise, made against the village on account of any negligence or
contract as aforesaid on the part of the company.



      (2)   The company shall carry and pay the cost of the
following liability insurance in support of the undertaking to hold the
village harmless from loss sustained by either on account of the negligence
of the company, in at least the amounts indicated below, for injury to or
death of persons and injury to or destruction of property:



         (a)   Two hundred thousand dollars for property damage
to any one person;



         (b)   Five hundred thousand dollars for property damage
in any one accident;



         (c)   Five hundred thousand dollars for personal injury
to any one person; and



         (d)   One million dollars for personal injury in any one
accident.



      (3)   The company shall comply with all the provisions of the
Worker’s Compensation Law of the state, being ILCS Ch. 820, Act 305.



   (F)   Local office.



      (1)   The company shall maintain a local business office or
agent in proximity of the village for receiving, via non-toll telephone call,
inquiries or complaints regarding quality or service, equipment malfunctions,
billing disputes and similar matters. Inquiries or complaints shall be
received during normal business hours, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday.



      (2)   All complaints and inquiries will be investigated,
responded to or acted upon as promptly as is practical, and unless
circumstances otherwise require, within three business days of their receipt.



   (G)   Subscriber contracts.



      (1)   No contract as to the length service for a regular
monthly subscriber shall be required by the company under ordinary
circumstances. The company agrees that under ordinary circumstances, it shall
be the right of the subscriber to start or terminate his or her service on
the cable according to his or her own wishes by making advance payments to
commence service, and by reasonable notice to the company to terminate the
service. It is hereby acknowledged, however, that equipment installed by the
company on behalf of the subscriber shall remain the property of the company,
and shall be subject to reasonable inspection and service by the company at
reasonable hours and removal upon termination of the service.



      (2)   In the event that any subscriber shall fail to meet his
or her obligations according to the rate schedule and to meet reasonable
company rules and regulations, the company shall have the right to withhold
or deny services to such subscribers. Otherwise, the service rendered by the
company shall be available to all inhabitants of the village along reasonable
extended pole routes of company.



   (H)   Condition of road occupancy.



      (1)   The company may enter into one or more contracts with
the light, gas and water utilities in the village, the telephone company or
the owner or lessee of any poles or posts located within the village to
whatever extent such contract or contracts may be expedient and of advantage
of the company in furnishing the service covered by this franchise to its
customers.



      (2)   The company’s system poles, wires and appurtenances
shall be located, erected and maintained so that none of it shall endanger or
interfere with the lives of persons, or interfere with any improvements the
village may deem proper to make, or hinder unnecessarily or obstruct the free
uses of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or public property.



   (I)   Transfer and right of acquisition. No sale or transfer shall
be effective until the vendee, assignee or lessee has filed with the
appropriate official of the village an instrument duly executed, reciting the
fact of sale, assignment or lease, accepting the terms of this franchise and
agreeing to perform all conditions thereof. The system shall not be sold or
transferred by the company to any outside interest, except upon written
notice to the village not less than 30 days before such transfer of sale.



   (J)   Payments To village. The company shall, during each year of
operation under this franchise, pay to the village, 3% of the annual gross
subscriber revenues received by the company for cable television services
rendered to customers within the village to the extent allowed by FCC
regulations. For purposes of this chapter, GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUES shall
mean only those revenues derived from regular subscriber services, namely,
carriage of broadcast signals and required non-broadcast services. At the
time of this annual payment, the company shall furnish the village with an
annual report showing the company’s annual gross subscriber revenues during
the preceding year and such other information as the village shall reasonably
request with respect to properties and expenses related to the company’s
services with the village for such period and 1% of the annual gross revenues
received by the company for all other services rendered to customers in the
village.



   (K)   Free connection and service. Upon request, the company shall
furnish free of charge, outside connections and services to all fire
protection districts and rescue squad buildings and all public and parochial
schools located within the village and to village buildings, including public
libraries, when other connections are being made within the particular area
of any such schools or public buildings; provided, however, any and all
inside wiring or work shall be done at the expense of the schools or village,
as the case may be; and, provided that, a service cable has previously been
installed in reasonable proximity to such schools or public buildings. In
addition, the company agrees to provide such access channels as are required
by the FCC rules and regulations.



   (L)   Franchise term. The franchise granted the company herein shall
terminate 20 years from date of grant, and may be renewed for a successive
20-year term on the same terms or conditions as contained herein.



   (M)   Commencement of construction. Upon grant of this franchise to
construct and maintain a community television system in the village, the
company may enter into contracts with light, gas and water utilities, the
village, the telephone company or others for the uses of poles and posts
necessary for proper installation of the system, obtain right-of-way permits
from appropriate state, county and federal officials necessary to, cross
highways or roads under their respective jurisdictions to supply main trunk
lines from the company’s receiving antennas suitable to the needs of the
system and its subscribers and obtain whatever other permits a city, village,
county, state or federal agency may require. In the construction,
installation and maintenance of its system, the company will use steel, cable
and electronic devices, all of specialized and advanced design and type; in
the operation of its system the company will employ personnel with training,
skill and experience in electronics and communications. Neither material, nor
personnel, of this sort will be available to the company for its system in
the event of war or other similar national emergency.



   (N)   Construction schedule. Within one year from the date the
Federal Communications Commission certifies that the company’s plans for
cable television operations in and for the village comply with its rules and
regulations governing cable television, pole agreements, and all other
agreements necessary to commence construction have been executed, the company
shall accomplish significant construction; the company shall thereafter
extend energized trunk cable television to at least 20% of the village per
year, so that construction of the entire cable television system in the
village is completed within five years of the date of FCC certification
unless additional time is granted by the Village Board upon request of the
company for good cause shown.



   (O)   Modification of FCC rules. Consistent with the requirements of
Rule 76.31(a)(6) of the Federal Communications Commission, any modification
of Rule 76.31 resulting from amendment hereto by the Federal Communications
Commission shall to the extent applicable be considered as a part of this
franchise as of the effective date of the amendment made by the FCC and shall
be incorporated or deleted, as the rules are modified in such franchise by
specific amendments thereto by the lawful action of the Village Board within
one year from the effective date of the Federal Communications Commission’s
amendment or at the time of renewal of this franchise, whichever occurs first.



   (P)   Publication costs. The company shall assume the cost of
publication of this franchise if such publication is required by law. A bill
for publication costs shall be presented to the company by the appropriate
village officials upon the company’s filing of its acceptance of this
franchise and the said publication costs shall be paid at that time by the
company.



   (Q)   Activities prohibited. The company shall not allow its cable
or other operations to interfere with television reception or persons not
served by the company, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or
hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities servicing the
residents of the village.



   (R)   Limited purpose. This franchise is granted by the President
and Board of Trustees of the village to the company purely for the purpose of
using easements, streets and highways of the village to erect and construct
the company’s system and is not intended to convey any copyright or patent
privileges whatsoever.



   (S)   Forfeiture. If the company shall violate any of the terms,
conditions or provisions of this chapter, or if company shall fail to comply
with any reasonable provision of any ordinance of the village and should
company continue to violate the same for a period of 30 days after company
shall have been notified in writing by village to desist from such violation
the company may, at the village’s option, be deemed to have forfeited and
annulled all the rights and privileges of this chapter.



   (T)   Period of acceptance. The company shall be deemed to have
forfeited and abandoned all right and privileges conferred by this chapter,
and this chapter shall be null and void and of no force and effect, unless
the company shall, within 30 days after adoption hereof, file with the
Village Clerk its written acceptance of the rights and privileges hereby
conferred and with the terms, conditions and restrictions hereby imposed.



   (U)   Passage and delivery. Be it further ordained that this chapter
shall take effect from the date it shall have been passed by the Village
Board, certified and delivered to the Office of the Village Clerk and become
effective as otherwise provided by law.



CHAPTER 29: RESERVED



CHAPTER 30: RESERVED



CHAPTER 31: RESERVED



CHAPTER 32: RESERVED



CHAPTER 33:  OCCUPATION AND OTHER TAXES



Section



   33.01   Municipal retailers’ occupation tax



   33.02   Municipal service occupation tax



   33.03   Municipal utility tax



   33.04   Hotel tax



§ 33.01  MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in
the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the village
at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of
such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.



   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village
shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to
the State Department of Revenue required by ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3.



   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding
month.



   (D)   The Village Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State
Department of Revenue a certified copy of this section.



§ 33.02  MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of the
cost price of al1 tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen
either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real
estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions
of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5.



   (B)   Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal
service occupation tax for the benefit of the village shall file, on or
before the 20th day of the month, the report to the State Department of
Revenue required by ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115, § 9 Service Occupation Tax Act,
approved 7-10-1961, as amended.



   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.



   (D)   The Village Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State
Department of Revenue a certified copy of this section.



§ 33.03  MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX.



   (A)   (1)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the
following occupations or privileges:



         (a)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas for a use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the
gross receipts therefrom; and



         (b)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within
the corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of
the gross receipts therefrom.



      (2)   The tax imposed under this Section shall not apply with
respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply,
furnishing or sale of electricity for either use or consumption of the
electricity subject to the tax imposed under division (A)(4) below.



      (3)   If a taxpayer under this section is unable to use a
credit authorized by this section solely because the tax imposed by this
section has been replaced by the tax imposed under division (A)(4) below,
then the taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due under division
(A)(4) below.



      (4)   Pursuant to § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a
tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired
in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of
the village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each
purchaser:



         (a)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.582 per kilowatt- hour;



         (b)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.428 per kilowatt- hour;



         (c)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.270 per kilowatt- hour;



         (d)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.265 per kilowatt-hour;



         (e)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.240 per kilowatt-hour;



         (f)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.200 per kilowatt-hour;



         (g)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.170 per kilowatt-hour;



         (h)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.140 per kilowatt-hour;



         (i)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.110 per kilowatt-hour; and



         (j)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of
20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month: $0.80 per kilowatt-hour:



            1.   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and
other revenue measures imposed by the village, the state or any other
political subdivision of the state;



            2.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or
collection of the tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the
United States or the Constitution of the state; and



            3.   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the
use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the
first bill issued on or after 9-1-1998; and with respect to the use or
consumption of electricity by non-residential customers beginning with the
first bill issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with
§ 16-104 of the Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-104), or
the first bill issued to such customers on or after 1-1-2001, whichever
issuance occurs sooner.



      (5)   Subject to the provisions of division (A)(6) below
regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under
this amendment shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a
place of business in the state who delivers electricity to such purchasers.
This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers
the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in
the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.



         (a)   Any tax required to be collected by this
amendment, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the
village by the person delivering the electricity; provided that, the person
delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to
deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as
uncollectible; and, provided further that, if such charges are thereafter
collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.



         (b)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the
tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering
the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to
add to such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to
reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filling returns, remitting the tax and supplying
data to the village upon request. For purposes of this amendment, any partial
payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall
be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity.



      (6)   (a)   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis
file a return in a form prescribed by the Village Clerk. The return and
accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month
following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be
collected under division (A)(4) above.



         (b)   If the person delivering electricity fails to
collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax
under division (A)(3) above, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form
prescribed by the Village Clerk and pay the tax directly to the Village Clerk
on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the
electricity is used or consumed.



      (7)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the village
shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the
person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the
Village Clerk and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the
electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or
partially non-taxable as a sale for resale.



         (a)   If a person who receives electricity in the
village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall
apply to the Village Clerk for a resale number. The applicant shall state
facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this amendment on
any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as
the Village Clerk may reasonably require.



         (b)   Upon approval of the application, the Village
Clerk shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the
number to the applicant.



         (c)   The corporate authorities may cancel the resale
number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this
amendment for electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number:



            1.   Was obtained through misrepresentation; or



            2.   Is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.



         (d)   1.   If a reseller has acquired electricity
partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay
the tax imposed by this amendment directly to the village pursuant to
division (A)(6) above on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or
consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to division (A)(4) above and
remit the tax pursuant to division (A)(6) above on the amount of electricity
delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.



            2.   Any person who delivers electricity to a
reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other
conditions of the section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the
tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller; provided
that, the person reports to the Village Clerk the total amount of electricity
delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the Village Clerk
may reasonably require.



      (8)   Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay
the tax imposed by this section shall keep accurate books and records of its
business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting
the transactions that give rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this section. The books and records shall be subject to and available
for inspection at all times during business hours of the day.



      (9)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this section in
order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, no person
shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this
section unless the persons files a claim for refund or credit within one year
after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the Village Clerk.



   (B)   No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the
business may not, under the construction and statutes of the United States,
be made the subject of taxation by the state or any political subdivision
thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this section for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act authorized by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1; nor shall any
tax authorized by this section be imposed upon any person engaged in a
business unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon
all persons engaged in business of the same class in the village, whether
privately or municipally owned or operated.



   (C)   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or
value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the tax payer
as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s business.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      GROSS RECEIPTS.



         (a)   The consideration received for distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas, for use or consumption and not for
resale, and the consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption and not for resale,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and
property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith,
and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the
service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or
service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.



         (b)   For utility bills issued on or after 5-1-1997, but
before 5-1-1998, and for receipts from those utility bills, GROSS RECEIPTS
does not include two-thirds of:



            1.   Amounts added to customers’ bills under §
9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, being ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222; or



            2.   Amount added to customers’ bills by
taxpayers who axe not subject to rate regulation by the State Commerce
Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities described
in § 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, being ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.



         (c)   For utility bills issued on or after 5-1-1998, and
for receipts from those utility bills, GROSS RECEIPTS does not include:



            1.   Amounts added to customers’ bills under §
9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, being ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222; or



            2.   Amounts added to customers’ bills by
taxpayers who are not subject to rate regulation by the State Commerce
Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities described
in § 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, being ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.



      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state, or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.



      PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE STATE. Any person
having or maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent or other representative operating within the state operating
under the authority of the person or subsidiaries or other affiliate,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located in the state permanently or temporarily or whether
such person, subsidiary or other affiliate who is licensed or qualified to do
business in the state.



      PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser
for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include
the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in § 8-11-2 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2), directly in the
generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.



      PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes within the corporate
limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.



      TAX COLLECTOR. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.



   (E)   This section shall take effect after publication and the tax
provided for herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined,
actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after 4-1-1998.



   (F)   (1)   On or before 8-31-1998, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the Village Treasurer for the months of April, May and June, 1998,
stating:



         (a)   His or her name;



         (b)   His or her principal place of business;



         (c)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon
the basis of which the tax is imposed;



         (d)   Amount of tax; and



         (e)   Such other reasonable and related information as
the corporate authorities may require.



      (2)   On or before the last day of every third month
thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the Village Treasurer
for a corresponding three-month period.



      (3)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for
shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village Treasurer, the
amount of tax herein imposed; provided that, in connection with any return
the taxpayer may, if he or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon
his or her total billings of business subject to the tax during the period
for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed)
with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any difference between
such billings and the taxable gross receipts.



   (G)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which
was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer
who made the erroneous payment; provided that, no amount erroneously paid
more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so
credited.



   (H)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the
provisions of this section shall be commenced more than three years after the
due date of such amount.



   (I)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision or this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not less than $100, nor more than $500, and in addition shall be liable
in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



(Ord. 98-O-01, passed 1-22-1998; Ord. 98-O-16, passed 6-11-1998)



§ 33.04  HOTEL TAX.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to generate revenue to
be placed in a fund to generate tourism through the promotion of lodging,
restaurants, attractions, conventions, expositions, and theatrical, sport,
cultural, and other similar activities.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of and as used in this section
unless the context otherwise requires:



      HOTEL. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping, or housekeeping
accommodations. The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes, or courts,
lodging houses, rooming houses, apartment houses, and bed-and-breakfast
houses.



      OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to
the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and
accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms.



      PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any man or woman who occupies or has the
right to occupy any room or rooms in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days
for his or her own personal use unrelated to the conducting of any business
or occupation.



      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or a
receiver, executor, trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed
by order of any court.



      RENT or RENTAL. The consideration received for occupancy, valued
in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts,
cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature.



      RENTER. Any person who pays for the privilege of using or
occupying a hotel room for the period for which payment is made.



      ROOM or ROOMS. Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping
accommodations.



      TREASURER. The Village Treasurer of the Village of Lakemoor,
Illinois.



      VILLAGE CLERK. The Village Clerk of the Village of Lakemoor,
Illinois.



   (C)   Tax imposed.



      (1)   There is hereby levied and imposed a tax upon all
persons, firms or corporations engaged in the business of renting, leasing or
letting rooms in a hotel which is located within the corporate limits of the
Village of Lakemoor, Illinois, at a rate of 5% of the gross rental receipts
from such renting, leasing or letting for any purpose for each 24 hour period
or portion thereof, excluding, however, from the gross rental receipts the
proceeds of such rents, leasing or letting to permanent residents. The tax
imposed herein shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and charges
applicable to such hotels, but such other taxes and charges shall not be
construed to be a part of the gross rental receipts upon which this tax is
levied.



      (2)   The ultimate incidents of and liability for payment of
the tax levied herein is upon the person engaged in the business of leasing,
renting or letting said rooms. Such hotel owners and operators may reimburse
themselves for their tax liability for this tax by separately stating such
tax as an additional charge to the lessee or renter, which charge may be
stated in combination as a single amount, with the State of Illinois tax
imposed under "The Hotel Operator's Occupation Tax Act", (as provided for in
ILCS Ch. 35, Act 145, §§ 1 et seq.) No tax is imposed based upon receipts
from any permanent residents of any hotel.



      (3)   No person engaged in the business of renting, leasing,
or letting rooms in a hotel shall reimburse himself or charge for the
imposition of this tax at a rate higher than the tax imposed by this section.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, on or
before the last day of each calendar month, every person engaged in the
business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel within the Village
of Lakemoor during the preceding calendar month shall file a return with the
Treasurer, on forms to be supplied by the Village Clerk, stating:



         (a)   The name of the operator;



         (b)   His residence address and the address of the
principal place of business from which he engages in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel in the village;



         (c)   Total amount of rental receipts received by him
during the preceding calendar month from renting, leasing, or letting rooms
during such preceding calendar month;



         (d)   Total amount of rental received by him during the
preceding calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms to permanent
residents during such preceding calendar months;



         (e)   Total amount of other exclusions from gross rental
receipts as allowed by this ordinance;



         (f)   Gross rental receipts which were received by him
during the preceding calendar month and upon the basis of which the tax is
imposed;



         (g)   The amount of the tax due;



         (h)   The amount of penalty due, if any;



         (i)   Such other reasonable information as may from time
to time be required by the Treasurer.



      (5)   The person subject to tax shall also transmit to the
Treasurer with the return required by this division the amount of the tax and
penalties, if any, due as shown by said return required by this paragraph the
amount of the tax and penalties, if any, due as shown by said return. Such
person shall also file with the Treasurer, not later than five business days
after said documents are transmitted to the State of Illinois, copies of all
hotel operator's occupation tax returns as are required by the provisions of
"The Hotel Operators' Occupation Tax Act", ILCS Ch. 35, Act 145, §§ 1 et
seq.



         (a)   Any person engaged in the business of renting,
leasing, or letting of hotel rooms shall maintain complete and accurate books
and records, including a daily sheet showing the gross receipts for the hotel
rentals for the day reported.



         (b)   For the purposes of enforcing and administering
this section, the Treasurer or such agents as are designated by the Treasurer
shall, after providing reasonable notice, have access during normal business
hours to the books and records of persons and businesses subject to this
section. The Treasurer or such agents as are designated by the Treasurer
shall at least annually inspect said books and records and shall file a
written report of his or her findings with the Village Board no later than
April 1 of each year.



         (c)   Any person who violates any provision of this
section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $750 for the offense. A separate and distinct offense
shall be regarded as having been committed each day upon which said person
shall continue any such violation.



(Ord. 17-O-15, passed 5-11-2017)



CHAPTER 34:  ANNUAL APPROPRIATION



Section



   34.01   Annual appropriation for corporate purposes of the Village
of Lakemoor, McHenry County, Illinois



§ 34.01  ANNUAL APPROPRIATION FOR CORPORATE PURPOSES OF THE VILLAGE OF
LAKEMOOR, McHENRY COUNTY, ILLINOIS.



   (A)   An ordinance making appropriation for the corporate purposes
of the village for the fiscal year commencing May 1 and ending April 30 of
the following year shall be appropriated each year.



   (B)   Those sums, or so much thereof as may be authorized by law,
and the same be hereby appropriated for the corporate purposes of the
village, as hereinafter specified.



   (C)   The said several sums of money are hereby appropriated from
monies received and to be received by the village from all sources.



CHAPTER 35:  TAX LEVY



Section



   35.01   Annual tax levy



§ 35.01  ANNUAL TAX LEVY.



   (A)   The Village Board will pass each year the annual appropriation
bill for the fiscal year beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of the following
year.



   (B)   There be and is hereby levied upon all the taxable property
within the corporate limits of the village, subject to taxation for the
fiscal year commencing May 1 and ending April 30 the respective sums.



CHAPTER 36:  RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELATED TO LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAXES



Section



   36.01   Title



   36.02   Scope



   36.03   Definitions



   36.04   Notices



   36.05   Late payment



   36.06   Payment



   36.07   Certain credits and refunds



   36.08   Audit procedure



   36.09   Appeal



   36.10   Hearing



   36.11   Interest and penalties



   36.12   Abatement



   36.13   Installment contracts



   36.14   Statute of limitations



   36.15   Voluntary disclosure



   36.16   Publication of tax ordinances



   36.17   Local Tax Administrator



   36.18   Application



§ 36.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Locally
Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance.”



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.02  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village’s
procedures in connection with all of the village’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.  The Village President and Board of Trustees.



   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR.  The Village Treasurer, or any officer of the
village acting therefore, is charged with the administration and collection
of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or
agents to the extent they are authorized by the Local Tax Administrator to
act in the Local Tax Administrator’s stead. The Local Tax Administrator
shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full
effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by the Local Tax
Administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the Act.



   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX.  Each tax imposed by the
village that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the village other
than infrastructure maintenance fees.



   NOTICE.  Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice
or communication in connection with each of the village’s locally imposed
and administered taxes.



   TAX ORDINANCE.  Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.



   TAXPAYER.  Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the village.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.04  NOTICES.



   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the
Local Tax Administrator. The notice shall be sent by the Local Tax
Administrator as follows:



   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to
the persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or



   (B)   Personal service or delivery.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.05  LATE PAYMENT.



   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it
is physically received by the village on or before the due date, or received
in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with
adequate postage prepaid.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.06  PAYMENT.



   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in
the following order: first to the tax due for the applicable period; second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and third to the penalty for
the applicable period.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.07  CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.



   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily
paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a
locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.



   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund
shall be less than four years after the end of the calendar year in which
payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of
locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person
who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.



   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be
as follows:



      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the Local Tax Administrator
in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:



         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered
tax subject to the claim;



         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and
administered tax subject to the claim;



         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim
and the cancelled check or receipt for the payment;



         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an
amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and



         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in
connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and
penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit
given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the village.



      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the Local Tax
Administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the Local Tax
Administrator shall either:



         (a)   Grant the claim; or



         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with
a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.



      (3)   In the event the Local Tax Administrator grants, in
whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for
refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per annum, based on a
year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the
overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.08  AUDIT PROCEDURE.



   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax
shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.



   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The tax;



      (2)   The time period of the audit; and



      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.



   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and
if the date and time selected by the Local Tax Administrator is not agreeable
to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer
within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.



   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the
Local Tax Administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event
taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing,
that is convenient to the taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator.



   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer’s business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have
given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be
kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the village.



   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the
taxpayer fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the Local Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best
estimate of the taxpayer’s tax liability.



   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of
the village’s determination of the amount of overpayment.



   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect
local governmental entity, the Local Tax Administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.09  APPEAL.



   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the Local Tax Administrator’s issuance of a protestable
notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the assessment;



      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;



      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and



      (4)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal,
refund and collection process.



   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the Local Tax
Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
Local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the Local Tax
Administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.



   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed,
the Local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and
shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for
a date within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.



   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed
within the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.



   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the
full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the Local Tax Administrator may reopen or extend the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall
the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.10  HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely
written protest and petition for hearing under § 36.09, the Local Tax
Administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.



   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer.
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 14 days.



   (C)   At the hearing the Local Tax Administrator shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator
shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of
the written decision.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.11  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.



   (A)   Interest. The village hereby provides for the amount of
interest to be assessed on a late payment underpayment, or nonpayment of the
tax, to be 1% per month, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days
elapsed.



   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not
filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a
late filing penalty, of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due
shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of
tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty
shall be assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable
reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing
or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by
the controlling ordinance.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.12  ABATEMENT.



   The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate
any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if
the Local Tax Administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay
or failure to make a filing.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.13  INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.



   The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer
for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The Local Tax
Administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
Local Tax Administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.14  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   The village, through the Local Tax Administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.



   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than
four years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return
for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the
return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.



   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year
period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by
the village, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.



   (C)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.15  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.



   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from
the Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application
with the Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the
amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the date
of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty
for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the
taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on
the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the
part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid
and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90
days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is longer.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.16  PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.



   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk’s office.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.17  LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid,
the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to
be improper, the Local Tax Administrator shall:



   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the village’s expense;



   (B)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and



   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



§ 36.18  APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the village’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter
shall be controlling.



(Ord. 13-O-36, passed 12-5-2013)



CHAPTER 37:  INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRIES



Section



   37.01   Definitions



   37.02   Establishment of registry



   37.03   Maintenance of registry



   37.04   Registration by residents



   37.05   Registration by organizations



   37.06   Determination of eligibility



   37.07   Renewal and termination



   37.08   Amendment to registration



   37.09   Registries available for public inspection



   37.10   Notices to be sent to interested parties



   37.11   Non-interference



   37.12   Amendment of registration rules



   Appendix A:   Registration form



   Appendix B:   Notice



§ 37.01  DEFINITIONS. 



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act, being ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, §§ 11-74.4-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   INTERESTED PARTY(IES).  Any individual or organization or entity
registered in a specific registry who has registered in such registry and
whose registration has not been terminated in accordance with these
registration rules.



   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA.  A redevelopment project area that is
intended to qualify as a REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA under the Act and is
subject to the interested parties registry requirements of the Act.



   REGISTRATION FORM.  The form appended to these registration rules or
such revised form as may be approved by the village consistent with the
requirements of the Act.



   REGISTRY or REGISTRIES.  Each interested parties registry, and all
such registries, collectively, established by the village pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-4.2 for any and all redevelopment project areas in
the village.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY.



   The village shall establish a separate interested parties registry for
each redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the
adoption of these rules or hereafter established. The village shall establish
a new registry whenever it has identified an area for study and possible
designation as a redevelopment project area. In any event, the process of
establishing the new registry must be completed prior to the deadline for
sending any of the notices required by § 37.10 or any other notices required
by the Act with respect to the proposed redevelopment project area.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.03  MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY.



   The registries shall be maintained by the Clerk or his or her designee.
In the event the village determines that an individual other than the Clerk
should maintain the registries, the village may transfer the responsibility
for maintaining the registries to such other department provided that the
village gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less than 30
days prior to such transfer and published notice of such transfer in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.04  REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS.



   An individual seeking to register as an interested person with respect
to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form
to the Clerk.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.05  REGISTRATION BY ORGANIZATIONS.



   An organization seeking to register as an interested person with
respect to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a
registration form to the Clerk.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.06  DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY.



   All individuals and organizations whose registration form and
supporting documentation complies with these registration rules shall be
registered in the applicable registry within ten business days after the
Clerk’s receipt of all such documents. The Clerk shall provide written
notice to the registrant confirming such registration. Upon registration
interested parties shall be entitled to receive all notices and documents
required to be delivered under these rules or as otherwise required under the
Act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project area. If the Clerk
determines that a registrant’s registration form and/or supporting
documentation is incomplete or does not comply with these registration rules,
the Clerk shall give written notice to the registrant specifying the
defect(s) and the registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and
resubmit a new registration form and supporting documentation.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.07  RENEWAL AND TERMINATION.



   An interested person’s registration shall remain effective for a
period of three years. At any time after such three-year period, the Clerk
may provide written notice by regular mail to the interested person stating
that such registration shall terminate unless the interested person renews
such registration with 30 days after the Clerk’s mailing of written notice.
To renew such registration, the interested person shall, within such 30-day
period, complete and submit the same registration form then required of
initial registrants operations in the village. The registration of all
individuals and organizations whose registration form is submitted in a
timely manner and complies with these regulation rules shall be renewed for
an additional, consecutive three-year period. If the Clerk determines that a
registrant’s renewal registration form is incomplete or does not comply
with these registration rules, the Clerk shall give written notice to the
registrant at the address specified in the renewal registration form
submitted by such registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall
be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form
within 30 days after receipt of the Clerk’s notice. If all defects are not
corrected within 30 days after the interested person’s receipt of the
Clerk’s notice, the interested person’s registration shall be terminated.
Any interested person whose registration is terminated shall be entitled to
register again as if a first-time registrant.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.08  AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION.



   An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice
to the Clerk by certified mail of any of the following: change in address for
notice purposes; in the case of organizations, a change in the name of the
contact person; and a termination of registration. Upon receipt of such
notice, the Clerk shall revise the applicable registry accordingly.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.09  REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.



   Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal
business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone
number of each interested person and for organizations, the name and phone
number of a designated contact person.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.10  NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES.



   Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other
notices required under the Act with respect to the applicable redevelopment
project area:



   (A)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 21-74.4-5(a), notice of the
availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report,
including how to obtain this information; such notice shall be sent by mail
within a reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance or
resolution fixing the public hearing for the proposed redevelopment plan.



   (B)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(a), notice of
changes to proposed redevelopment plans that do not add additional parcels of
property to the proposed redevelopment project area, substantially affect the
general land uses proposed in the redevelopment plan, substantially change
the nature of or extend the life of the redevelopment project, or increase
the number of inhabited residential units to be displaced from the
redevelopment project area, as measured from the time of creation of the
redevelopment project area, to a total of more than ten; such notice shall be
sent by mail not later than ten days following the village’s adoption by
ordinance of such changes.



   (C)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(c), notice of
amendments to previously approved redevelopment plans that do not add
additional parcels of property to the redevelopment project area,
substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment plan,
substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project, increase the
total estimated redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan
by more than 5% after adjustment for inflation from the date the plan was
adopted, add additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of
redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan, or increase
the number of inhabited residential units to be displaced from the
redevelopment project area, as measured from the time of creation of the
redevelopment project, to a total of more than ten; such notice will be sent
by mail not later than ten days following the village’s adoption by
ordinance of such amendment.



   (D)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(d)(9), for
redevelopment plans or projects that would result in the displacement of
residents from ten or more inhabited residential units or that contain 75 or
more inhabited residential units, notice of the availability of the annual
report described by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(d), including how to
obtain the annual report; such notice shall be sent by mail within a
reasonable period of time after completion of the certified audit report.



   (E)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-6(e), notice of the
public meeting as required under the Act for any proposed redevelopment
project area that would result in the displacement of residents from ten or
more inhabited residential units or which would contain 75 or more inhabited
residential units; such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than
15 days before the date of such preliminary public meeting.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.11  NON-INTERFERENCE.



   These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise
interfere with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to
register for receipt of information to which they are entitled under the Act.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



§ 37.12  AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION RULES.



   These registration rules may be amended by the village subject to and
consistent with the requirements of the Act.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



APPENDIX A:  REGISTRATION FORM



   INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRATION FORM



Registration for Individuals: If you would like to register on the Interested
Parties Registry for one or more Redevelopment Project Areas (TIFs) in the
Village of Lakemoor, please complete Part A of this form, sign and date the
form and submit to the Village Clerk at the address indicated below.



Registration for Organizations: If you would like to register on the
Interested Parties Registry for one or more Redevelopment Project Areas
(TIFs) in the Village of Lakemoor, please complete Part B of this form, sign
and date the form and submit to the Village Clerk at the address indicated
below.



PART A: REGISTRATION FOR INDIVIDUALS (Please Print)



Name    



Street Address    



Village
                                 State
                  Zip Code    



Telephone (      )                        Fax
(      )                         



E-Mail Address    



Please check the TIF(s) you are interested in below:



( )   Rt. 120 (North) TIF



( )   Rt. 120 (South) TIF



( )   All future or current TIFs



PART B:  REGISTRATION FOR ORGANIZATIONS (Please Print)



Organization Name    



Contact Name    



Street Address    



Village                               State
                  Zip Code    



Telephone (      )
                           Fax (      )   



E-Mail Address    



Please check the TIF(s) you are interested in below:



( )   Rt. 120 (North) TIF



( )   Rt. 120 (South) TIF



( )   All future or current TIFs



Please return this form to:      TIF Interested Parties Registry



                     Village Clerk’s Office



                     Village of Lakemoor



                     28874 West Illinois Route 120,
Suite C & D



                     Lakemoor, Illinois 60051



Signature/Title
                                       �
�  Date    



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



APPENDIX B:  NOTICE



   TAX INCREMENT FINANCING REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT



   AREAS REGISTRATION FOR INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY



   Pursuant to Section 11-74.4-2 of the Tax Increment Allocation
Redevelopment Act, 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1, et seq. (the “Act”), the Village
of Lakemoor (the “Village”) is required to establish an interested
parties registry (“Registry” or “Registries”) for each
“Redevelopment Project Area” created pursuant to the Act, whether
existing as of the date of this Notice or hereafter established. On November
6, 2014, the Village adopted an ordinance authorizing the establishment of
Registries by the Village Clerk (the “Clerk”) and adopting Registration
Rules for such Registries. The purpose of this Notice is to inform Interested
Parties of the Registries and Registration Rules for the Registries and to
invite Interested Parties (as defined below) to register in the Registry for
any Redevelopment Project Area in the Village.



   Any individual or organization requiring information pertaining to
activities within one or more Redevelopment Project Areas in the Village (an
“Interested Party”) is entitled to register in the Registry for any
Redevelopment Project Area. Organizations include, but are not limited to,
businesses, business organizations, civic groups, not-for-profit corporations
and community organizations.



   An organization seeking to register as an Interested Party with respect
to a Redevelopment Project Area must also complete and submit a Registration
Form to the Clerk.



   Interested Parties Registries are being established for the following
Redevelopment Project Areas, which the Village is considering designating:



   Proposed Rt. 120 TIF (North) District



   Proposed Rt. 120 TIF (South) District



   Any future or current TIF Districts



   All individuals and organizations whose Registration Forms comply with
the Registration Rules, and are submitted, either in person or by mail, to
the office of the Village Clerk, 28874 West Illinois Route 120, Suite C & D,
Lakemoor, Illinois 60051, will be registered in the applicable Registry
within 10 business days after the Clerk’s receipt of all such documents.
The Clerk will provide written notice to the registrant confirming such
registration. Upon registration, Interested Parties will be entitled to
receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under the Act with
respect to the applicable Redevelopment Project Area. If the Clerk determines
that a registrant’s Registration Form is incomplete or does not comply with
the Registration Rules adopted by the Village, the Clerk will give written
notice to the registrant specifying the defects. The registrant will be
entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new Registration Form and
supporting documentation. An Interested Party’s registration will remain
effective for a period of three years. Rules for the renewal or amendment of
an Interested Party’s registration are included with the Registration Form
that may be obtained as described herein.



   Each Registry will be available for public inspection at the office of
the Clerk during normal business hours. The Registry will include the name,
address and telephone number of each Interested Person and/or organizations,
the name and phone number of a designated contact person.



   Interested Parties will be sent the following notices and any other
notices required under the Act with respect to the applicable Redevelopment
Project Area:



   (i)   Pursuant to sub-section 11-74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of the
availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report,
including how to obtain this information; such notice shall be sent by mail
within a reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing
the public hearing for the proposed redevelopment plan;



   (ii)   Pursuant to sub-section 11-74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of
changes to proposed redevelopment plans that do not (1) add additional
parcels of property to the proposed Redevelopment Project Area, (2)
substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the redevelopment
plan, (3) substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the
redevelopment project, or (4) increase the number of inhabited residential
units to be displaced from the Redevelopment Project Area, as measured from
the time of creation of the Redevelopment Project Area, to a total of more
than 10; such notice shall be sent by mail not later than 10 days following
the Village’s adoption by ordinance or resolution of such changes.



   (iii)   Pursuant to sub-section 11-74.4-5(c) of the Act, notice of
amendments to previously approved redevelopment plans that do not (1) add
additional parcels of property to the redevelopment project area, (2)
substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment plan, (3)
substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project, (4) increase
the total estimated redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment
plan by more than 5 percent after adjustment for inflation from the date the
plan was adopted, (5) add additional redevelopment project costs to the
itemized list of redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment
plan, or (6) increase the number of inhabited residential units to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area, as measured from the time of
creation of the redevelopment project, to a total of more than 10; such
notice will be sent by mail not later than 10 days following the Village’s
adoption by ordinance of such amendment;



   (iv)   Pursuant to sub-section 11-74.4-5(d)(9) of the Act, for
redevelopment plans or projects that would result in the displacement of
residents from 10 or more inhabited residential units or that contain 75 or
more inhabited residential units, notice of the availability of the annual
report described by sub-section 74.4-5(d) of the Act, including how to obtain
the annual report; such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable
period of time after completion of the certified audit report.



   (v)   Pursuant to sub-section 11-74.4-6(e) of the Act, notice of the
public meeting required under the Act for any proposed Redevelopment Project
Area that would result in the displacement of residents from 10 or more
inhabited residential units or which would contain 75 or more inhabited
residential units; such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than
15 days before the date of such preliminary public meeting.



Registration Forms may be picked up at the office of the Village Clerk,
Village of Lakemoor, 28874 West Illinois Route 120, Suite C & D, Lakemoor,
Illinois 6005 land may be obtained by Interested Parties or by their
representatives. Registration Forms will not be mailed or faxed. If you
require additional information, please call the office of the Village Clerk
at 815/385-1117.



(Ord. 14-O-33, passed 11-6-2014)



CHAPTER 38: RESERVED



CHAPTER 39: RESERVED



CHAPTER 40: RESERVED



CHAPTER 41: RESERVED



CHAPTER 41-1/2:  TRAFFIC



Section



   41-1/2.01   Illinois Vehicle Code adoption



   41-1/2.02   Placement of traffic-control devices



   41-1/2.03   Lights on parked vehicles



   41-1/2.04   Parking during snowfall



   41-1/2.05   Through streets and stop intersections



   41-1/2.06   Overnight street parking



   41-1/2.07   Relating to parking in the village



   41-1/2.08   Speed restrictions



   41-1/2.09   Use of motor vehicles for unlawful purposes; impoundment



   41-1/2.10   Construction equipment to display company name



   41-1/2.11   Construction equipment to display company name
commercial trucks used by construction contractors or subcontractors to
display company name



   41-1/2.12   Requirement of certificate of safety



   41-1/2.13   Commercial towing of unauthorized vehicles from private
property



   41-1/2.14   Automated traffic law enforcement program



§ 41-1/2.01  ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTION.



   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 20-204 (2001), the village hereby
adopts and incorporates by reference all of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(“IVC”) and subsequent amendments, along with any referenced penalty
provisions, as the Vehicle Code of the village. The section numbers used in
the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be identical to those section numbers in the
Lakemoor Vehicle Code. Therefore, an ordinance violation shall be cited as
“Chapter 41-1/2”, followed by the corresponding IVC section number.



(Ord. 01-O-19, passed 11-15-2001)



§ 41-1/2.02  PLACEMENT OF TRAFFIC- CONTROL DEVICES.



   When official traffic-control devices are required to be erected by
this chapter or by law, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public
Works, or other person designated by the Board of Trustees, to cause suitable
devices to be erected in such, areas, if not erected by the State Department
of Public Works and Buildings.



(Ord. 01-O-19, passed 11-15-2001)



§ 41-1/2.03  LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped on a street during the times
between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise or at any
other lime when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible
any vehicle on the street from a distance of 200 feet, there shall be
displayed upon such vehicle one or more lamps projecting a white or amber
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of such vehicle and projecting a red light visible under like
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the rear; except that, such parking
light or lights need not be displayed upon any vehicle stopped or parked in
accordance with other provisions of this chapter upon any street designated
by the Village Marshal where there is sufficient light to reveal any person
within a distance of 200 feet upon such street.



(Ord. 01-O-19, passed 11-15-2001)



§ 41-1/2.04  PARKING DURING SNOWFALL.



   No person shall allow any vehicle to be parked or remain standing on
any street or any right-of-way of any street in the village, without a permit
issued by the Superintendent of Public Works, between November 1 in any
calendar year and April 1 in the following calendar year during any time of
the day or night when village snow removal operations are in process or so
long as there shall be snow remaining upon the aforesaid streets or
rights-of-way of any street of said streets in excess of one inch; any person
having parked or left standing a vehicle on any street or within the
right-of-way of any street of the village during the aforesaid calendar dates
shall be required to remove said vehicle immediately upon commencement of any
village snow removal operations. Failure to so remove any such vehicle shall
constitute a violation of this section.



(Ord. 01-O-19, passed 11-15-2001)



§ 41-1/2.05  THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The streets described herein are hereby designated through
streets and stop intersections. The driver of a vehicle shall stop as
provided by law in obedience to a stop sign erected at the entrance to a
through street or stop intersection.



   (B)   In accordance with this section, drivers of vehicles shall
stop before entering any of the following designated through streets and stop
intersections unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic signal:



      (1)   Through streets.



 

Route 120


South Drive



 



      (2)   Stop, intersecting streets.



 

Stop Streets
 
Intersecting Streets




Allegheny Way
 
Four Seasons Boulevard


Allegheny Way
 
Sonoma Pass


Anthony Lane
 
Bay Oaks Drive


Anthony Lane
 
Julia Way


Arbor Circle
 
Bakers Drive (East)


Arbor Circle
 
Bakers Drive (West)


Autumn Boulevard
 
Sullivan Lake Boulevard


Bakers Drive
 
Darrell Road


Bakers Drive
 
Sawmill Lane


Bakers Drive
 
Deer Run Road (traveling East)


Bakers Drive
 
Deer Run Road (traveling West)


Barbara Lane
 
Lily Lake Road


Barbara Lane
 
Fritzsche Road


Bay Meadow Lane
 
Bay Oaks Drive


Bay Oaks Drive
 
Anthony Lane


Bay Oaks Drive
 
Bay Road


Bayberry Court
 
Darrell Road


Bending Creek Road
 
Darrell Road


Bending Creek Road
 
Weathervane Lane


Blacksmith Street
 
Wagon Trail Road


Blossom
 
Four Seasons Boulevard


Borre Drive
 
Pineview Boulevard


Borre Drive
 
Schlesser Drive


Bridle Court
 
Darrell Road


Cape Cod Lane
 
Rockwell Drive


Clearwater Drive
 
Pineview Boulevard


Clearwater Drive
 
Schlesser Drive


Concrete Drive
 
Fox Lake Road


Cuhlman Road
 
Lincoln Road


Darrell Road
 
Bakers Drive


Darrell Road
 
Wagon Trail Road


Deer Run Road
 
Bakers Drive


Deer Run Road
 
Willow Road


Dominion Lane
 
Bay Oaks Drive


East End (Southbound)
 
Sunnyside Road


East End (Northbound)
 
Sunnyside Road


Elaine Terrace
 
Riverside Drive


Four Seasons Boulevard
 
Allegheny Way


Four Seasons Boulevard
 
Lincoln Road


Four Seasons Boulevard
 
Sullivan Lake Road


Fox Lake Road
 
State Hwy. 12


Fox Lake Road
 
Volo Village Road


Fritzsche Road
 
Sheridan Road


Fritzsche Road
 
South Drive


Game Trail Road
 
Sullivan Lake Boulevard


Gilmer Road
 
McNally Lane


Grand Meadow
 
Cuhlman Road


Grand Meadow
 
Wellington Road


Great Plaines Avenue
 
North Sullivan Lake Boulevard


Great Plaines Avenue
 
Sullivan Lake Boulevard


Heartland Drive
 
Allegheny Way


Herbert Road
 
South Drive


Heritage Community Park Exit
 
Darrell Road


Highland Drive
 
Morningside Drive


Highland Drive
 
South Drive


Hollywood Terrace
 
Riverside Drive


Highland Drive
 
Sunset Drive


Hollywood Terrace
 
Ill. State Rt. 120


Honeysuckle Court
 
Darrell Road


Innetowne Road
 
Darrell Road


Innetowne Road
 
Weathervane Lane


Jennifer Lane
 
Pineview Boulevard


Jennifer Lane
 
Schlesser Drive


John Court
 
Bay Oaks Drive


Julia Way
 
Chapel Hill Road


Juniper Drive
 
Sullivan Lake Boulevard


Lakeview Drive
 
Ill. State Rt. 120


Lakeview Drive
 
North Lake Road


Lily Lake Parkway
 
Sheridan Road


Lily Lane
 
Ill. State Rt. 120


Lily Lane
 
Riverside Drive


Lily Lane
 
North Lake Road


Lincoln Road (west bound only)
 
Cuhlman Road


Lincoln Street
 
Sheridan Road


Long Beach Road
 
South Drive


Lotus Drive
 
Highland Drive


Lotus Drive
 
Venice Road


Mackinack Lane
 
Sonoma Pass


Maplewood Drive (southbound)
 
North Lake Road


Maplewood Drive (northbound)
 
North Lake Road


Maplewood Drive
 
Riverside Drive


Margaret Court
 
Lincoln Road


Margaret Court
 
Julia Way


Mason Corte Drive
 
Margaret Court


McNally Lane
 
Ill. State Route 120


Melissa Court
 
Bay Road


Millstone Circle
 
Bakers Road


Morningside Drive
 
Highland Drive


Morningside Drive
 
Venice Road


Morris Court
 
Darrell Road


North Lake Road
 
Pine Grove Road


North Lake Road
 
Maplewood Drive


North Lake Road
 
Tia Juana Drive


O’Shea Court
 
Bay Oaks Drive


Park Road
 
Sheridan Road


Park Road
 
South Drive


Pilgrims Pass
 
Darrell Road


Pilgrims Court
 
Pilgrims Pass


Pine Grove Road
 
Lakeview Drive


Pineview Boulevard
 
Route 120


Pondview Drive
 
Darrell Road


Pondview Drive
 
Pineview Boulevard


Portside
 
Sullivan Lake Road


Prairie View Lane
 
Blacksmith Street


Prairie View Lane
 
Wagon Trail Road


Riverside Drive
 
Lakeview Drive


Riverside Drive
 
Hollywood Terrace


Riverside Drive
 
Willow Road


Rosedale Drive
 
Riverside Drive


Reiche Lane
 
Anthony Drive


Riverside Drive
 
Tia Juana Drive


Riverside Drive
 
Lily Lane


Rockwell Drive
 
North Sullivan Lake Boulevard


Rockwell Drive
 
Sullivan Lake Boulevard


Rushmore Avenue
 
Sonoma Pass


Santa Barbara Road
 
Riverside Drive


Sawmill Lane
 
Darrell Road


Sawyer Court
 
Wagon Trail Road


Schlesser Drive
 
Pineview Boulevard


Scotland Road
 
Herbert Road


Scotland Road
 
South Drive


Sedona Road
 
Cape Cod Lane


Sheridan Road
 
South Drive


West Sheridan Road
 
Herbert Road


West Sheridan Road
 
Fritzsche Road


West Sheridan Road
 
Lily Lake Road


West Sheridan Road
 
Lincoln Street


South Sheridan Road
 
Ill. State Rt. 120


Short Street
 
Ill. State Rt, 120


Short Street
 
Valley View Drive


South Drive
 
Darrell Road


Sullivan Lake Boulevard
 
Great Plaines Avenue (south) (traveling south)


Sullivan Lake Boulevard
 
Great Plaines Avenue (south) (traveling north)


Sullivan Lake Boulevard
 
Ill. State Rt. 120


Sullivan Lake Boulevard
 
Four Seasons Boulevard


Sullivan Lake Boulevard
 
Rockwell Drive (north) (traveling south)


Sullivan Lake Boulevard
 
Rockwell Drive (north) (traveling north)


Summer Boulevard
 
Four Seasons Boulevard


Summer Boulevard
 
Sullivan Lake Boulevard


Sunnyside Road
 
East Lake Drive


Sunnyside Road
 
Willow Road


Sunnyside Road
 
Riverside Drive


Sunset Drive
 
Highland Drive


Sunset Drive
 
Venice Road


Sunset Drive
 
Sheridan Road


Tallgrass Court
 
Pondview Drive


Tia Juana Drive
 
Ill. State Rt. 120


Tia Juana Drive
 
North Lake Road


Tia Juana Drive
 
Riverside Drive


Valley View Drive
 
Sheridan Road


Venice Road
 
Valley View Drive


Venice Road
 
South Drive


Venice Road
 
Sunset Drive


Venice Road
 
Lotus Drive


Venice Road
 
Morningside Drive


Vivian Way Court
 
Margaret Court


Wagon Trail Court
 
Wagon Trail Road


Wagon Trail Road
 
Darrell Road


Wagon Trail Road
 
Wagon Trail Road


Weathervane Lane
 
Pilgrims Pass


Wellington Drive
 
Bay Road


Wellington Drive
 
Grand Meadow Lane


Willow Road
 
Bakers Drive


Willow Road (traveling northbound)
 
Deer Run Road


Willow Road (traveling southbound)
 
Deer Run Road


Willow Road
 
Ill. State Rt. 120


Willow Road
 
Riverside Drive




 



   (C)   The following additional signs shall be erected in the village:



      (1)   Yield right-of-way intersections are as follows:



 

Yield Street
 
Intersecting Street


Dominion Lane
 
Bay Meadow Lane


Elaine Terrace
 
North Lake Road


Santa Barbara Drive
 
North Lake Road


Red Rock Point
 
Baker’s Drive



 



      (2)   No left-hand turn sign as follows:



 


Exit on to Route 120 from Property located at the northwest corner of Route
120 and Darrell Road



Exit on to Darrell Road from property located at the northwest corner of
Route 120



 



(Ord. 13-O-15, passed 6-27-2013; Ord. 15-O-15, passed 4-9-2015; Ord. 17-O-02,
passed 1-12-2017)



§ 41-1/2.06  OVERNIGHT STREET PARKING.



   (A)   Criteria.



      (1)   Overnight parking of vehicles is permitted on specified
streets when the vehicle is under the gross weight rating of under 8,000
pounds and not exceeding 20 feet in length. Recreational vehicles, boats,
personal watercraft, trailers, all- terrain vehicles, off-highway motorcycles
and inoperable vehicles are not eligible for overnight parking under this
part. Even though a motor vehicle may not qualify for an overnight parking
under this part, the village may nevertheless issue an overnight parking
permit for a motor vehicle owned by and issued to an employee of a federal,
state, or local governmental agency for their use. Overnight parking is not
allowed for any commercial vehicles.



      (2)   No vehicle of any type being used for the purpose of
transporting any volatile, toxic, gaseous, explosive or flammable material
shall be parked or left unattended on any public street or public
right-of-way for any period of time, except while being actively loaded or
unloaded, or while such vehicle is being used in connection with any work or
service being performed within the immediate area.



      (3)   No long-term parking is allowed on any village street.
Vehicles must be moved within 72  hours.



      (4)   There shall be no parking on any village streets after a
snowfall of more than two inches or more or within 12 hours of snowfall.



   (B)   Signage.  Signs shall be posted on streets throughout the
village advising of the existence of on-street parking regulations. The
location placement or visibility of said signs in the village shall have no
bearing upon enforcement of this section.



   (C)   No parking areas.



 


Street

 

Side of Street Parking Prohibited





Arbor Circle
 
West


Bakers Drive East
 
North


Bakers Drive West
 
South


Bakers Court
 
No parking


Bayberry Court
 
South (no parking in cul-de-sac)


Bending Creek Road
 
West


Blacksmith Street
 
West to north end of street


Blacksmith Street
 
North to west end of street (no parking in cul-de-sac)


Darrell Road
 
West


Deer Run Drive
 
West


Eastwood Terrace
 
East


Elaine Terrace
 
East


Highland Drive
 
East


Hollywood Terrace
 
East


Honeysuckle Court
 
South (no parking in cul-de-sac)


Innetowne Court
 
No parking in cul-de-sac


Innetowne Road
 
West


Lakeview Drive
 
East


Lily Lake/Parkway
 
No parking


Lily Lane
 
East


Long Beach Road
 
East


Lotus Drive
 
South


Maplewood Drive
 
West


Millstone Circle
 
East (no parking in cul-de-sac)


Morningside Drive
 
South


Northlake Road
 
South


Park Lane
 
East


Pilgrims Court
 
West


Pilgrims Pass
 
West


Pine Grove Road
 
East


Prairie View Lane
 
West


Red Rock Street
 
West


Riverside Drive
 
South


Rosedale Drive
 
West


Santa Barbara Drive
 
West


Sawmill Lane
 
North (no parking in cul-de-sac)


Sawyer Court
 
West (no parking in cul-de-sac)


Sheridan Road
 
East


Sunnyside Road
 
South


Sunset Drive
 
South


Tia Juana Drive
 
East


Valley View Drive
 
North


Venice Road
 
East


Wagon Trail Court
 
No parking on both sides of street


Wagon Trail Road
 
North to east end of street


Wagon Trail Road
 
East to Wagon Trail Court


Wagon Trail Road
 
South to Wagon Trail Road


Weathervane Lane
 
East


Wegner/South Drive
 
No parking


Wildwood Lane
 
Parking spaces


Willow Road
 
West Bakers Drive to Willow Court


Willow Road
 
West




 



   (D)   Penalties.



      (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section is subject to a fine of $50 per day.



      (2)   A motor vehicle found to be parked in violation of this
section is immediately subject to towing at the direction of the Police
Department. The owner of said motor vehicle shall be responsible for any
towing and/or storage charges related thereto, said costs being in addition
to any fines or penalties which may be imposed on the owner of the vehicle
under this section.



(Ord. 01-O-19, passed 11-15-2001; Ord. 13-O-28, passed 10-24-2013; Ord.
13-O-32, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. 14-O-27, passed 7-24-2014; Ord. 14-O-31,
passed 10-23-2014; Ord. 15-O-16, passed 4-23-2015; Ord. 16-O-12, passed
6-9-2016; Ord. 17-O-24, passed 8-8-2017)



§ 41-1/2.07  RELATING TO PARKING IN THE VILLAGE.



   (A)   Parking violations. Except as otherwise provided, any person
accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking a vehicle in a
designated area or restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there
parked, may settle and compromise the claim against him or her for such
illegal parking by paying to the village within 72 hours, $25 for each such
offense. Such payment may be made at the police station, and a receipt shall
be issued for all money so received, and such money shall be promptly turned
over to the Village Treasurer. The members of the Police Department are
hereby authorized to refrain from instituting a prosecution for the alleged
offense involved unless this offense has not been compromised within 72 hours
from the time and date of the ticket. Thereafter, a citation may be issued
and once issued the penalty is controlled by division (M)(2)(d) below. For
the purpose of determining penalties for parking violations, each 24 hours
that a car remains illegally parked constitutes a separate violation.



   (B)   Towing cars away.



      (1)   The Police Department and all members are hereby
authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any
place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard,
blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of
any emergency vehicle.



      (2)   Cars so towed away shall be stored on any village
property or in a public garage or parking tot and shall be restored to the
owner or operator thereof after payment of the expense incurred by the
village in removing and storing such vehicles.



      (3)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to:



         (a)   Persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the
entrance or exit of any place where Police or Fire Department apparatus or
other emergency equipment is kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency
atones in a hospital;



         (b)   To any person charged with parking a vehicle so as
to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley, or parking in such away
as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only; or



         (c)   To any person who refuses to move a vehicle
illegally parked at the request of any member of the police department.



   (C)   Fire limits. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person to park a motor vehicle in a designated fire lane and, upon citation,
a violator shall be assessed a fine in the amount of not less than $25 for
each offense;



   (D)   Violations.



      (1)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person
to park a motor vehicle in an area reserved for handicapped persons who does
not have:



         (a)   A special registration plate or parking decal or
device on the vehicle issued to a physically disabled person pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616;



         (b)   A disabled veteran registration plate pursuant to
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609; or



         (c)   A special decal pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 11-1301.2.



      (2)   Upon conviction, a violator shall be assessed a fine in
the amount of not less than $200 for each offense.



   (E)   Parking at curb. No vehicle shall be parked with the left side
of such vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with
the curb and with the two right wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the
regularly established curb line in areas that curbs are present. In areas
where curbs do not exist vehicles may be parked on the gravel shoulder or
edge of the normal driving surface of the roadway with the left two (drivers
side) tires on the shoulder or driving surface and the right two tires on the
grass; except that, upon those streets that have been marked for angle
parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such
marks



   (F)   Vehicles for sale.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street
for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon
private property for sale with out the permission of the property owner and
only when said property is in an area zoned for the sale of vehicles, or to
park any vehicle upon any street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled or
sold.



      (2)   It shall be permissible for a person, firm or
corporation owning, leasing, occupying or having control of property to
display for sale no more then one vehicle at a time for a period of no more
than 60 days.



      (3)   Said person or entity cannot display more than two
vehicles for sale on the property in any calendar year. In any event, a
vehicle offered for sale under this division (F) must be legally parked as
provided for in this section, legally licensed with the state and the village
and registered to the person having control over the property.



   (G)   Loading zone. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle
to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary
for the loading or unloading of passengers, in any place designated by the
Village Board as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the
following designated places:



      (1)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before
the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time;



      (2)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb line
before the entrance to a public building between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
except on a Sunday; and/or



      (3)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any
time that the theater is open.



   (H)   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley, except
for the purpose of loading and unloading merchandise and then in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of
the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, end no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



   (I)   Parking motor vehicles on private property. It shall be
unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the
consent of the owner of the property.



   (J)   Abandonment of motor vehicle.



      (1)   Unlawful to leave on streets. The abandonment (as
defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-101.05) of a motor vehicle or any other
vehicle or any part thereof on any street, alley or sidewalk within the
village is unlawful. When a vehicle is abandoned on a street or roadway
within the village ten hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. When an abandoned,
unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled vehicle is creating a
traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the street or roadway
or its physical appearance is causing the impediment of traffic its immediate
removal from the street or roadway or private property adjacent to the street
or roadway by a towing service may be authorized by the Chief of Police. Any
vehicle towed is subject to penalties as set forth in division (M) below.



      (2)   Property.



         (a)   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other,
vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property, in view of the
general public, anywhere in the village is unlawful, except on property of
the owner of such abandoned vehicle and, subject to division (J)(2)(b) below,
is subject to penalties as set forth in division (M)(2) below.



         (b)   1.   It shall be unlawful to park any motorized
vehicle, camper, trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, inoperable vehicle or
any part thereof on a private lot, in view of the general public, anywhere in
the village unless the subject private lot is:



               a.   Improved with a residence or accessory
structure; or



               b.   The subject private lot is contiguous
to a lot on which there is constructed a residence or accessory structure and
both lots are owned by the same individual.



            2.   An individual who violates this section is
subject to penalties as set forth in division (M)(2) below.



         (c)   A vehicle or any part thereof fitting the
description in divisions (J)(2)(a) or (J)(2)(b) above shall be authorized for
removal by the Chief of Police after a waiting period of seven days or more,
which waiting period shall commence when notice is given to the vehicle owner
by the placing of a “tow tag” on the vehicle or equipment.



         (d)   The vehicle or equipment may be removed
immediately if it is determined to be a “hazardous dilapidated motor
vehicle”. For the purposes of this section, HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED MOTOR
VEHICLE means any motor vehicle with a substantial number of essential parts
as defined by § 1-118 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
1-118), either damaged, removed or altered or otherwise so treated that the
vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power, or which by
its general state of deterioration, poses a threat to the public health,
safety and welfare. HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a
motor vehicle, which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven
under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair
operations.



      (3)   Removal and impoundment. Any vehicles, or parts thereof,
removed under this section shall be conveyed to a vehicle impound location
designated by the Chief of Police.



      (4)   Definition of “abandonment”. For the purpose of this
division (K), ABANDONED VEHICLE shall be as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 1-101.05.



   (K)   Inoperable motor vehicles.



      (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, INOPERABLE
MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least
seven days the engine, wheels or other parte have been removed or on which
the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power. INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a motor vehicle, which has
been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power
in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.



      (2)   Nuisance declared. All inoperable vehicles whether on
public or private property and in view of the general public are considered a
nuisance and may be towed by the village and subject to fines as provided for
in this section for the failure of any person to obey a notice received from
the village to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle under his or her
control after the expiration of ten days after receiving notice of the
violation. Notice shall be considered given when posted on a vehicle left on
vacant property and sent by United States Mail to the property owner listed
on the Tax Assessor’s rolls. If the vehicle has vehicle registration on it,
the notice shall be sent to the registered owner, if different from the
property owner, by United States Mail. If the vehicle is located on property
which contains a residence or other building the notice shall be posted on
the building, posted on the vehicle, and sent by mail to the property owner
listed on the Tax Assessor’s rolls. If the vehicle has vehicle registration
on it, the notice shall be sent to the registered owner, if different from
the property owner, by mail. Personal service on the property owner and
registered owner if different from the property owner may be made by an
authorized village official or as provided for in ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§
2-203, 2-204 or 2-205.



      (3)   Outside storage of inoperable vehicle unlawful. The
storage of an inoperable motor vehicle or any part thereof on property
outside of an enclosed building anywhere in the village, except on property
located in a zoning district where such storage is permitted under the
village’s Zoning Ordinance, is unlawful.



      (4)   Issuance of citation failure to correct violation;
penalty. Any person, firm or corporation owning, leasing, occupying or having
control of property on which an inoperable motor vehicle is located shall be
issued a non-traffic complaint citation or ordinance citation by an officer
of the Village Building and Zoning Department or Village Police Department
and be given a reasonable time, but not less than seven days, to correct the
violation. If the owner, lessee, occupant or person, firm or corporation
having control of the property fails to correct the violation within said
period of time, he or she shall be charged with a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than
$1,000, Each day upon which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate
offense.



   (L)   Signs. Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where
parking is limited or prohibited indicating such limitations or prohibitions.



   (M)   Prohibited parking. It shall be unlawful for the operator of
any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following
places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic in
compliance with direction of a police officer or official traffic sign or
signal.



      (1)   (a)   In any intersection;



         (b)   In any crosswalk;



         (c)   Upon or under any bridge or viaduct or approach
thereto;



         (d)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or
within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a
safety zone;



         (e)   Within 30 feet of any traffic signal;



         (f)   Within 20 feet of an intersection;



         (g)   At any curb within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



         (h)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use
of a driveway;



         (i)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire
department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within 75 feet of such entrance;



         (j)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle or leave any vehicle parked or occupying any portion of any public
street at such time or in such manner as will impede or impair the plowing or
removal of snow from such public street after one inch of snow fall;



         (k)   Blocking any sidewalk;



         (l)   Any commercial vehicle having larger than a
“B” truck plate in any residential zoned district for a period of time in
excess of 30 minutes between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in front of
the front building line of a residential dwelling;



         (m)   On any public street without current registration
displayed on the vehicle;



         (n)   On any portion of any village parkway;



         (o)   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to
park, or for any tenant or property owner to allow to be parked, any motor
vehicle, as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code, on the grass or on any
other portion of a zoning lot other than on an approved off-street parking
area. An approved OFF-STREET PARKING AREA shall mean an area built on a
zoning lot and intended for the parking of motor vehicles. Off-street parking
areas will be constructed as provided for by village ordinances and will be
constructed of an impervious surface of concrete, compacted asphalt or other
approved surface as provided for in Village Building Codes.



            2.   In the event that a special circumstance
exists and the individual having control over the property finds it necessary
to park a vehicle in a front or side yard on other than an approved off
street parking area, as described above, such individual may contact the
Village Police Department to obtain a permit for parking of a vehicle on
other than an approved off street parking area. The individual requesting
permission for said parking must describe the extraordinary circumstances and
temporary permission may be granted by the village’s Police Department to
allow such parking.



         (p)   During the period of time any park or beach area
is closed.



      (2)   (a)   A vehicle parked or occupying any portion of
any public street in violation hereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance
which shall be abated by any police officer by issuing an ordinance citation
for such violation and placing it upon such vehicle and causing such vehicle
to be removed and towed or conveyed to a vehicle pound designated by the
Chief of Police.



         (b)   The owner or authorised operator of such impounded
vehicle may have the vehicle removed from the impoundment by paying all costs
and expenses that have been incurred for the towage and storage of such
vehicle, plus all towage and storage charges which have theretofore accrued
against such vehicle during the time of his or her ownership thereof. The
payment of such costs, expenses and charges shall be in addition to the
penalty that may be imposed upon conviction of a violation of this section as
provided hereafter.



         (c)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is
authorized to be towed away, the Police Department shall keep and maintain a
record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture,
manufacturer’s name, manufacturer’s model, body style, vehicle
identification number and license plate year and number displayed on the
vehicle. The record shall also include the Police report number, date of the
tow, who towed the vehicle, location towed to and the name of the officer
authorizing the tow.



         (d)   1.   When the Police Department does not know
the identity of the registered owner or other legally entitled person, they
will cause the motor vehicle registration records of the state to be searched
for the purpose of obtaining the required ownership information.



            2.   The Police Department will cause the stolen
motor vehicle files of the State Police to be searched for stolen or wanted
reformation on the vehicle. When the State Police files are searched with
negative results, the information contained in the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the State Police. The information
determined from these record searches will be used by the Police Department
in sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally entitled
persons advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made
and setting forth public sale information.



         (e)   When the registered owner or other person legally
entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be
identified from the registration files of the state or from the registration
files of a foreign state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify
the State Police for the purpose of idetituying the vehicle’s owner



         (f)   Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle
is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other
person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by
presenting to the Police Department proof of ownership or proof of the right
to possession of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or
other person under this section until all towing and storage charges have
been paid.



         (g)   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or undrained
motor vehicle or other vehicle, seven years of age or newer, remains
unclaimed by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its
possession for a period of 30 days after notice has been given as provided
herein, the Police Department shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the
highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a
conspicuous place for at least ten days prior to the sale on the premises
where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten days prior to the sale,
the Police Department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale
to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or the person known by
the Police Department or towing service to be legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description
of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally
entitled person to reclaim the vehicle. In those instances where the
certified notification specified herein has been returned by the postal
authorities to the Police Department due to the addressee having moved, or
being unknown at the address obtained from the registration records of the
state, the sending of a second certified notice will not be required.



         (h)   1.   When the identity of the registered owner
or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or
unclaimed vehicle of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by the
means provided for in this section, the vehicle may be sold as provided
herein or disposed of in the manner authorized by the section without notice
to the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
the vehicle.



            2.   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven
years of age is impounded a specified by this section, it will be kept in
custody for a minimum of ten days for the purpose of determining ownership
the contacting of the registered owner by the U.S. Mail, public service or in
person for the determination of disposition; and, an examination of the State
Police stolen motor vehicle filers for theft and wanted information. At the
expiration of ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition information
being received from the registered owner, the Chief of Police will authorize
the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.



            3.   A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified
as an antique vehicle is excluded from this section.



         (i)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the
custody of the Police Department is reclaimed by the registered owner or
other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or
otherwise disposed of as provided in this section, a report of the
transaction will be maintained by the Police Department for a period of one
year from the date of the sale or disposal.



         (j)   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits
of the municipality is authorized to be towed away by the Chief of Police and
disposed of as set forth in this section, the proceeds of the public sale or
disposition after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges
shall be deposited in the municipal treasury.



         (k)   Any police officer, towing service owner, operator
or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any
action brought by the registered owner, former registered owner, or his or
her legal representative, or any other person legally entitled to the
possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed
and sold or disposed of as provided by this section.



         (l)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of
the provisions of divisions (E), (F), (G), (H), (I), (J) and (M)(1) and
(M)(2) above shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25, nor more
than $1,000, for each such conviction unless otherwise provided for in this
section. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 01-O-19, passed 11-15-2001; Ord. 02-O-013, passed 7-11-2002; Ord.
03-O-01, passed 1-9-2003; Ord. 05-O-07, passed -28-2005)



§ 41-1/2.08  SPEED RESTRICTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under
the jurisdiction of the state, or the county, or in an urban district within
the village at a speed in excess of 25 mph and on any street outside the
urban district of the village at a speed of more than 55 mph; provided that,
if the corporate authorities, set other limits as provided by statute after
an engineering or traffic survey, then such limits shall govern die rate of
speed on the streets. Appropriate signs shall be posted showing such speed
limits.



(Ord. 01-O-19, passed 11-15-2001)



§ 41-1/2.09  USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES; IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   General. The owner of record of any motor vehicle that does
the following shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this
section:



      (1)   The vehicle is operated by a driver under the influence
of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound(s) or any combination
thereof, as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501(a);



      (2)   The vehicle is operated by a driver while driver’s
license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or
revoked, as a result of suspension related to conviction for drugs, alcohol,
intoxicating compound or any combination thereof, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-501(a), as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303 or is
suspended or revoked for any other reason and the vehicle is being operated
in violation of ILCS Ch. 625,  Act 5, § 6-303;



      (3)   The operation of any motor vehicle with open alcohol in
violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-502;



      (4)   Any vehicle operated and occupied solely by minors
wherein alcoholic beverages, whether open or sealed, are found in violation
of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 10.1;



      (5)   Any vehicle being operated wherein there is found
cannabis in violation of State Cannabis Control Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550,
§ 1); or



      (6)   Any vehicle being operated or having been operated while
the operator or occupants of the vehicle are in the commission of or fleeing
from the commission of a crime constituting a charge of a Class A
misdemeanor, or any felony;



      (7)   A violation  of  ILCS  Ch.  720,  Act  5, §
11-14, “Prostitution”, of  the  Illinois  Criminal Code of 1961, as
amended, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-14.1, “Solicitation of a Sexual Act”,
of the Illinois Criminal Code of  1961, as amended, ILCS Ch.  720, Act 5,
§ 11-18, “Patronizing a Prostitute”, of the  Illinois  Criminal  Code
of 1961, as  amended, or , ILCS  Ch. 720, Act  5, § 11-18.1,
“Patronizing a Minor Engaged in Prostitution” of the Illinois Criminal
Code, as amended;



      (8)   Any vehicle being operated by a driver upon a highway in
the state when such driver does not possess a valid license or permit or a
restricted driving permit in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 6-101(A);



      (9)   Any vehicle being operated with sound amplification
equipment in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-611; and/or



      (10)   Any vehicle being operated or having been operated
while the operator or occupants of the vehicle commit the violation of
illegal dumping, as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 21.



   (B)   Posting a bond. The owner of record of such described above
shall post a bond in the amount of $400. The impounded motor vehicle shall be
released to the owner of record, upon the payment by the owner of record of
the towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company. If an
administrative fee is imposed consistent with division (C)(2) below, the bond
shall be applied to said fee; provided, in the event that a violation of this
section is not proven, the bond shall be returned to the person posting the
bond. All bond money posted pursuant to this section shall be held by the
village until the time for appeal lapses, a Hearing Officer issues a
decision, or, if there is judicial review, until a reviewing court issues a
final decision.



   (C)   Administrative hearings.



      (1)   General. Where the owner of record of a motor vehicle
seized under the provisions of this section makes a request, in writing and
filed with the Chief of Police or designee, for a preliminary hearing within
24 hours after the seizure of the motor vehicle, the Chief of Police or
designee must conduct a preliminary hearing within 24 hours after the request
for hearing is received. Requests received on Friday, Saturday or the day
prior to a holiday, will be heard on the next business day. The following
rules shall apply to such preliminary hearing:



         (a)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing.



         (b)   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at
the preliminary hearing, and hearsay testimony shall be allowed if it is the
type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of
their affairs.



         (c)   If, after the conclusion of the preliminary
hearing, the Chief of Police or his or her designee determines that there is
probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle was used as provided in
division (C)(1)(a) above, the Chief of Police or designee shall order the
continued impoundment of the motor vehicle, unless the owner of record of the
motor vehicle posts the cash bond with the village in the amount of $400, and
pays the towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company, as set
forth herein.



         (d)   If the hearing results in a finding of no probable
cause to believe there is a violation of division (C)(1)(a) above, the motor
vehicle shall be returned to the owner of record without any fees or other
costs, but the owner of record shall be responsible to pay any towing or
storage charges to the applicable towing company.



         (e)   The Chief of Police shall have the discretion to
settle an impoundment made pursuant to the section for a reduced
administrative fee of not less than $300 upon a finding that unique
circumstances exist to warrant a reduced administrative fee. Any settlement
accepted by an owner constitutes a waiver of the right to  any  further
appeals to  the  village  or  the courts regarding the violation that was
subject to the preliminary hearing.



      (2)   Plea hearing/evidentiary hearing.



         (a)   Within ten days after a motor vehicle is impounded
pursuant to this section, the village shall notify the owner of record of the
date, time and location of a plea hearing that shall be conducted, pursuant
to this section. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of record as shown on the records of the Secretary of
State. Notice by certified mail need not be given when the owner of record
has been personally served with notice, in written form, of the time, date
and location of the plea hearing. The plea hearing shall be conducted by a
Hearing Officer, designated by the Village President. The owner of record
shall appear at a plea hearing and enter a plea of guilty or not guilty. If a
guilty plea is entered, or if the owner of record fails to appear, the cause
shall be disposed of at that time, with an order/default order in favor of
the village, which order/default order shall require the payment to the
village of an administrative fee of $400 and towing and storage costs to the
applicable tow company. If the owner of record pleads not guilty, an
evidentiary hearing shall be scheduled and held no later than 45 days after
the motor vehicle was impounded, unless continued by the Hearing Officer. All
interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the
evidentiary hearing. At any time prior to the evidentiary hearing date, the
Hearing Officer may, at the request of either the village or the owner of
record, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the evidentiary
hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the evidentiary
hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible if it is the type commonly
relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.



         (b)   If, after the evidentiary hearing, the Hearing
Officer determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the motor
vehicle was used in connection with a violation set forth herein, the Hearing
Officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the motor vehicle
civilly liable to the village for the administrative fee of $400 and require
the motor vehicle impoundment continued until the owner of record pays the
administrative fee to the village as well as the towing and storage fees to
the applicable towing company. If a cash bond has been posted pursuant to
this section, then the bond shall be applied as and for the administrative
fee. If the owner of record fails to appear at the evidentiary hearing, the
Hearing Officer shall enter a default order in favor of the village, which
order shall require the payment to the village of the administrative fee and
towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company, and the continue
impoundment of the motor vehicle until the such fees and costs are paid in
full. The administrative fee shall be a debt due to the village. The village
may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment as
provided by law. If the Hearing Officer finds no such violation occurred, the
Hearing Officer shall order the immediate return to the owner of record, the
motor vehicle without any fees or other costs, or, if a cash bond had
previously been posted, said bond shall be returned.



         (c)   At the evidentiary hearing, the violation citation
shall be prima facie evidence that the violation was committed as provided in
the citation, and the burden of proof shall be upon the owner of record to
prove that the violation was not committed.



This division (C)(2)(c) shall not apply:



            1.   If the vehicle used in the violation was
stolen at the time and theft was reported to the appropriate police
authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably
should have been discovered;



            2.   If the vehicle is operating as a common
carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in
control of the vehicle; or



            3.   If the owner proves that the presence of the
controlled substance or cannabis was authorized under the Controlled
Substances Act, being ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, or Cannabis Control Act, being
ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, or in the case of a firearm, stun gun or taser that
the presence of the firearm, stun gun or taser was permissible pursuant to §
24-2 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2)  or that
the firearm was exempt from registration under any provision of state or
federal law.



      (3)   Disposition of impounded vehicles.



         (a)   If the administrative fee and other applicable
fees are not paid within 30 days after the administrative fee is imposed
against the owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the hearing
provided in this section, or who admits guilt at the plea hearing, the motor
vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed motor vehicles pursuant to
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq. as amended. In all other cases, if
the administrative fee and applicable towing and storage costs to the
applicable towing company are not paid within 30 days after the expiration of
time by which administrative review of the Hearing Officer’s determination
may be sought, or within 30 days after an action seeking administrative
review has been resolved in favor of the village, whichever is applicable,
the motor vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the
manner provided by law.



         (b)   No owner of record, lien holder or other persons
shall be legally entitled to take possession of a motor vehicle impounded
under the section until the administrative fee and towing and storage costs
to the applicable tow company imposed pursuant to the section have been paid.
However, whenever a person with a lien of record against an impounded motor
vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the motor
vehicle shall be given to that persons if he or she agrees in writing to
refund to the village the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale,
less any amount required to pay all line holders of record, not to exceed the
administrative fee, plus the applicable towing and storage costs.



      (4)   Applicability of other laws. This section is in addition
to and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal
laws or any ordinance that relates to the seizure or impoundment of motor
vehicles, and any fee provided for in this section shall be in addition to
any and all penalties that  may  be assessed  or imposed  by  a  court
for any criminal charges. This section shall not apply:



         (a)   If the motor vehicle used in the violation was
stolen at the time of the violation and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered;



         (b)   If the motor vehicle is operated as a common
carrier as defined by applicable law and the violation occurs without the
knowledge of the person in control of the motor vehicle; or



         (c)   If the motor vehicle is subject to successful
forfeiture proceedings under ILCS Ch. 725, Act 5, §§ 36-1 et seq. as
amended (Seizure and Forfeiture of Vessels, Vehicles and Aircraft); or other
state or federal forfeiture laws.



      (5)   Use of fees collected. All fees collected by the village
pursuant to this section shall be deposited and used for village traffic
safety and enforcement expenditures.



      (6)   General regulations. Fees for towing and storage of a
vehicle under this section shall be those approved by the Chief of Police for
all tow companies authorized to tow for the Police Department.



      (7)   Administrative review. Any owner of record, lien holder
or other person with a legal interest in the motor vehicle, shall have the
right to appeal the decision of the Hearing Officer to the 22nd Judicial
Circuit Court, pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, ILCS Ch. 735, Act
5, §§ 3-101 et seq., as amended. Any respondent seeking review of a final
decision shall be required to reimburse the village of the costs of preparing
and certifying the record of proceedings. Failure of the respondent to
reimburse the village shall be grounds for the dismissal of a complaint for
administrative review pursuant to ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-109. In the event
the reviewing court reverses the findings, decision and order of the
Administrative Law Judge, the village will reimburse the respondent for the
costs for preparing and certifying the record of proceedings.



      (8)   Administrative fee refund. A finding of “not guilty”
following a trial in the 22nd Judicial Circuit Court for the underlying
violation wherein the motor vehicle was impounded, shall entitled the owner
of record to a full and complete refund of any administrative fee imposed
under this section.  However, the owner of record must request the refund in
writing and shall include in the request a certified disposition of “not
guilty” following a trial from the 22nd Circuit Court Clerk. An order of
dismissal or a negotiated disposition on the underlying charge(s) shall not
result in a refund of the administrative fee.



(Ord. 11-O-09, passed 6-9-2011)



§ 41-1/2.10  CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT TO DISPLAY COMPANY NAME.



   (A)   Construction equipment that is capable of being self propelled
or any construction equipment capable of being towed shall display on the
side of the equipment the name of the company for which it is employed. The
name shall be in letters at least two inches tall and one-half inch wide.
This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle upon which is affixed the
insignia required under § 18c-4701 of the State Commercial Transportation
Law (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-712, from Ch. 95-1/2, par. 12-712).



   (B)   Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
petty offense and subject to a fine of $100.



(Ord. 12-O-06, passed 3-22-2012)



§ 41-1/2.11  CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT TO DISPLAY COMPANY NAME COMMERCIAL
TRUCKS USED BY CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS OR SUBCONTRACTORS TO DISPLAY COMPANY
NAME.



   (A)   Every second division vehicle operating commercially in the
state that is used by a construction contractor or subcontractor shall
display on the side of the vehicle or its trailer the name of the company for
which it is employed. The name shall be in letters at least two inches tall
and one-half inch wide. This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle
upon which is affixed the insignia required under § 18c-4701 of the State
Commercial Transportation Law (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-713, from Ch. 
95-1/2,  par. 12-713).



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty
of a petty offense and subject to a fine of $100.



(Ord. 12-O-06, passed 3-22-2012)



§ 41-1/2.12  REQUIREMENT OF CERTIFICATE OF SAFETY.



   (A)   Every owner of a second division vehicle, medical transport
vehicle, tow truck or contract carrier transporting employees in the course
of their employment in a vehicle designed to carry 15 or fewer passengers
shall, before operating the vehicle in the village, submit it to a safety
test and secure a certificate of safety furnished by the State Department of
Transportation (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 13-101, from Ch. 95-1/2,  par.
13-101).



   (B)   No person shall operate in the village any vehicle required to
be inspected under the provisions of this chapter unless there is affixed to
that vehicle a certificate of safety.



   (C)   None of the provisions of this section shall apply to the
following:



      (1)   Farm tractors, machinery and implements, wagons,
wagon-trailers or similar farm vehicles used primarily in agricultural
pursuits;



      (2)   A semi-trailer or trailer having a gross weight of 5,000
pounds or less including vehicle weight and maximum load;



      (3)   Recreational vehicles as defined in the Illinois Vehicle
Code;



      (4)   Vehicles registered as and displaying valid state
antique vehicle plates;



      (5)   House trailers equipped and used for living quarters;



      (6)   Vehicles registered as and displaying state permanently
mounted equipment plates or similar vehicles eligible therefore, but
registered as governmental vehicles; provided that, if said vehicle is
reclassified from a permanently mounted equipment plate so as to lose the
exemption of not requiring a certificate of safety, such vehicle must be
safety tested within 30 days of the reclassification;



      (7)   Vehicles owned or operated by a manufacturer, dealer or
transporter displaying special plates while such vehicle is being delivered
from the manufacturing or assembly plant directly to the purchasing
dealership or distributor, or  being temporarily  road  driven for quality
control testing, or from one dealer or distributor to another, or are being
moved by the most direct route from one location to another for the purpose
of installing special bodies or equipment, or driven for purposes of
demonstration by a prospective buyer with the dealer or his or her agent
present in the cab of the vehicle during the demonstration;



      (8)   Pole trailers and auxiliary axles;



      (9)   Special mobile equipment;



      (10)   Vehicles properly registered in another state pursuant
to law and displaying a valid registration plate; except that, vehicles of
contract carriers transporting employees in the course of their employment in
a vehicle designed to carry 15 or fewer passengers are only exempted to the
extent that the safety testing requirements applicable to such vehicles in
the state of registration are no less stringent than the safety testing
requirements applicable to contract carriers that are lawfully registered in
Illinois;



      (11)   Water-well boring apparatuses or rigs;



      (12)   Any vehicle which is owned and operated by the federal
government and externally displays evidence of such ownership; and



      (13)   Second division vehicles registered for a gross weight
of 8,000 pounds or less, except when such second division motor vehicles pull
or draw a trailer, semi-trailer or pole trailer having a gross weight of or
registered for a gross weight of more than 8,000 pounds and except for motor
buses, religious organization buses, school buses, senior citizen
transportation vehicles, medical transport vehicles and tow trucks.



   (D)   Certificates of safety shall be in contrasting colors, as
determined by the State Department of Transportation, with a number on the
face of the certificate indicating the month of the next inspection period in
which the vehicle is subject to inspection.



   (E)   (1)   Any person convicted of violating this section shall
be guilty of a petty offense and subject to a fine of $250.



      (2)   The village shall utilize its system of administrative
adjudication for vehicular standing and parking violations, violations
regarding the display of municipal stickers/licenses, select ordinance
violations and automated traffic law violations. The administrative
adjudication system for all violations of the village code subject to
administrative adjudication shall be comprised of a Code Hearing Unit which
shall be comprised of a Hearing Officer and any other officials deemed
necessary, including a Traffic Compliance Administrator with respect to all
parking, standing, condition and use of vehicle equipment, display of
municipal stickers/licenses and automated traffic law regulations, as well as
those other ordinances identified by the ordinances of the village pertaining
to such administrative hearing body. Such officers shall be vested with the
power, authority and limitations as are hereinafter set forth.



(Ord. 12-O-06, passed 3-22-2012)



§ 41-1/2.13  COMMERCIAL TOWING OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE
PROPERTY.



   (A)   Every commercial towing company who tows unauthorized or
trespassing vehicles from private property located with the Village of
Lakemoor shall comply with the following provisions:



      (1)   Any towing service that tows or removes vehicles and
proposes to require the owner, operator, or person in control of the vehicle
to pay the costs of towing and storage prior to redemption of the vehicle
must file and keep on record with the local law enforcement agency a complete
copy of the current rates to be charged for such services, and post at the
storage site an identical rate schedule and any written contracts with
property owners, lessors, or persons in control of property which authorize
them to remove vehicles as provided in this section;



      (2)   No person shall engage in the removal of vehicles from
private property as described in this section without filing a notice of
intent in each community where he intends to do such removal, and such notice
shall be filed at least seven days before commencing such towing;



      (3)   No removal of a vehicle from private property shall be
done except upon express written instructions of the owners or persons in
charge of the private property upon which the vehicle is said to be
trespassing;



      (4)   Any towed vehicle shall be released to its owner or
custodian within one half hour after requested, if such request is made
during business hours;



      (5)   Companies shall also provide insurance coverage for
areas where vehicles towed under the provisions of this chapter will be
impounded or otherwise stored, and shall adequately cover loss by fire, theft
or other risks;



      (6)   Any towed or removed vehicle must be stored at the site
of the towing service's place of business. The site must be open during
business hours, and for the purpose of redemption of vehicles, during the
time that the person or firm towing such vehicle is open for towing purposes;



      (7)   The towing service shall within 30 minutes of completion
of such towing or removal, notify the law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction of such towing or removal, and the make, model, color and
license plate number of the vehicle, and shall obtain and record the name of
the person at the law enforcement agency to whom such information was
reported;



      (8)   If the registered owner or legally authorized person
entitled to possession of the vehicle shall arrive at the scene prior to
actual removal or towing of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be disconnected
from the tow truck and that person shall be allowed to remove the vehicle
without interference, upon the payment of a reasonable service fee of not
more than one half the posted rate of the towing service as provided in
division (A)(6) of this section, for which a receipt shall be given;



      (9)   The rebate or payment of money or any other valuable
consideration from the towing service or its owners, managers or employees to
the owners or operators of the premises from which the vehicles are towed or
removed, for the privilege of removing or towing those vehicles, is
prohibited.



   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation partnership or other person in
control of real property within the Village of Lakemoor who utilizes the
services of a commercial towing operation to remove unauthorized vehicles
from such real property, shall:



      (1)   Prominently place notice at the perimeter of the parking
lot, in a position where the notice is visible to the occupants of vehicles
entering the lot, in compliance with the following:



         (a)   The notice must indicate clearly, in not less than
two inch high light-reflective letters on a contrasting background, that
unauthorized vehicles will be towed away at the owner's expense.



         (b)   The notice must also provide the name and current
telephone number of the towing service towing or removing the vehicle.



         (c)   The sign structure containing the required notices
must be permanently installed with the bottom of the sign not less than four
feet above ground level, and must be continuously maintained on the property
for not less than 24 hours prior to the towing or removing of any vehicle.



      (2)   Post notice on any unauthorized vehicle in the form of a
self-adhesive sticker, not less than three by five inches, being bright
orange in color, notifying the owner or custodian of such vehicle that the
vehicle is parked illegally and shall be removed by a professional towing
operator, consistent with the posted notices, if the vehicle is not removed
within 24 hours. This provision shall not affect the ability of the Police to
order vehicles removed and shall not apply in any case where such
unauthorized vehicle is blocking ingress/egress to private property or where
the parking of the vehicle creates a health and/or safety hazard.



   (C)   Any person, agent, corporation, employee or officer who
violates this section or who carries out towing operations in violation of
this section, shall be fined not less than $200 for the first offense and
$500 for any subsequent offense of this section. Nothing herein shall prevent
the enforcement or excuse compliance with state statute and nothing herein
shall prevent an officer of the village from writing any such violations
under either local ordinance or state statute. Any subsequent violations of
this section and/or applicable provisions of the state statute may be written
as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 and jail time not
exceeding six months.



(Ord. 15-O-47, passed 12-17-2015)



§ 41-1/2.14  AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM.



   (A)   This section provides for an automated traffic law enforcement
system, which detects motor vehicles which fail to abide by traffic-control
signals at intersections under penalty of a fine, and a system of
administrative adjudication by which such detected infractions shall be
resolved.



   (B)   It shall be a violation of this section for anyone to operate
a vehicle in disregard of a traffic control device or to turn right on a red
light where it is posted “No Turn on Red.”



   (C)   Automated traffic law enforcement system.



      (1)   Detection. As used in the section, AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW
ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM means a device within the village with one or more motor
vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce
recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a steady
or flashing red signal indication in violation of Section 11-306 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306. The AUTOMATED TRAFFIC
LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM shall not be used to enforce speed limit regulations.
The recorded images produced by the AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM,
which consist of either two or more photographs, two or more electronic
images of a video recording showing the motor vehicle, shall capture and
display images of the vehicle allegedly violating traffic-control signals,
together with the license plate on such vehicle, and shall also show the
time, date and location of the violation.



      (2)   Signage. Any intersection equipped with an automated
traffic law enforcement system must have a sign posted which is visible to
approaching traffic indicating that the intersection is being monitored by an
automated traffic law enforcement system.



      (3)   Intentionally omitted.



      (4)   Notice of violation. When the automated traffic law
enforcement system records a motor vehicle entering an intersection in spite
of a steady or flashing red signal indicating a violation of Section 11-306
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306, this shall be
deemed a non-criminal violation for which a civil penalty of $100 shall be
assessed and for which no points shall be assigned by the Illinois Motor
Vehicle Code Point System for License Suspension to the owner or driver of
the vehicle. The village shall issue a written notice of the violation to the
registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be delivered by first
class mail within 30 days after the Illinois Secretary of State notifies the
village of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, and
in no event later than 90 days following the violation. Each notice of
violation associated with an automated traffic law violation shall require a
review of the associated recorded image by an officer or other employee or
agent of the village police department empowered under this section to
determine whether a red light offense has occurred or whether one of the
defenses enumerated below in division (6) is visibly applicable upon
inspection. Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation
of one of the foregoing provisions and that no defense applies, the notice of
violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner
provided for below. The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall retain a copy
of all violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to
the alleged violator. Each notice of violation, which shall constitute
evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any
proceeding alleging a violation of the above-noted statutory and local
provisions and shall establish prima facie evidence of a violation, subject
to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in division (6), shall
include the following:



         (a)   The name and address of the registered owner or
lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State,
or, if such information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known
address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database;



         (b)   The registration number of the motor vehicle
involved in the violation;



         (c)   The violation charged, with specific reference to
that section of the Village of Lakemoor Municipal Code of Ordinances
allegedly violated;



         (d)   The location where the violation occurred;



         (e)   The date and time of the violation;



         (f)   A copy of the recorded images;



         (g)   The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the
date by which the civil penalty should be paid if liability for the violation
is not going to be contested;



         (h)   A statement that the recorded images are evidence
of a violation of a red light signal;



         (i)   A warning that failure to either pay the civil
penalty or to contest liability within 30 days of the mailing of the notice
of violation in writing or by attending the administrative hearing is an
admission of liability and may result in a suspension of the driving
privileges of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle in addition to
the specified penalties for failing to appear at the hearing or pay the fine
in advance of the hearing;



         (j)   The date, time and place of the administrative
hearing at which the charge may be contested on its merits, a date that shall
be no less than 15 days from the mailing or other service of the first notice
of violation;



         (k)   A statement that payment of the indicated fine and
of any applicable penalty for late payment shall constitute a final
disposition of the violation; and



         (l)   The signature of the party reviewing the recorded
images and confirming that a violation took place.



      (5)   Penalty and final determination of violation liability.



         (a)   If the civil penalty of $100 referred to in
division (4) herein is not timely paid or the notice of violation referred to
in division (4) herein is not contested timely, a $100 penalty will be
assessed in addition to the original $100 fine by way of “Final
Determination of Violation Liability.”



         (b)   The village, through its Treasurer, Clerk, Police
Department, Law Department, administrative adjudication program, and/or any
other designated agent of the village, may establish procedures for the
collection of the civil penalty imposed.



      (6)   Defenses. The following are the only defenses available
for an alleged violator contesting his or her liability for a violation,
which shall be weighed by the Hearing Officer and shall only rebut the prima
facie case established by the notice of liability insofar as one or more of
the following defenses are established by a preponderance of the evidence:



         (a)   The motor vehicle or registration plates were
stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control of or in
the possession of the owner at the time of the violation, which may be
demonstrated through the submission of a certified copy of a report
concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed with a
law enforcement agency in a timely manner;



         (b)   The driver of the vehicle passed through the
intersection in spite of a red light either to yield the right-of-way to an
emergency vehicle or as part of a funeral procession; and



         (c)   The license plate number or other source of
identification of the vehicle cannot be determined;



         (d)   The operator of the vehicle received a Uniform
Traffic citation from a police officer at the time of the violation for the
same incident as captured by the automated traffic law enforcement system and
either paid such citation or successfully contested said citation; and



         (e)   The vehicle was leased to another and within 60
calendar days after the citation was mailed to lessor, lessor submitted to
the municipality the correct name and address of the lessee of the vehicle
identified in this notice of violation at the time of the alleged violation,
together with a copy of the lease agreement, the lessee’s driver’s
license number and any additional information that may be needed.



      (7)   Administrative adjudication. The village shall utilize
its system of administrative adjudication for vehicular standing and parking
violations, violations regarding the display of municipal stickers/licenses,
and automated traffic law violations. The administrative adjudication system
for all violations of the Village Code subject to administrative adjudication
shall be comprised of a Code Hearing Unit which shall be comprised of a
Hearing Officer and any other officials deemed necessary, including a Traffic
Compliance Administrator with respect to all parking, standing, condition and
use of vehicle equipment, display of municipal stickers/licenses and
automated traffic law regulations, as well as those other ordinances
identified by the ordinances of the village pertaining to such administrative
hearing body. Such officers shall be vested with the power, authority and
limitations as are hereinafter set forth.



      (8)   Powers of the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall
have all of the powers granted to Hearing Officers under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5,
§ 1-2.14, the provisions of which are incorporated herein by reference,
including the power to preside over all administrative hearings as the
adjudicator, administer oaths, hear testimony and accept evidence that is
relevant to the existence of the code violation.



      (9)   Powers of the Traffic Compliance Administrator. The
Traffic Compliance Administrator shall have all of the powers granted by ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3(b)(1), the provisions which are incorporated
herein by reference.



      (10)   Establishment of hearing unit. The Village President is
hereby authorized to appoint necessary officers to establish the Code Hearing
Unit and to otherwise comply with the terms herein.



      (11)   Appointment of Traffic Compliance Administrator. The
Village President, with the advice and consent of the Village Board of
Trustees, shall appoint a Traffic Compliance Administrator for a term not to
exceed that of the Village President’s current term of office, who is
authorized to adopt, distribute and process parking, compliance and automated
traffic law violation notices, collect money paid as fines and penalties for
the above noted violations, operate an administrative adjudication system and
make certified reports to the Secretary of State regarding a registered
vehicle owner's failure to pay fines and penalties in accordance with ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5. The Village Administrator shall act as the
Traffic Compliance Officer unless or until such position is filled by the
President and Board of Trustees.



      (12)   Compensation for Hearing Officers. The Traffic
Compliance Administrator and any other official deemed necessary to implement
the system of administrative adjudication, shall be compensated as
established annually by the Village President and Board of Trustees.



      (13)   Service of violation notices. Violation notices must be
mailed to the address of the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle
as recorded with the Secretary of State within 30 days after the Secretary of
State notifies the village of the identity of the registered vehicle owner,
but no later than 90 days after the date of the violation. If the notice of
violation is returned as undeliverable, then the notice of violation shall be
sent to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office
approved database, which notice shall still be sent within 90 days of the
violation.



      (14)   Adjudicative hearing. The hearing shall be tape
recorded, and the Hearing Officer conducts the hearing in accordance with his
or her powers and duties, enumerated herein. Alleged violators who appear at
the administrative hearing to contest an alleged violation may be represented
by legal counsel at their own expense, however, formal rules of evidence
shall not apply to the administrative hearing. The Hearing Officer shall
enter either a default judgment or a determination of liability or
non-liability in accordance with consideration of the facts and testimony, if
any, and shall constitute a final determination of liability from which an
appeal may be taken.



      (15)   Collection of fines and penalties. Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent the village from pursuing all available remedies,
allowed by law, to collect fines and payment of penalties owed to village.



      (16)   Notice of impending driver's license suspension. This
notice shall be sent via first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to
the address recorded with the Secretary of State of any person liable for any
fine or penalty due and owing the village for five or more unpaid automated
traffic law violations. If such mailing is returned as undeliverable, then
the village shall send the notice to the last known address recorded in a
United States Post Office approved database. If village subsequently makes a
certified report to the Secretary of State, the subject vehicle owner may
challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing. To do so, the
vehicle owner must submit to the Administrator a written statement under
oath, together with supporting documentation, establishing one of the
following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the certified report:



         (a)   That the person was not the owner or lessee of the
subject vehicle or vehicles receiving five or more automated traffic law
violations on the date or dates such violation notices were issued; or



         (b)   That the person already paid the fines or
penalties for the five or more automated traffic law violations indicated on
the certified report. Such statement and supporting documentation must be
sent to the Administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
hand delivered to the Administrator within five days after the person
receives notice from the Secretary of State that the person’s driver’s
license will be suspended at the end of a specified period of time unless the
Secretary is presented with a notice from the village certifying that the
fines or penalties due and owing have been paid or that the inclusion of the
person's name on the certified report was in error.



      (17)   Procedures for non-residents. Where the registered
owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a resident of the village but
seeks to contest the merits of the alleged violation, such persons may
contest the charges using the same available defenses as stated above, and
the same procedures - they may attend the administrative hearing or they may
submit any and all documentary evidence no later than the hearing date
referenced in the notice of liability, together with a written statement
reflecting that they are non-residents of the village.



   (D)   Authority to execute agreement. The Village President is
authorized to sign, and the Village Clerk to attest to, whatever documents
are necessary and perform all actions necessary to finalize the
implementation of the traffic enforcement program subject to approval of said
documents by the Village Attorney including but not limited to any and all
necessary permits with the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT).



(Ord. 12-O-03, passed 1-26-2012)



CHAPTER 42:  MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING



Section



   42.01   Definition



   42.02   License required



   42.03   Application for license



   42.04   License and late fees



   42.05   Late fees



   42.06   Replacement of license



   42.07   Penalty



§ 42.01  DEFINITION.



   Whenever the term MOTOR VEHICLE is used in this chapter, it shall be
construed to include vehicles propelled by automotive power, including
automobiles, and motorcycles, with the exceptions of traction engines, farm
tractors, road rollers, steam railways and snowmobiles. This chapter shall
not apply to bicycles or other vehicles propelled by muscular power.



(Ord. 08-O-01, passed 3-27-2008)



§ 42.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor
vehicle to store, use or to cause or permit any of his or her agents or
employees to store or use such motor vehicle in the village unless said
vehicle is licensed as hereinafter provided. Vehicles not licensed by the
state are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   All vehicles for which a license is required by this chapter,
not owned by persons residing in the village, but kept in the village or used
for a longer period of time than 30 days, are hereby declared to be within
and subject to the provisions of this chapter, if stored or used in the
village. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
carrying passengers for hire, in motor vehicles, within the corporate limits
of the village, without first obtaining a license to do so as otherwise
provided by ordinance.



   (C)   If a vehicle is not in operation at the time a violation is
found, a ticket may be issued to the owner of said vehicle who shall be
presumed to be in control of such vehicle at the time of the violation. A
ticket may be issued as in cases of parking violations by firmly affixing the
ticket to the vehicle.



(Ord. 08-O-01, passed 3-27-2008)



§ 42.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Application for a vehicle license from the village shall be
made in writing to the Village Collector and shall give the name and address
of the owner; the description of the vehicle for which the license is
desired, including the year, make, model, color and license plate; and the
place where such vehicle is kept when not in use.



   (B)   Upon payment of the license fee to the Village Collector, the
Village Collector shall issue the license.



(Ord. 08-O-01, passed 3-27-2008)



§ 42.04  LICENSE AND LATE FEES.



   (A)   The following license fee is to be paid annually to the
Village Collector on or before May 1:



 




License Fees



Citizens age 62 and over



   Passenger vehicles

 

$5




   Trucks with “B” license plates




   Recreational vehicles



Motorcycles and motor bikes
 

$14



Passenger vehicles
 

$14




   Trucks with “B” license plates




   Recreational vehicles



Public passenger vehicles with capacity of 7 or less passengers
 

$20



Public passenger vehicles with capacity of 8 or more passengers
 

$26



Trucks with license plates over “B”
 

$38





 



   (B)   The penalty for licenses not purchased by June 1 shall be a
late fee of $3 per month for each month or part thereof after May 31.



   (C)   All issued licenses shall expire on April 30 of each year.
When issued for a period of less than one year, in cases of new residency or
a new vehicle that does not have a transferable license, the fee shall be:



 

May, June and July
 
100% of annual fee


August, September and October
 
75% of annual fee


November, December and January
 
50% of annual fee


February, March and April
 
25% of annual fee



 



   (D)   All new residents shall purchase a vehicle license within 30
days of the date of occupancy of a residence in the village.



(Ord. 08-O-01, passed 3-27-2008; Ord. 18-O-11, passed 4-3-2018; Ord. 19-O-08,
passed 3-19-2019)



§ 42.05  LATE FEES.



   A late fee of $5 per month shall be applied to any new resident vehicle
license or newly purchased vehicle license not purchased within 30 days of
the date of occupancy or within 30 days of the date of acquisition of a new
vehicle, as applicable.



(Ord. 08-O-01, passed 3-27-2008; Ord. 19-O-08, passed 3-19-2019)



§ 42.06  REPLACEMENT OF LICENSE.



   Any applicant whose license has been mutilated, destroyed or has newly
purchased a vehicle to replace a vehicle with a previously purchased license
may obtain a replacement sticker by showing proof of the original license
receipt. The replacement fee shall be $1 payable to the Village Collector.



(Ord. 08-O-01, passed 3-27-2008)



§ 42.07  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500, for each offense.



(Ord. 08-O-01, passed 3-27-2008) , Safety and Morals



CHAPTER 43:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS



Section



   43.01   Disorderly conduct



   43.02   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer



   43.03   Battery



   43.04   Assault



   43.05   Firearms and other weapons



   43.06   Possession of weapons



   43.07   Fireworks



   43.08   Fires



   43.09   Barbed wire fences



   43.10   Noise



   43.11   Damaging property



   43.12   Littering



   43.13   Trespasses



   45.14   Combustible refuse



   43.15   Boating regulations



   43.16   Parades and demonstrations



   43.17   Bathing



   43.18   Curfew



   43.19   Possession and consumption of alcoholic liquors by minors



   43.20   Social host responsibility



   43.21   Bathing beaches



   43.22   Sale of tobacco products to minors under 18 years of age



   43.23   Retail theft



   43.24   Theft under $500



   43.25   Municipal bond for bail processing



   43.26   Possession of cannabis and drug paraphernalia



§ 43.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits disorderly conduct
when he or she knowingly:



      (1)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or
disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace;



      (2)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to
the Fire Department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a
false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is
no reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists;



      (3)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to
another, a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any
nature or a container holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical
contaminant, or radioactive substance is concealed in such place that its
explosion or release would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb,
explosive or a container holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical
contaminant, or radioactive substance is concealed in such place;



      (4)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to
any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect
that an offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground
for believing that such an offense will be committed, is being committed, or
has been committed;



      (5)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or
unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through
any window or other opening in it;



      (6)   While acting as a collection agency, as defined in the
Collection Agency Act or as an employee of such collection agency, and while
attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged
debtor which is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor;



      (7)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to
the Department of Children and Family Serves under Section 4 of the Abused
and Neglected Child Reporting Act;



      (8)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to
the Department of Pubic Health under the Nursing Home Care Act;



      (9)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in an manner to
the Police Department or Fire Department of any municipality or fire
protection district, or any privately-owned and operated ambulance service, a
false request for an ambulance emergency medical technician - ambulance or
emergency medical technician - paramedic, knowing at the time there is no
reasonable ground for believing that such assistance is required;



      (10)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report
under Article II of “An Act in relation to victims of violence and
abuse”, approved September 16, 1984, as amended;



      (11)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to
any public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe
that transmitting such a report is necessary for the safety and welfare of
the public; or



      (12)   Calls the number “911” for the purpose of making or
transmitting a false alarm or complaint and reporting making or transmitting
a false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the
call or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground
for making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or
transmission could result in the emergency response of any public safety
agency.



   (B)   Any person convicted or adjudicated guilty of violating
division (A) shall be fined an amount not less than $250 nor more than $750.



(Ord. 13-O-17, passed 7-11-2013; Ord. 14-O-18, passed 4-24-2014)



§ 43.02  RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER.



   No person shall resist or obstruct a peace officer in the village. A
person who knowingly resists or obstructs the performance by one known to the
person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within his or her official
capacity commits the offense of resisting or obstructing a peace officer.



§ 43.03  BATTERY.



   (A)   A person commits battery if he or she knowingly without legal
justification by any means causes bodily harm to an individual or makes
physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.



   (B)   Any person convicted or adjudicated guilty of committing
battery, as defined in division (A), shall be fined an amount not less than
$250 nor more than $750.



(Ord. 14-O-08, passed 4-24-2014)



§ 43.04  ASSAULT.



   (A)   No person shall commit an assault in the village.



   (B)   A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he
or she engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery.



§ 43.05  FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to discharge
any firearm, cannon, air gun, air rifle, BB or pellet gun, or any gun
projecting lead or any missiles, bow and arrow, cross-bow or pointed arrow,
except:



      (1)   In a shooting gallery located in compliance with the
village’s Zoning Ordinance, within the municipal limits of the village; or



      (2)   On a parcel of greater than 25 acres in size.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of
the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his or her duty; nor
to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or
property.



(Ord. 02-O-07, passed 5-9-2002; Ord. 09-O-18, passed 9-10-2009)



§ 43.06  POSSESSION OF WEAPONS.



   Unless authorized by law, no person shall carry or conceal on or about
his or her person, except in his or her own abode or fixed place of business,
or possess in any vehicle or display in a threatening-like manner, any
dangerous or deadly weapon including, but not limited to, any pistol,
revolver, slingshot, knuckles, any Bowie or similar knife, or any knife with
a switchblade or device whereby the blade or blades can be opened by a button
or pressure on the handle, stun gun or other mechanical contrivance.



(Ord. 02-O-07, passed 5-9-2002)



§ 43.07  FIREWORKS.



   No person shall sell, offer for sale, use or explode any fireworks in
the village, except the Board of Trustees may grant a permit for a public
display of fireworks under such conditions as it may impose under the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 425, Act 35, § 2.



§ 43.08  FIRES.



   No person shall start or maintain any fire in any street, sidewalk,
park or public place or any place within 30 feet of any building or structure.



§ 43.09  BARBED WIRE FENCES.



   No person shall maintain any fence containing barbed wire along or near
any public sidewalk.



§ 43.10  NOISE.



   (A)   No person shall disturb the peace and quiet of any other
person by creating excessive noise on his, her or any property.



   (B)   EXCESSIVE NOISE shall include but, not by way of limitation,
any of the following:



      (1)   Loud playing of phonographs, radios, television sets or
music machines, or musical instruments;



      (2)   Barking or howling dogs or cats;



      (3)   Prohibition against excessive motor vehicle noise:



         (a)   Violations. No person operating or occupying a
motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway within the
village shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification
system from the vehicle in such a manner or at a volume that will disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of any other person and is plainly audible at a
distance of 75 or more feet from the noise source. Such prohibition shall
apply when the motor vehicle is stopped, standing, parked or moving on a
street, highway, alley, parking lot, driveway, public property or private
property anywhere within the village, at any time.



         (b)   Other acts. The following acts, among others, are
declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this
section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:



            1.   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of
the exhaust of any steam engine stationary internal combustion engine, motor
boat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud, unusual, excessive or explosive noises to be
emitted therefrom;



            2.   Tires. The rapid acceleration, the turning,
backing or other operation of any vehicle or the willful operation of any
motor vehicle so as to cause an unusual or excessive noise from the contact
of any tire upon the surface of any street, alley or other public place;



            3.   Defect on vehicle or load. The use of any
motor vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise; and



            4.   Horns, signaling devices and the like. Any
unreasonable, unnecessary, loud sounding of any horn or signaling device on
any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of
the city, except when used as a danger warning. This provision includes any
horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust.



         (c)   Exceptions. Division (B)(3)(a) above shall not
apply to any of the following circumstances:



            1.   The sound amplification device is being
operated in a motor vehicle to request medical or vehicular assistance or to
warn others of hazardous road, vehicle operating or traffic safety conditions;



            2.   The sound amplification device is an
anti-theft device being operated in a motor vehicle to deter theft or
vandalism;



            3.   The motor vehicle is an emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is being operated on an emergency run;



            4.   The motor vehicle is participating in a
parade which the sponsors of the parade have obtained the proper permits; and



            5.   The sound amplification device is being
operated as a requirement of federal or state law.



         (d)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division
(B)(3), the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



            PLAINLY AUDIBLE.



               a.   Any sound which can be clearly heard by
a person with normal hearing ability at a distance of 75 feet or more.



               b.   Measurement standards shall be the
auditory senses, based upon direct line of sight.



               c.   Words or phrases need not be
discernible and bass reverberations are included.



            SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM. Any radio, tape player,
compact disc player, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, “boom
box”, sound amplifier; television, audio system, loudspeaker or other
electronic device used for amplification of the human voice or music.



            VEHICLE. The same meaning as “motor vehicle” as
set forth in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217.



         (e)   Administrative adjudication. All citations for
violations of this division (B)(3) shall be subject to administrative
adjudication by the village under the village’s Administrative Adjudication
Ordinance.



         (f)   Fines. Any person who violates this division
(B)(3) shall be subject to a fine of $50 for the first offense, $100 for a
second offense within a one-year period and $500 for a third or subsequent
offense committed within a one-year period.



         (g)   Seizure and impoundment. A vehicle that is used in
violation of this division (B)(3) shall be subject to seizure and impoundment
and shall be liable for any and all administrative charges under the
village’s Impound Fine Ordinance, as well as any associated towing and
storage fees.



         (h)   Notice upon impoundment. Whenever a police officer
has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this division (B)(3), the police officer shall
provide for the towing of this vehicle to facilitate control by the village
or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, a police officer shall notify the
person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and
of the vehicle owner’s right to an appeal under the municipal code.



      (4)   No construction shall take place between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. the following day with the exception that said
construction shall not begin before 8:30 a.m. on Sundays; and



      (5)   The use of any power lawn mower, snow blower, snowmobile
or other noisy machine between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. the
following day with the exception that use of said equipment or other
motorized machines shall not begin before 8:30 a.m. on Sundays or at any time
if not properly muffled.



(Ord. 11-O-08, passed 6-9-2011)



§ 43.11  DAMAGING PROPERTY.



   No person shall damage, destroy or deface any village property or any
public or private property without permission of the owner.



§ 43.12  LITTERING.



   No person shall litter any public or private property with paper or
other debris or foreign matter. Any stored or transported materials
susceptible to blowing or scattering shall be adequately covered or protected
to prevent littering.



§ 43.13  TRESPASSES.



   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a
trespass within the village upon either public or private property.



   (B)   Specifically enumerated trespasses; suppression. Without
constituting any limitation, upon the provisions of this section, any of the
following acts by any person shall be deemed included among those that
constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of this section, and
appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time,
to prevent or suppress any violation or violations of this section, the
aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as follows, to wit:



      (1)   Any entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of
another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or at any point of approach
or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing, by any owner or occupant thereof;



      (2)   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental
to the making of any entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice
posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or at any point of
approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given
orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof;



      (3)   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of
another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by
any owner or occupant thereof; or



      (4)   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the
possession or control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such
vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person
having such rights.



§ 45.14  COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE.



   It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such
manner as to create a fire hazard, or to throw or deposit, or cause to be
thrown or deposited, any such refuse of any kind on or in any street, highway
or alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the village.



§ 43.15  BOATING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Registration and permits.



      (1)   Registration. All boats and vessels shall be required to
be registered with the Village Clerk. Proof of said registration in the form
of a current registration sticker shall be affixed to the trailer hauling
said boat or vessel and be conspicuously displayed on the trailer tongue.



      (2)   Fees. The yearly fee for a non-resident of the village
for such registration sticker shall be $30.



      (3)   Special permits. Any regatta or other boating exhibition
must be approved by the Village Board a permit for such shall be issued
thereafter.



   (B)   Illinois Boat Registration and Safety Act. This section hereby
incorporates by reference all applicable provisions of the Boat Registration
and Safety Act of the state and amendments thereto, being ILCS Ch. 625, Act
45, and the same shall be enforced as part of this section, except where this
section further restricts operations and use of vessels, then this section
takes precedence.



   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ICEBOAT. Any boat, vessel or device meant to travel on the frozen
waters of Lily Lake on runners, skis or similar devices, powered by sail.



      MOTORBOAT. Any vessel propelled by motor or machine, whether or
not such machine is the principal source of propulsion.



      NO WAKE SPEED. The speed at which any motorboat, vessel or device
must travel go as not to create any appreciable waves, but in no case shall
NO WAKE SPEED be any greater than five mph.



      OPERATE. To navigate, propel or otherwise use a motorboat, vessel
or device.



      PERSON. An individual, partnership, firm, corporation,
association or other entity.



      POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of Police of the Village of Lakemoor, or
any acting Chief, or commanding officer in his or her absence.



      SAILBOAT. Any watercraft propelled by sail or canvas. For the
purpose of this section, any watercraft propelled by both sail or canvas and
machine or motor shall be deemed a motorboat when being propelled by machine
or motor.



      VESSEL or WATERCRAFT. Every description of watercraft used or
capable of being used as means of transportation on water.



   (D)   Enforcement. The Village Police Department or any special
police or water safety patrol authorized by the village shall, for the
purposes of this section, have full and complete jurisdiction of the lake
known as Lily Lake for the purpose of enforcement of this section.



      (1)   Designated no wake areas. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any motorboat at any speed greater than “no wake” in
the following areas:



         (a)   Areas known as lagoon and channel; and/or



         (b)   Any area within 75 feet of the shoreline.



      (2)   Maximum speed limits in undesignated areas. In parts of
Lily Lake other than areas designated in division (D)(1) above, it shall be
unlawful to operate a motorboat or vessel at speeds in excess of ten mph.



      (3)   Nighttime limitations. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any motorboat at any speed greater than “no wake”
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on any part of Lily Lake.



      (4)   Muffler and noise requirements.



         (a)   It shall be unlawful to use a boat propelled by a
motor or machine unless same is provided with a serviceable muffler or
underwater exhaust capable of adequately muffling the sounds of the exhaust
of the engine.



         (b)   The phrase ADEQUATELY MUFFLING shall mean that the
motor exhaust at all times be so muffled or suppressed as not to create
excessive or unusual noise.



         (c)   No other excessive or unusual noise shall be
created through operation of said boats or devices.



      (5)   Age requirements. No person under age of ten years shall
operate any motorboat or sailboat.



      (6)   Restricted areas.



         (a)   It shall be unlawful to operate any boat or vessel
within 50 feet of a bathing area or within any area restricted by buoys.



         (b)   The village may designate certain areas to be
bathing, fishing, swimming or otherwise restricted areas. Further, the
Village Board or the Police Chief may restrict all boating on the lake when
the conditions of weather warrant or when other activities shall have been,
approved and boating has been suspended for a particular day.



         (c)   If conditions exist whereby the lake becomes too
crowded, the Police Chief may suspend boating on the lake for the remainder
of the day.



      (7)   Littering. No person shall be allowed to cast, throw or
deposit bottles, glass, caps, garbage, refuse or debris into the waters of
Lily Lake or upon its shores.



      (8)   Sailboat size limits. No person shall operate any
sailboat upon the waters of Lily Lake that shall exceed 16 feet in length.



      (9)   Iceboat prohibited. It shall be unlawful to operate any
iceboat upon the frozen waters of Lily Lake.



      (10)   Hovercraft prohibited. It shall be unlawful to operate
any hovercraft or similar air- driven craft on Lily Lake.



      (11)   Horsepower limitation. It shall be unlawful to operate
any boat or vessel powered by a motor in excess of ten horsepower.



      (12)   Waterskiing. No boat operating under these provisions
shall be used for waterskiing.



      (13)   Reckless operation. No person shall operate any boat or
vessel in a careless, willful, heedless, reckless or wanton manner so as to
endanger, harass or annoy persons or endanger property.



      (14)   Driving while under the influence. No person shall
operate any boat or vessel or be in actual physical control of any boat or
vessel who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or narcotic drug.



   (E)   Penalty. Any person violating any part of this section shall
be fined not less than $25, nor more than $750, for each offense. Any person
who shall be convicted a second time in a calendar year of a violation of
this section shall be prohibited from operation of any boat or vessel upon
the waters of Lily Lake for the remainder of said calendar year.



(Ord. 96-O-15, passed 8-22-1996; Ord. 05-O-11, passed 6-9-2005)



§ 43.16  PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall participate in or promote any parade or
demonstration on any street or other public property unless a permit therefor
has been issued by the Village Marshal.



   (B)   Application for such permit shall be made at least 72 hours
before the event and shall provide such information as the Village Marshal
shall require for proper protection of the public.



   (C)   No such parade or demonstration shall be held during the
nighttime, or in any such manner as to obstruct the orderly use by the public
of any street or public place.



   (D)   The Village Marshal may issue such permit subject to such
reasonable restrictions as he or she shall deem necessary to safeguard the
residents of the village and to protect private and public property.



§ 43.17  BATHING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe at any public place, or in
any place open to public view, unless such person is adequately or decently
clothed or garbed in a bathing suit; and it shall be unlawful for any person
to robe or disrobe at any public place or in any place open to public view,
or to change clothing, or to change into or out of a bathing suit at any
public place or in any place open to public view, or in an automobile or
other motor vehicle on or in any street, highway, alley or other public place
within the corporate limits of the village.



§ 43.18  CURFEW.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CURFEW HOURS.



         (a)   11:00 p.m. on any Sunday. Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and



         (b)   11:59 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and until
6:00 a.m. of the following day.



      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for
a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any
place of amusement or entertainment.



      GUARDIAN.



         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian
of the person of a minor; or



         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by a court.



      MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.



      OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.



      PARENT. A person who is:



         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of
another person; or



         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transport facilities and shops.



      REMAIN. To:



         (a)   Linger or stay; or



         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by
a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the
premises.



      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during
curfew hours.



      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he
or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to
remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
village during curfew hours.



      (3)   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment
commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours.



   (C)   Defenses.



      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) above
that the minor was:



         (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;



         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s
parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;



         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without detour or stop;



         (e)   Involved in an emergency;



         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence
or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor’s presence;



         (g)   Attending an official school, religious or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a
civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
Unites States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or



         (i)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated
minor under the Emancipation of Mature Minors Act, as amended, being ILCS Ch.
750, Act 30.



      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B)(3)
above that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.



   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this
section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason
for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make
an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defense in division (C) above is present.



   (E)   Penalties. A person who violates a provision of this chapter
is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which
the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon
conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.



(Ord. 04-O-03, passed 4-8-2004)



§ 43.19  POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS BY MINORS.



   (A)   No person under the age of 21 shall purchase or accept as a
gift any alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession
within the village limits, except as otherwise provided under this section.



   (B)   No person under the age of 21 shall consume any alcoholic
liquor within the village limits of the village, except as provided under
this section.



   (C)   The possession or serving of alcoholic liquor by a person
under 21 years of age, but not under 18 years of age, pursuant to his or her
employment by an employer licensed to sell liquor in the village is not
prohibited under this section. The possession or consumption of an alcoholic
liquor by a person under the age of 21 in the performance of a religious
service or ceremony is not prohibited under this section. The possession or
consumption by a person under the age of 21 years under the direct
supervision of that person’s parent or parents in the privacy of a home is
not prohibited under this section.



   (D)   No person shall serve, sell or give any alcoholic liquor to a
person under 21 years of age, except as otherwise provided under this
section. No person shall knowingly permit a gathering, at a residence that he
or she occupies, of two or more persons where anyone or more of the persons
is under 18 years of age and the following factors also apply:



      (1)   The person occupying the residence knows that any such
person under the age of 18 is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic
liquor;



      (2)   The possession or consumption of the alcoholic liquor by
the person under 18 is not otherwise permitted by this section; and



      (3)   The person occupying the residence knows that the person
under the age of 18 leaves the residence in an intoxicated condition.



   (E)   Any person violating any provision of this section, or any
rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereof, or any provisions of
any code adopted herein by reference shall, upon adjudication of guilt, be
subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $750, and the costs of
prosecution.



(Ord. 09-O-03, passed 2-26-2009)



§ 43.20  SOCIAL HOST RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of
wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin or any other distilled spirits including
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process
produced.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer and which
contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other
substances.



      CONVEYANCE. Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container
operated for the transportation of persons or property.



      EVENT or GATHERING. Any group of three or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



      HOST. To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise,
control or permit a gathering or event.



      ILLICIT DRUGS. Any drug, substance or compound, prohibited by
law, including drugs prescribed by a physician which are in the possession of
or used by someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.



      PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:



         (a)   As a natural, adoptive parent or stepparent;



         (b)   As a legal guardian; or



         (c)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given
by order of the court.



      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation
or any association of one or more individuals.



      RESIDENCE or PREMISES. Any home, yard, farm, field, land,
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a
hall or meeting room, park or any other place of assembly, public or private,
whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented or used with or without permission or compensation.



      UNDERAGE PERSON. Any individual under 21 years of age.



      RELIGIOUS CEREMONY. The possession, consumption and dispensation
of alcohol or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any bona
fide rite or religious ceremony.



      RESPONSE COSTS. The costs associated with responses by law
enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to an event or
gathering, including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel for the amount of
time spent responding to, remaining at or otherwise dealing with an event or
gathering, and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s);



         (b)   The cost of any medical treatment for any law
enforcement, code enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel
injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of an event or
gathering; and



         (c)   The cost of repairing any village equipment or
property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in
responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of an event or gathering.



      REASONABLE STEPS. Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at
the event or gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages
present at the event or gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the
event or gathering by inspecting drivers licenses or other government-issued
identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages
while at the event or gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at
the event or gathering, calling for police assistance in the event people
under 21 are in possession of alcohol at the event or gathering or advising
law enforcement in advance of departing one’s residence that the owner will
be away and no underage person is authorized to be present and consume
alcohol at the owner’s residence.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
building, transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to host, permit, allow or
fail to take reasonable steps to prevent an event or gathering at any
residence, premises or on any other private or public property or in any
conveyance where illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present
when the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage person will
or does consume any illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverage or the
person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption of
illicit drugs alcohol or alcoholic beverage by the underage person(s).



   (C)   A person is responsible for violating division (B) above if
the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, conspires with,
otherwise procures another to commit or knows or should have known about the
prohibited act.



   (D)   A person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in
violation of this section if he or she seeks assistance from the police
department or other law enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses
to abide by the host’s performance of the duties imposed by this section;
or terminates the event or gathering because the host has been unable to
prevent underage persons from consuming illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic
beverages despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so, as long as such
request is made before any other person makes a complaint about the event or
gathering.



   (E)   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be
present at the event or gathering to be guilty of a violation of this section.



   (F)   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of
alcoholic beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or exclusively
between an underage person and his or her parent or legal guardian, as
permitted by state law.



   (G)   Any person violating any provision of this section, or any
rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereof, or any provisions of
any code adopted herein by reference shall, upon adjudication of guilt, be
subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $750, and the costs of
prosecution and response costs.



(Ord. 09-O-03, passed 2-26-2009)



§ 43.21  BATHING BEACHES.



   (A)   Designated bathing beaches. The Lake Shore Drive Beach is the
only designated swimming beach on Lily Lake.



   (B)   Bathing beach regulations.



      (1)   Use of beaches restricted to residents or guests only.



      (2)   Fishing is prohibited on the beaches.



      (3)   Swimmers using the beaches must stay within the confines
of the buoys marking the swimming area.



      (4)   The Village Board or Chief of Police may restrict use of
bathing beaches when conditions of weather or health warrant or when other
activities shall have been approved.



      (5)   No person shall be allowed to cast, throw or deposit
bottles, glass, caps, garbage, refuse or debris onto the beaches.



      (6)   Glass bottles are prohibited on beaches.



      (7)   Fires are prohibited on beaches.



      (8)   Beach hours are 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.



      (9)   No lifeguard on duty; do not swim alone.



      (10)   No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic liquor
on the beaches.



   (C)   Special permits. The village may issue a permit upon good
cause shown to persons or groups for the purpose of special events on a first
come-first served basis.



   (D)   Enforcement. The Village Police Department or any special
police or water safety patrol authorized by the village shall for the purpose
of this section have full and complete jurisdiction of the beaches for the
enforcement of this section.



   (E)   Penalties. Any person violating any part of this section shall
be fined not less than $25, nor more than $750, for each offense.



(Ord. 96-O-15, passed 8-22-1996; Ord. 05-O-11, passed 6-9-2005)



§ 43.22  SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.  A product or device not consisting of
or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT
excludes cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these
terms are defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 675, § 1 and any product approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for
sale as a tobacco cessation product, as tobacco dependence product, or for
other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.



   CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES. Vending machine operated by the customer
through the use of coin, slug, token or other like objects, or credit card or
debit card, by which the customer by inserting the coin or token, swiping a
credit card or debit card, purchases a tobacco product or alternative
nicotine product from other than another person.



   MINOR.  For the purposes for which this section is enacted, to ensure
that ILCS Ch. 720, Act 675, § 1 is obeyed, a minor is anyone under 18 years
of age.



   TOBACCO ACCESSORIES.  Any cigarette paper, pipes, holders of smoking
materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines and other items, designed
primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products.



   TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco.



   (B)   Purpose.



      (1)   It is the policy of the village to prohibit the sale of
tobacco products or alternative nicotine products to minors under 18 years of
age in accordance with ILCS Ch. 720, Act 675, § 1.



      (2)   Furthermore, it is also the policy of the village to
prevent the use of cigarette vending machines by minors in violation of ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 675, § 1.



   (C)   License required. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for
sale at retail, at wholesale, to give away, deliver, or to keep with the
intention of selling at retail, wholesale, giving away, or delivering tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products within the village without first
obtaining a license. This license shall be required regardless of the method
of sale or dispensing and shall include sales and dispensing by self-help,
manual service, or coin-operated device.



   (D)   Application for license. Any person desiring to obtain a
license to sell tobacco products or alternative nicotine products shall make
written application for that purpose to the Village Clerk in which shall be
set forth the full name and address of the applicant, the name and address of
the business, firm or corporation at which such sales are proposed to be
made. The applicant shall further comply with all other provisions of Chapter
7 concerning the business license application process.



   (E)   License fee. The license fee for a tobacco dealer’s license
within the village shall be as provided in § 7.09 of this code.



   (F)   Scope of license. The license required by this section shall
authorize the licensee named therein to sell tobacco products or alternative
nicotine products at the place designated therein only.



   (G)   License to be posted. Licenses required by this section shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises designated therein.



   (H)   Licenses not transferable. The transfer of any license issued
hereunder is hereby expressly prohibited.



   (I)   Inspection/enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Chief of
Police or his or her designee(s), and they are hereby authorized and
empowered, from time-to-time, to inspect and examine all places where tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products are licensed to be sold within the
village, with the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of the state, the
provisions of this section and other ordinances of the village in relation to
the sale of tobacco products or alternative nicotine products are being
complied with at such places. It shall be their duty to cause all such laws
and ordinances to be vigorously enforced. It shall be the duty of all persons
licensed to sell tobacco products or alternative nicotine products within the
village, upon demand of the Chief of Police and/or his or her designee (s),
to furnish to said person for their inspection, samples of all tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products sold or offered for sale by them,
which samples of tobacco products or alternative nicotine products shall be
analyzed by or under the direction of the Chief of Police and/or his or her
designee(s) and a record of such analysis shall be made and kept in their
office for the inspection of the public.



   (J)   Prohibited sales or delivery. It shall be unlawful for any
person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away, or
deliver tobacco products or alternative nicotine products, or accessories to
any person under the age of 18 years of age, including upon the written order
of a parent or adult acting “in loco parentis” not present at the time of
purchase.



   (K)   Signage prohibiting sales or possession of tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products to persons under the age of 18 years of age.
Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall
be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products and on or upon every vending machine which
offers tobacco products or alternative nicotine products for sale. Each such
sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:



      “The sale or possession of tobacco products or alternative
nicotine products to persons under 18 years of age is prohibited by law. Any
person who violated this law is subject to a fine of not less than $50 and no
more than $500.” Posted signs shall be plainly visible and shall measure at
least eight and one-half inches in height by 11 inches in length. Letters on
posted signs shall be at least three-quarters of an inch in height.



   (L)   Minimum  age  to  sell tobacco  products or alternative
nicotine products. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to
engage, employ or permit any person under 18 years of age to sell tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products in any licensed premises.



   (M)   Purchase by persons under 18 years of age prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to purchase
tobacco products or alternative nicotine products/accessories, or to
misrepresent their identity or age, or to use false or altered identification
for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products or alternative nicotine
products.



   (N)   Cigarette machines to be inaccessible to persons under 18
years of age. Each cigarette vending machine shall be so installed as to be
inaccessible to persons under 18 years of age. Every vending machine not
installed as to be inaccessible to persons under 18 years of age in hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. Inaccessibility may be accomplished either
by placement of the machine in a room or area to which persons under 18 years
of age do not have access or by the installation of a manual, electric,
electronic, or remote control locking device which can be activated and
controlled only by an adult employee of the premises on which such machine is
located, and then only after such adult employee has verified that the person
desiring to purchase cigarettes is not a person under 18 years of age. The
cigarette vending machine must be directly visible by the owner of the
premises, or his or her employee or agent during the operation of such
vending machine.



   (O)   Responsibility for agents and employees. Every act or omission
of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of
this section by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of
any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and
such licensee shall be punished in the same manner as if such act or omission
had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.



   (P)   Fine, suspension or revocation of license.



      (1)   Every license issued under this section is subject to
the right which is hereby expressly reserved, to suspend or revoke the same
should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the sale of a tobacco
product or alternative nicotine product or accessory to any person under the
age of 18, or permit the operation of any cigarette vending machine contrary
to the provisions of this section or the laws of the state. Said license may
be suspended or revoked by the Board of Trustees after written notice to the
licensee, which notice should specify the ordinance or law violation with
which the licensee is charged, if after a hearing the licensee is found to be
guilty of such violation. Ten days notice of the hearing shall be given the
licensee. At such hearing, the licensee and his attorney may present and
submit evidence or witnesses to his or her defense.



      (2)   In addition to the aforesaid power to suspend or revoke
the license to sell tobacco products, the licensee may be prosecuted by the
village before the Village Hearing Officer for any violation of this section
by the licensee or his agents or employees. The Hearing Officer shall have
the power to fine the licensee an amount not to exceed $750 for each
violation of this section.



   (Q)   Penalty.



      (1)   Any person convicted of a first offense of this
provision shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and no more than
$750. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.



      (2)   Any person under the age of 18 found to have purchased
tobacco products or alternative nicotine products, or to have misrepresented
their identity or age, or the use of any false or altered identification for
the purpose of purchasing tobacco products or alternative nicotine products
may be subject to a penalty of not less than $100 and no more than $500. Any
person under the age of 18 found in possession of tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products may be subject to a penalty of not less than
$100 and no more than $500.



(Ord. 00-O-13, passed - -2000; Ord. 14-O-03, passed 2-27-2014)



§ 43.23  RETAIL THEFT.



   (A)   Definitions.



      CONCEAL MERCHANDISE means that, although there may be some notice
of its presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation.



      CONTINUING COURSE OF CONDUCT means a series of acts, and the
accompanying mental state necessary for the crime in questions, irrespective
of whether the series of acts are continuously or intermittent.



      FULL RETAIL VALUE means the merchant's stated or advertised price
of the merchandise. FULL RETAIL VALUE includes the aggregate value of
property obtained from retail thefts committed by the same person as part of
a continuing course of conduct from one or more mercantile establishments in
a single transaction or in separate transactions over a period of one year.



      MERCHANT means an owner or operator of any retail mercantile
establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director,
franchisee, or independent contractor of such owner or operator.



      MINOR means a person who is less than 18 years of age, is
unemancipated and resides with his or her parents or legal guardian.



      PEACE OFFICER has the meaning ascribed to that term in ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, § 2-13.



      PERSON means any natural person or individual.



      PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT includes, but is
not limited to, the retail mercantile establishment; any common use areas in
shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf
of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons
of such retail mercantile establishment.



      RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT means any place where merchandise
is displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.



      SHOPPING CART means those push carts of the type or types which
are commonly provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail
mercantile establishments for the use of the public in transporting
commodities in stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a
place outside the store.



      THEFT DETECTION DEVICE REMOVER means any tool or device
specifically designed and intended to be used to remove any theft detection
device from any merchandise.



      THEFT DETECTION SHIELDING DEVICE means any laminated or coated
bag or device designed and intended to shield merchandise from detection by
an electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.



      UNDER-RING means to cause the cash register or other sales
recording device to reflect less than the full retail value of the
merchandise.



   (B)   Offense of retail theft.



      (1)   A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or
she knowingly:



         (a)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or
causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held,
stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the
intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving
the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such
merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or



         (b)   Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price
tag, markings, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in
determining value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to
purchase such merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than
the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the
full retail value of such merchandise; or



         (c)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored
or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container
in or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or



         (d)   Under-rings with the intention of depriving the
merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or



         (e)   Removes a shopping cart from the premise of a
retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at
the time of such removal with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart; or



         (f)   Represents to a merchant that he or another is the
lawful owner of property, knowing that such representation is false, and
conveys or attempts to convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of
the property in exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of
the merchant; or



         (g)   Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding
device or theft detection device remover with the intention of using such
device to deprive the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit
of any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment without paying the full retail value of such
merchandise; or



         (h)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over
property of the owner and thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of
the use or benefit of the property when a lessee of the personal property of
another fails to return it to the owner, or if the lessee fails to pay the
full retail value of such property to the lessor in satisfaction of any
contractual provision requiring such, within ten days after written demand
from the owner for its return. A notice in writing, given after the
expiration of the leasing agreement, by registered mail, to the lessee at the
address given by the lessee and shown on the leasing agreement shall
constitute proper demand.



   (C)   Theft by emergency exit. A person commits the offense of theft
by emergency exit when he or she commits a retail theft as defined in ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16A-3 and to facilitate the theft he or she leaves the
retail mercantile establishment by use of a designated emergency exit.



   (D)   Presumptions. If any person:



      (1)   Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her
belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and



      (2)   Removes that merchandise beyond the last know station
for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile
establishment, such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away
or transferred such merchandise with the possession, use or benefit of such
merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise.



   (E)   Detention.



      (1)   Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that
a person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for
a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:



         (a)   To request identification;



         (b)   To verify such identification;



         (c)   To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such
person has in his or her possession unpurchased merchandise and, to make
reasonable investigation of the ownership of such merchandise;



         (d)   To inform a peace officer of the detention of the
person and surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer;



         (e)   In the case of a minor, to immediately make a
reasonable attempt to inform the parents, guardians or other private person
interested in the welfare of that minor and, at the merchant's discretion, a
peace officer, of this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to
such person.



      (2)   A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off
the premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is
pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person.



      (3)   A merchant shall be deemed to have reasonable grounds to
make a detention for the purposes of this section if the merchant detains a
person because such person has in his or her possession either a theft
detection shielding device or a theft detection device remover.



   (F)   Affirmative defense. A detention as permitted in this section
does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, as defined in Section
10-3 of the Illinois Criminal Code, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 10.3, nor shall
it render the merchant liable to the person so detained.



   (G)   Fines and penalties. Any violation under this section shall be
subject to a fine not less than $100 and not more than $750 per offense, or
incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period
not to exceed six months, or both. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a first
offense of this section shall be a Class A misdemeanor. A second or
subsequent offense shall be a felony to be prosecuted by appropriate state
law. Nothing in this section shall limit the village's authority to
reclassify any offense under this section to an offense under the Illinois
Criminal Code.



(Ord. 14-O-08, passed 4-24-2014; Ord. 15-O-03, passed 2-12-2015)



§ 43.24  THEFT UNDER $500.



   (A)   A person commits theft when he or she knowingly:



      (1)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of
the owner;



      (2)   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner;



      (3)   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner;



      (4)   Obtains control of stolen property knowing the property
to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce
him or her to believe that the property was stolen; or



      (5)   Obtains or exerts control over property in the custody
of any law enforcement agency which any law enforcement officer or any
individual acting in behalf of a law enforcement agency explicitly represents
to the person as being stolen or represents to the person such circumstances
as would reasonably induce the persons to believe that the property was
stolen, and:



         (a)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the
use or benefit of the property;



         (b)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property
in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or



         (c)   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing
such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner
permanently of such use or benefit.



   (B)   Any person convicted or adjudicated guilty of violating this
provision shall be fined not less than $300 nor more the $750.



(Ord. 14-O-08, passed 4-24-2014)



§ 43.25  MUNICIPAL BOND FOR BAIL PROCESSING.



   The village shall impose a fee of $20 for bail processing against any
person arrested for violating a bailable municipal ordinance or a state or
federal law.



(Ord. 14-O-12, passed 5-22-2014)



§ 43.26  POSSESSION OF CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   Possession of cannabis. It shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly possess cannabis or a substance containing cannabis within the
village.



   (B)   Penalty for possession of cannabis.



      (1)   Any person having found to be knowingly in possession of
cannabis in an amount not in excess of ten grams, within the village shall be
subject to, in addition to all other  court  costs  and  state penalties,
a fine of not less than $250 for the first offense, not less than $350 for
the second offense, not less than $400 for the third offense and not less
than $500 for any additional offense beyond the third offense.



      (2)   Any person having been found to be knowingly in
possession of cannabis in an amount in excess of ten grams but less than 30
grams within the village shall be subject to, in addition to all other court
costs and state penalties, a fine of not less than $400 for the first offense
and not less than $750 if such person has a prior conviction for possession
of cannabis. In addition, any person found guilty of possession in an amount
of greater than ten but less than 30 grams, may be charged with a Class C
misdemeanor.



   (C)   Possession of paraphernalia.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly possess a glass pipe, a water pipe, a bowl, bong, or
other device or contraption contrived and intended for inhaling cannabis into
their body within the village.



   (D)   Penalty for possession of paraphernalia. Any person having
been found to be knowingly in possession of paraphernalia shall be subject
to, in addition to all other court costs and state penalties, a fine of not
less than $200 for their first offense and not less than $500 for each
subsequent offense. Any such offense may also be prosecuted as a Class C
misdemeanor.



   (E)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BONG.  A device intended for smoking cannabis where the user
draws smoke through any combination of tubes and pipes.



      BOWL.  A pipe-like device intended for smoking cannabis wherein
the user ignites cannabis and inhales the smoke through a tube or mouthpiece.



      WATER PIPE.  A device intended for smoking cannabis wherein
smoke is drawn through water prior to inhaling.



(Ord. 13-O-25, passed 10-10-2013)



CHAPTER 44:  FILING FEES



Section



   44.01   Fees



§ 44.01  FEES.



   There are hereby established certain fees for application procedures
for zoning and related matters as follows:



 

Request
 
Property In Question
 

Fee





Amendments, rezonings and conditional use permits (including PUDs)
 
First two acres
 

$250



Each additional acre or part thereof
 

$10



Conditional use permits for sign
 
Entire property
 

$100 (per sign)



Final plat of subdivision
 
All property sizes
 

$300 + $25/acre



Pre-annexation agreement
 
Entire property
 

$100



Preliminary plat of subdivision
 
All property sizes
 
$300 + $25/acre


Simplified residential variation
 
Entire property
 

$50



Variations (non-residential) and appeals
 
Entire property
 

$300





 



(Ord. 98-O-02, passed 2-12-1998; Ord. 14-O-23, passed 6-26-2014)



CHAPTER 45:  FINES FOR OFFENSES



Section



   45.01   Fines for offenses and costs of collection



§ 45.01  FINES FOR OFFENSES AND COSTS OF COLLECTION.



   (A)   The fines for offenses in the village are adopted by
reference. A copy of the fines can be found in the offices of the Village
Clerk and is available upon request.



   (B)   Whenever any fine, charge, penalty or payment is due pursuant
to any provision of this Code and is not paid after the village sends, mails
or otherwise delivers notice (unless a different period is stated elsewhere
in this Code) to the person responsible for such fine, charge, penalty or
payment (the responsible person), the village may transfer such fine, charge,
penalty or payment to a collection agency of the village’s choosing. Any
such collection agency shall, for purposes of collection of such fine,
charge, penalty or payment, be deemed an agent of the village. All costs
incurred by the village for the collection of any fines, charges, penalties
or payments transferred to any such collection agency shall be assessed
against the responsible person as an additional fine, charge, penalty or
payment, subject to any applicable statutory limits.



(Ord. 13-O-26, passed 10-20-2013; Ord. 16-O- 23, passed 10-13-2016; Ord.
17-O-06, passed 2- 9-2017)



CHAPTER 46:  FLOODPLAIN



Section



   46.01   Purpose



   46.02   Provisions for accomplishing the purpose



   46.03   Definitions



   46.04   Base flood elevation



   46.05   Development permit



   46.06   Preventing increased damages



   46.07   Protecting buildings



   46.08   Other development requirements



   46.09   Variances



   46.10   Disclaimer of liability



   46.11   Penalty



   46.12   Severability



   46.13   Repealed provisions



   46.14   Effect



§ 46.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the
village by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2 and 11-31-2, in
order to accomplish the following purposes:



   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing the flood or
drainage hazards to others;



   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings
from flood damage;



   (C)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;



   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood
rescue and relief operations;



   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by
minimizing the potential for creating flood blight areas;



   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
property in the village; and



   (G)   To provide for the orderly growth and development of an
environment that is especially sensitive to changes from human activity.



§ 46.02  PROVISIONS FOR ACCOMPLISHING THE PURPOSE.



   (A)   All new development proposals in the special flood hazard
areas shall be reviewed and approved by the Building Inspector.



   (B)   The Building Inspector’s review is to ensure the following:



      (1)   New development will not change the flow of flood or
other surface drainage waters so that other properties become more
susceptible to damage;



      (2)   New developments will not create special hazards or
nuisances when flooded; and



      (3)   New buildings and major improvements to existing
buildings will not be subject to damage by the base flood.



§ 46.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100- YEAR
FLOOD. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in § 46.04 of
this chapter.



   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank in order
that such tanks will be constructed to the same flood damage protection
standards. The term includes a mobile home or prefabricated building which is
affixed on a permanent site and connected to the required utilities. The term
does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.



   DEVELOPMENT.



      (1)   Any human-made change to real estate, including:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction or replacement of
building or an addition to a building valued at more than $1,000;



         (b)   Installing a mobile home on a site or preparing a
site for a mobile home;



         (c)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities or
facilities, construction of roads, bridges or similar projects valued at more
than $1,000;



         (d)   Construction or erection of levees, walls or
fences;



         (e)   Filling, dredging, grading, excavating or other
non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface;



         (f)   Storage of materials; or



         (g)   Any other activity that might change the
direction, height or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include:



         (a)   Maintenance of existing buildings and facilities
such as re-roofing or re-surfacing roads;



         (b)   Repairs made to a damaged building that do not
change the building’s exterior dimensions and that are valued at less than
50% of the value of the building before the damage occurred;



         (c)   Gardening, plowing and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees; or



         (d)   Agricultural development activities on farms,
including farm residences as exempted by law.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of inundation of normally dry
land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation or the
runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOODWAY. The portion of the SFHA required



to store and convey the base flood. If not prohibited, building or placing
obstructions in a FLOODWAY will increase flood damages to other properties.



   FPE or FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The elevation of the base flood plus
one foot at any given location in the SFHA.



   SFHA or SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The SFHAs of
the village are generally identified as such on the flood hazard boundary map
of the village, prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration and dated
12-10-1976, and the Flood Hazard Boundary Map of the County of McHenry,
prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration and dated 5-20-1977.



§ 46.04  BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.



   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood
according to the best data available to the State Water Survey’s Floodplain
Information Repository. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, he may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
existing data with better data and submit it to the State Water Survey.



   (B)   The base flood elevation for each SFHAs delineated on an “A
Zone” on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map for the village, dated 12-10-1976,
and the Flood Hazard Boundary Map for the County of McHenry, dated 5-20-1977,
shall be the 100-year flood depth calculated by the Building Inspector
according to the formulas presented in Depth and Frequency of Floods in
Illinois, published by the U.S. Geological Survey, 1976.



§ 46.05  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall commence any development
in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from the Building
Inspector. The Building Inspector shall not issue a development permit if the
proposed development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building Inspector. The application shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and in
those parts of the site that are below the base flood elevation:



      (1)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade
resulting from excavation or filling;



      (2)   The direction of flow of surface drainage and flood
flows;



      (3)   The location of all watercourses and drainage facilities;



      (4)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and
additions to buildings; and



      (5)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all buildings subject to the requirements of § 46.07 of this chapter.



   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
Building Inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land higher than the base flood
elevation is not in the SFHA and therefore not subject to the requirements of
this chapter.



   (D)   The Building Inspector shall inform the applicant of any and
all other local, state and federal permits that may be required for this type
of development activity. The development permit will only be issued on the
condition that the other specified permits are obtained. The Building
Inspector shall not issue a use permit/certificate of use or occupancy unless
all required permits have been obtained.



§ 46.06  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.



   (A)   No development in the SFHA shall create a damaging or
potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity.



      (1)   (a)   For development proposals located in an
identified floodway or within a riverline SFHA where the floodway has not yet
been identified, the following rule shall apply: the Building Inspector shall
review the development plans to discern if:



            1.   A new obstruction to flood flows would be
created;



            2.   The project will involve a channel crossing
such as a bridge or pipeline; or



            3.   The project will modify the shape of the
channel.



         (b)   If any of these three situations will result from
the project, the applicant shall be required to obtain a permit from the
State Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources, issued
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, § 23. The Building Inspector shall not
issue a development permit unless the applicant has obtained either a Section
70 permit or a “waiver of permit required” from the Division of Water
Resources.



      (2)   For development proposals located in a flood fringe,
“AO Zone” or “AH Zone”, identified as such on a SFHA map or in a
lakefront floodplain, ponding area, area of sheet flow or other SFHA not
subject to overbank flooding from an identified channel, the requirement of
this division (A) shall not apply.



   (B)   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE unless such materials are
stored in a storage tank or flood- proofed building constructed according to
the requirements of division (C) below.



   (C)   New replacement sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste
disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other above
ground openings located below the FPE are water-tight.



§ 46.07  PROTECTING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of § 46.06,
all buildings to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage
below the FPE.



   (B)   This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:



      (1)   Construction or replacement of a new building valued at
more than $1,000;



      (2)   Improvements made to an existing building that increase
the first-floor area by more than 20%;



      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged building
that are valued at or more than 50% of the value of the building before the
damage occurred; and



      (4)   Installing a mobile home on a new site or a new mobile
home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply
to returning a mobile home to the same site it formerly lawfully occupied.



   (C)   This building protection requirement may be met by any one of
the following methods.



      (1)   A building may be constructed on permanent landfill in
accordance with the following.



         (a)   The area to be filled shall be cleared of all
standing trees, brush, down timber, trash and other growth or objects
unsuitable for use as foundation material.



         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
one foot deep before compaction.



         (c)   The surface of the fill shall be at or above the
FPE. The fill shall extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation of the
building before sloping below the FPE.



         (d)   The fill shall be protected- against erosion and
scour during flooding by vegetation cover, rip rap or bulk-heading. If
vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical.



         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



         (f)   The Building Inspector shall maintain a record of
the “as built” elevation of the lowest floor of the building.



      (2)   A building may be elevated in accordance with the
following.



         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on
stilts, piles, walls, crawl space or other foundation that is permanently
open to flood waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures.



         (b)   The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored, shaped and aligned so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic
forces such as current, waves and floating debris.



         (c)   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage. The bottom of the joists of the lowest
floor and all utility meters shall be located at or above the FPE.



         (d)   The Building Inspector shall maintain a record of
the “as built” elevation of the lowest floor.



         (e)   No area below the FPE shall be used for storage of
items or materials subject to flood damage unless such items or materials are
declared “property not covered” by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy of
the National Flood Insurance Program.



         (f)   Any future alteration of the area below the FPE
that violates the requirements of this division (B) shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. The Building Inspector shall inform the applicant
that any such alteration is considered a willful act to increase flood
damages and therefore will cause coverage by a standard flood insurance
policy to be suspended.



         (g)   No mobile home may be placed on a new site located
within an identified floodway.



      (3)   A non-residential building may be flood-proofed in
accordance with the following.



         (a)   A registered professional engineer shall certify
that the building has been designed so that below the FPE, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are water-tight and capable of resisting the
affects of the base flood. The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the
effects of buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice.



         (b)   Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without
human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



         (c)   The bottom of the floor joists of the first floor
of a residential building shall be at or above the FPE.



         (d)   The Building Inspector shall maintain the
engineer1s certificate and a record of the “as built” elevation to which
the building was flood-proofed.



§ 46.08  OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   The President and Board of Trustees shall take into account flood
hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions related
to land management, use and development.



   (A)   The President and Board of Trustees shall not approve any
annexation agreement or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate
limits unless such agreement, or plat is in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The Building Inspector shall obtain the best available SFHA
maps and data for the unincorporated areas.



   (B)   New subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit
developments (PUDs) shall meet the requirements of §§ 46.06 and 46.07 of
this chapter. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and
planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes
in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (ILCS Ch.
765, Act 205, § 2).



   (C)   Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and
planned units developments (PUDs) shall display the following flood data:



      (1)   The boundary of the SFHA;



      (2)   The boundary of the floodway, if shown on available SFHA
maps;



      (3)   Easements of lands dedicated to the village for access
for channel maintenance purposes; and



      (4)   The FPE for each building site. Where the base flood
elevation is not available from an existing study filed with the State Water
Survey, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the FPE and
submitting it to the State Water Survey for review and approval as best
available elevation data.



   (D)   Plans for the development activities to be undertaken by the
village in the SFHA shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector to ensure
that they comply with this chapter. Except as exempted by law, no other local
government shall commence any development activity in the SFHA, without first
obtaining a development permit from the Building Inspector.



   (E)   The Village Planning Commission shall take the following into
consideration when preparing or revising the comprehensive plan, community
development program, housing assistance plan and other land use or
development programs:



      (1)   Preserving SFHA land for open space uses such as farming
or recreation;



      (2)   Acquiring and removing frequently flooded buildings;



      (3)   Prohibiting hospitals, water treatment plants, natural
gas storage and other critical or especially hazardous facilities from
locating in the SFHA;



      (4)   Identifying the elevations of the base flood and past
floods at entrances to public buildings, on street signs or other prominent
locations; and



      (5)   Other flood hazard mitigation or floodplain management
activities that could help accomplish the purposes of this chapter.



§ 46.09  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on
a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Plan
Commission for a variance. The Plan Commission shall review the applicant’s
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the President
and Board of Trustees.



   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that:



      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the
SFHA;



      (2)   A substantial economic hardship would result if the
variance were not granted;



      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;



      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health or
safety or creation of a nuisance;



      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads,
utilities or other public facilities; and



      (6)   The provisions of § 46.05 of this chapter can still be
met.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variance from the requirements of § 46.07 of this chapter that would
lessen the degree of protection to a building will:



      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;



      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and



      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of
these risks and that he or she will acknowledge in writing that he or she
assumes the risk and liability.



   (D)   A variance from the requirements of § 46.07 may be granted to
permit a “wet flood-proofed” building; that is, a building to be
intentionally flooded during a flood; provided:



      (1)   No part of such a building below the FPW may be subject
to flood damage;



      (2)   The variance shall be conditioned on the contents being:



         (a)   Of materials resistant to flood damage;



         (b)   Items declared “property not covered” by a
standard flood insurance policy of the National Flood Insurance Program; or



         (c)   Readily moveable to a place of protection during a
flood; provided, there will be personnel available and adequate warning.



      (3)   Any future alteration of the area below the FPE that
violates the conditions of the variance shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. The Building Inspector shall inform the applicant that any such
alteration is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore will cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.



   (E)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site
or building documented as worthy of preservation by the State Department of
Conservation may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of division (B) above.



§ 46.10  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the SFHA
will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability
on the part of the village of any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder.



§ 46.11  PENALTY.



   The Building Inspector may determine upon due investigation that a
violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist and after such owner
fails after ten days’ notice to correct his or her property, the village
may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring
conformance with the chapter or Make such other order as the court sees
necessary to secure compliance with the chapter. Any person who violates this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25, nor more
than $500. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues. Failure to comply with the
requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be
deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Nothing herein shall prevent the
village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any
violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or
persons responsible.



§ 46.12  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, paragraph, division, clause, sentence or provision of
this chapter shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the
remainder thereof, which remainder shall remain and continue in full force
and effect.



§ 46.13  REPEALED PROVISIONS.



   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.



§ 46.14  EFFECT.



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form (which publication is
hereby authorized) as provided by law.



CHAPTER 47:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 48:  EMERGENCY ALARM CONTROL



Section



   48.01   Purpose and intent



   48.02   Definitions



   48.03   Audible or visual alarm systems



   48.04   Automatic telephone dialing devices prohibited



   48.05   Private alarm companies



   48.06   False alarms



   48.07   Repeated false alarms; public nuisance



   48.08   Penalties and forfeitures



   48.09   Severability



§ 48.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The Police Department of the village responds to alarms and it is
recognized that a well-maintained alarm system is an aid in the detection of
crime and the protection of persons and properties and other emergency
situations, but that a negligently maintained system can cause not only undue
burden to law enforcement officers, but create a potential risk of injury to
members of the public, dilute the overall safety protection for the village
and add an additional expense to the taxpayers. Therefore, it is the purpose
of this chapter to establish regulation, standards and controls relating to
the installation, use and termination of such alarms.



(Ord. 89-O-5, passed 3-9-1989)



§ 48.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM, POLICE ALARM or EMERGENCY CONTROL ALARM. Any mechanical or
electrical device which upon being activated transmits a signal to the Police
Department or to a central alarm system for the purpose of obtaining a
response from the Police Department and any system or device which produces
audible or visual signal to notify members of the public within range of such
signal of the described activity.



   FALSE ALARM. A signal from any alarm as defined in this section
resulting in response by the Police Department when a crime or emergency did
not exist at the location of the alarm.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
owner, subscriber or an agent of such person.



   SUBSCRIBER. The owner or person who shall have the alarm system
installed on the premises.



(Ord. 89-O-5, passed 3-9-1989)



§ 48.03  AUDIBLE OR VISUAL ALARM SYSTEMS.



   Any person who shall install, maintain audible or visual alarm system
shall use the alarm equipment which meets minimum Underwriter Laboratories’
alarm device standards and shall cause said alarm to be regularly tested,
inspected and maintain such equipment in accordance with manufacturer’s
recommendation to insure that such equipment is in a proper operating
condition. No audible alarm shall be installed which when activated, emits a
sound the same or similar to civil defense sirens or emergency vehicle sirens.



(Ord. 89-O-5, passed 3-9-1989)



§ 48.04  AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   No persons shall use or cause to be installed any telephone or
electronic device or attachment that automatically selects the telephone
numbers of the Police Department and produces a pre-recorded message to
report a crime or other emergency.



(Ord. 89-O-5, passed 3-9-1989)



§ 48.05  PRIVATE ALARM COMPANIES.



   Any person engaging in the business of monitoring alarm systems shall
be responsible for monitoring, maintenance and use of the private central
alarm station and shall pay the false alarm charges set forth in this
chapter. A private alarm company shall provide the Police Department with a
telephone number and the individual responsible for upkeep, installation and
maintenance of such service.



(Ord. 89-O-5, passed 3-9-1989)



§ 48.06  FALSE ALARMS.



   No persons shall intentionally cause the activation of an alarm device
or system, if such person knows that no crime or emergency exists which would
require response by law enforcement officers.



(Ord. 89-O-5, passed 3-9-1989)



§ 48.07  REPEATED FALSE ALARMS; PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   Repeated false alarms, as defined in this section, are
declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as all other public
nuisances. For the purpose of this section, a REPEATED FALSE ALARM means the
occurrence of three or more false alarms in any one calendar year. Any person
who shall have an alarm system as defined in this chapter, intended to
produce a response from the Police Department, shall pay to the village a
charge for responding to a false alarm, for which the premises are connected,
according to the following schedule for each calendar year:



 

Fourth false alarm in a calendar year
 

$25



Fifth false alarm in a calendar year
 

$50



Sixth and subsequent false alarm in a calendar year
 

$75




 



   (B)   It is the purpose of this section, consistent with the intent
set forth in this chapter, to impose a strict liability on any person
responsible for alarms whether they be of an electrical or mechanical design.



(Ord. 89-O-5, passed 3-9-1989)



§ 48.08  PENALTIES AND FORFEITURES.



   (A)   Any person shall, upon conviction of a violation of any
provision of this chapter, forfeit not less than $100 or more than $300 for
the first such offense and not less than $250 or more than $500 for a second
offense of this chapter within one year.



   (B)   Nothing in this penalty section shall prohibit the additional
remedies set forth in this chapter of disconnection of the alarm by the
Police Department or preceding as a public nuisance.



(Ord. 89-O-5, passed 3-9-1989)



§ 48.09  SEVERABILITY.



   This chapter shall be liberally construed to give effect to its
purpose, recognizing that the installation, maintenance,  service, upkeep
and response right for the subscriber. If any portion of this chapter shall
be declared invalid or of no force and effect, it shall not effect the
validity of the remainder of this chapter, which shall remain in full force
and effect.



(Ord. 89-O-5, passed 3-9-1989) -of-Way



CHAPTER 49:  CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



   49.01   Purpose and scope



   49.02   Definitions



   49.03   Annual registration required



   49.04   Permit required; applications and fees



   49.05   Action on permit applications



   49.06   Effect of permit



   49.07   Revised permit drawings



   49.08   Insurance



   49.09   Indemnification



   49.10   Security



   49.11   Permit suspension and revocation



   49.12   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status



   49.13   General construction standards



   49.14   Traffic control



   49.15   Location of facilities



   49.16   Construction methods and materials



   49.17   Vegetation control



   49.18   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities



   49.19   Cleanup and restoration



   49.20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance



   49.21   Variances



   49.22   Penalties



   49.23   Enforcement



   49.24   Severability



   49.25   Construction of small wireless facilities in the public
right-of-way and commercial and industrial



§ 49.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies
and procedures for constructing facilities in rights-of-way within the
village’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with
the preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the
village rights-of-way and the village as a whole.



   (B)   Intent. In enacting this chapter, the village intends to
exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the village and, in
particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility
facilities, including without limitation:



      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks,
alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;



      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions
and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations
of the village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in
rights-of-way or public property;



      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage
to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;



      (5)   Protect against increased storm water run-off due to
structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;



      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which
facilities are installed;



      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined
parkways that characterize the village’s residential neighborhoods;



      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of
facilities in the rights-of-way; and



      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private
properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.



   (C)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to
all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.



   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The village, in
its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such
an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent
with this chapter.



   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.



      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In
the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any
conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all
chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
state laws or regulations.



   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the
village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any
term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92
Ill. Admin. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.



   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this chapter.



   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in
a trench or pit.



   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   CABLE OPERATOR. Defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).



   CABLE SERVICE. Defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   CABLE SYSTEM. Defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).



   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such
as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.



   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of
a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside
Design Guide.



   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.



   CODE. The Municipal Code of the Village of Lakemoor.



   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.



   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Village Director of Public Works or his
or her designee.



   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this chapter, any work
that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the
use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures;
damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not
include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.



   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer or his or her designee.



   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.



   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including,
but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable,
antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles,
conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way under
this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term FACILITY shall not
include any facility owned or operated by the village.



   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.



   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is
determined by the Village Engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk
to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives,
radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology (biological) agents, flammables; corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute
or regulation.



   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§
1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets, HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the State Cable and
Video Competition Law, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.



   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.



   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.



   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
or more utilities.



   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.



   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.



   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.



   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.



   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility
or for the construction of a facility.



   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
§§ 49.04 and 49.05 of this chapter.



   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane or coal-slurry.



   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the
village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.



   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or
waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY
shall not include any real or personal village property that is not
specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not include
village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless
of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.



   ROADWAY. The part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SECURITY FUND. The amount of security required pursuant to § 49.10 of
this chapter.



   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages
or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services,
cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging
service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications and any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. “Private
line” means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to
one or more other specified locations. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to
act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecom- munications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
TELECOM- MUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable services
through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47
U.S.C. §§ 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or
other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the
village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 and following), as now or
hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.



   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.



   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.



   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in § 21-201(v) of the State Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v).



   VILLAGE. The Village of Lakemoor.



   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.03  ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall
register on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works,
providing the utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and
telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on
behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the
utility’s facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for
each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in § 49.08 of this
chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.04  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any
village right-of-way which:



         (a)   Changes the location of the facility;



         (b)   Adds a new facility;



         (c)   Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this
chapter); or



         (d)   Materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the
right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Village Director
of Public Works and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.



      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and
maintenance of service connections to customers’ premises where there will
be no disruption of the right-of-way.



   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to
this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The
applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
“proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.



   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and
telecopy numbers;



      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than
the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest
in the work;



      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers
and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
village:



         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that
additional information or assurances are needed.



      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings,
plans and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;



      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in § 49.08 of this
chapter;



      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
§ 49.10 of this chapter;



      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this chapter (see § 49.21 of this chapter); and



      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the village.



   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of
utilities. In addition to the requirements of division (C) above, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service
or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public
convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the
applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to
obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;



      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class and operating pressures;



      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the State Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public
Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the State Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control, and the Northern
Moraine Wastewater Reclamation District, have been satisfied; or



      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and
the design standard to be followed.



   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the
entire permit application review period and the construction period
authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit
application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village
within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment.



   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established in the
village schedule of permit fees, as amended from time to time. No application
fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act or any natural gas provider
that is paying a municipal fee under a separate ordinance or act.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.05  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Village review of permit applications.



      (1)   Completed permit applications, containing all required
documentation, shall be examined by the Village Director of Public Works
within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to
the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, the Village Director of Public Works shall reject such
application in writing, stating the reasons therefor.



      (2)   If the Village Director of Public Works is satisfied
that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and all
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Village
Director of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Director of Public Works,
that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Additional village review of applications of
telecommunications retailers.



      (1)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act, ILCS Ch.
220, Act 65, § 4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days
prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Director
of Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed.



      (2)   In the event that the Village Director of Public Works
fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications
retailer within either:



         (a)   Ten business days after service of notice to the
village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving
excavation for new construction; or



         (b)   Twenty-five business days after service of notice
by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation
for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work
without obtaining a permit under this chapter.



      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village,
where a permit is required for work pursuant to § 49.04 of this chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject
to the requirements of division (A) above.



   (C)   Additional village review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village;
provided, the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances
and regulations.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.06  EFFECT OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest
created. A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights-of-way,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid
for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.



   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village
with such village representatives in attendance as the village deems
necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under
the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where
work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other
utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid
disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during
construction and access and egress by adjacent property owners.



   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by
the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.07  REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.



   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate
from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit
also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with § 49.21 of this chapter. If the
village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either
remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it
conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.08  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Required coverages and limits.



      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any
facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming
the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and
employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in divisions
(A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) below:



         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as AX@, AC@ and AU@ coverages) and products-completed operations
coverage with limits not less than:



            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or
death to each person;



            2.   Five million dollars for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and



            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of
liability.



         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and
hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;



         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and



         (d)   Employees liability insurance with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 per employee and per accident.



      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to
protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such
contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.



   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this
section may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of
the policies required by this section to the village within ten days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the village.



   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.



      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall
contain the following endorsement: “It is hereby understood and agreed that
this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated
until 30 days after receipt by the village, by registered mail or certified
mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village
President of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”



      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said
notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.



   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion
“of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A)
above. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A) above, or the requirements of divisions (B), (C)
and (D) above. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to
self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
division (A) above, such as evidence that the utility is a private self
insurer under the Workers’ Compensation Act.



   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s
liability. The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person
for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.



   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this
section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state. All
insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-” or
better and of a class size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.09  INDEMNIFICATION.



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility
shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorneys fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from
or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way and, in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license or similar agreement; provided, however, that, the
utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the
village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.10  SECURITY.



   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall
be continuously maintained in accordance with this Section at the
permittee’s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:



      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the
requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village
occasioned by the permittees failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued
pursuant to this chapter; and



      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the village
must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee’s failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the
village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable
law.



   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the
village in the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in
a form acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a
form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this section shall, at a minimum:



      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior
notice to the village and the permittee;



      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the
collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and



      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and
within the state at which it can be drawn.



   (C)   Amount.



      (1)   The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works,
and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the village
estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such
restoration.



      (2)   Where the construction of facilities proposed under the
permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with
each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a
related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not
be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous
phase or phases, the Village Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of
sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security
which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit.



      (3)   The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction
shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this division (C) for any single phase.



   (D)   Withdrawals.



      (1)   The village, upon 14 days’ advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this section, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund;
provided that, the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the 14-day notice period.



      (2)   Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:



         (a)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by
the permittee hereunder;



         (b)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities
that are due and unpaid;



         (c)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages,
claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or
incur by reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or



         (d)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter
that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in
the Security Fund.



   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice
from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund,
the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
division (C) above.



   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by
the village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village;
provided that, any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below
the minimum balance required in division (C) above.



   (G)   Closing and return of security fund.



      (1)   Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit,
the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such
portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account
is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the village for failure by
the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other
applicable law.



      (2)   In the event of any revocation of the permit, the
Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable
costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation;
provided that, any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.



   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with
respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the
village, whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund
shall affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery
with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise
violated.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.11  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the
following reasons:



      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter;



      (3)   The permittee’s physical presence or presence of the
permittee’s facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within the public rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the
public health, safety or welfare; or



      (4)   The permittee’s failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.



   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension
and the alternatives available to permittee’s under this § 49.11 of this
chapter.



   (C)   The permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of
revocation or suspension.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or
suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options:



         (a)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that
no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the
village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written
proof of such correction to the village within five working days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation; or



         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and
restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing
written proof of such removal to the village within ten days after receipt of
the written notice of revocation.



      (2)   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause
shown, extend the time periods provided in this section.



   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division
(A) above.



   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply.



      (1)   If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of
division (C) above, the village or its designee may, at the option of the
village:



         (a)   Correct the deficiencies;



         (b)   Upon not less than 20 days’ notice to the
permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or



         (c)   After not less than 30 days’ notice to the
permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the village.



      (2)   The permittee shall be liable in all events to the
village for all costs of removal.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.12  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.



   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no
less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the
utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed
by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to
the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current
permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to
have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the
village’s right-of-way.



   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or
bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.13  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way
shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable,
the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as
amended from time to time:



      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;



      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      (3)   Highway Design Manual;



      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;



      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92
Ill. Admin. Code § 1545);



      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and



      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance
Operations.



   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this chapter, the Village Engineer shall determine, in the
exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance or
operation of a facility in the future.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.14  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village’s minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and this code.



   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.



   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that, in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to § 49.20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice
as is practicable under the circumstances.



   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct
any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the village.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.15  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements
applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities,
regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of
this section.



      (1)   No interference with village facilities. No utility
facilities shall be placed in any location if the Village Director of Public
Works determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the village’s utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village’s utility
facilities.



      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location
shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin said right-of-way.



      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such
right-of-way.



      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the
right-of-way.



      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation
shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of
location, for the particular application.



   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.



      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind
the face of the curb, where available;



         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote
from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m)
outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear
zone;



         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and



         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.



      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to
the right-of-way line;



         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         (c)   In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way
line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.



      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of
village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future
repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing
facilities.



      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage
facilities.



      (3)   90 degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall
cross at or as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as practicable.



      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead
power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC’s rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines, (83 Ill. Admin. Code 305);



         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided.



      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



         (b)   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide
a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a
power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify
the type of facility, the utility and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. §
192.707 (1989)).



   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The
village may require that facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   (E)   Freestanding facilities.



      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility
located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.



   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may
be installed only if:



      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;



      (2)   New underground installation is not technically
feasible; and



      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location,
and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be
used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is
strongly discouraged.



   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.



      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall
include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles,
cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from
the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.



      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a
facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:



         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of
the highway structure in the transportation system;



         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility
and their comparative practicability;



         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;



         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased
load of the proposed facility;



         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance
and painting;



         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure;
and



         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



   (H)   Appearance standards.



      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities
in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property
owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being
traversed.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.16  CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.



   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of
construction methods.



      (1)   Boring or jacking.



         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the Village Director of Public Works from the edge of the
pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours
in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours
after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they
shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be
designed, erected, supported, braced and maintained so that it will safely
support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the
boring or jacking operation.



         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall
not be permitted under the roadway.



         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than 6 inches.
Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an
auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the
outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).



         (d)   Borings with diameters 6 inches or less. Borings
of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking,
guided with auger or auger and following pipe method.



         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the
drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected
shall be bored under or around the root system.



      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair
or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.



         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to
the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing.
Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Village Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench
and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Ch. 6 of
the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable,
the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench
as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench
within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.



      (3)   Backfilling.



         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and
length using methods and materials in accordance with lDOT’s Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is
hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall
be used.



         (b)   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility,
at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of
the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs and driveways to the proper grades, as
determined by the Director of Public Works.



      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation
or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway
is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this
division (A)(4) is permitted under § 49.21 of this chapter, the following
requirements shall apply:



         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled
and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10
gradation, as designated by the Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
village.



         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.



         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or
resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



      (5)   Encasement.



         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the
load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the village.



         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall
extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent
pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that
particular section of the highway.



         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing,
encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or
village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be
omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier
pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the
village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.



         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.



         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if:



            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes
future maintenance or repair; and



            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.



         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum
products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be
provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 

Type of Facility
 
Minimum Cover


Communication, cable or video service lines
 
18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by village)


Electric lines
 
30 inches (0.8 m)


Gas or petroleum products
 
30 inches (0.8 m)


Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection


Water line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection



 



   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.



      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.



         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications
facilities within village rights-of- way shall be constructed, operated and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Admin. Code part 305
(formerly General Order 160 of the State Commerce Commission) entitled Rules
for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines and the National
Electrical Safety Code.



         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or
communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



         (c)   Underground facilities.



            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing; provided that, special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.



            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or
jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if:



               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of
moles, whip augers or other approved method which compress the earth to make
the opening for cable installation; or



               b.   The installation is by the open trench
method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.



            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with
the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops
placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year,
also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year,
weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather
permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops,
within ten business days after placement.



      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



         (a)   The use of moles, whip augers or other approved
methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if
installation is not possible by other means.



      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated
in a village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part
192B, Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal
Safety Standards (49 C.F.R. part 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction and all other applicable laws, rules and
regulations.



      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems, ANSI-B 31.4).



      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer
lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines
and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois.



      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one
foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The
vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or
by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Director of Public
Works. With the approval of the Director of Public Works, shrubbery
surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area.
The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color
to blend with the surroundings.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
State Commerce Commission or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be
stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village
Director of Public Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the village.



      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility
to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.



   (D)   Operational restrictions.



      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of- way may, at the
discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.



      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of
Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility
services.



      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in this code.



   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to
construct facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain
the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose
of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and
physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the State Underground Facilities
Damage Prevention Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.)



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.17  VEGETATION CONTROL.



   (A)   Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and
regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and
vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable state laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local
franchise or other agreement with the village as permitted by law.



   (B)   Other utilities; tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming
that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and
that is not performed pursuant to applicable state laws and regulations
specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a
permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.



      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for
tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in
accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an
expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.



      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in
damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The
village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International
Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village
may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.



   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village
may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or
trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



   (D)   Chemical use. No utility shall spray, inject or pour any
chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the village for any
purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease. Spraying of any
type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless
the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works
that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.18  REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the
village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily
or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any utility facilities within the rights-of- way whenever the corporate
authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance
or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of
the village in or upon, the rights-of-way.



   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject
to removal in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s
license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without
prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or



      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.



   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village
retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within
the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify
the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility
within the public rights-of- way of the village, the utility shall notify the
village within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice, the village may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the
Village Director of Public Works determines that such removal will be in the
best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the
village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it,
by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall
be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of
the facility by another utility or person.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.19  CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.



   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the
rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This
includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway
surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village
Director of Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist
of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to
restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that
which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period
provided in this section may be extended by the Village Director of Public
Works for good cause shown.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.20  MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility’s expense.



   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:



      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion
of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a
hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in
repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means
of access to the facility is available.



      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible,
notify the Village Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized
agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken
for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified
immediately.



      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the
village of a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within
48 hours after an emergency repair.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.21  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one
or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the
Village Director of Public Works as apart of the permit application. The
request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance
is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.



   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Village Board shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Village Board may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:



      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Board may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter, but which
carry out the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.22  PENALTIES.



   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when
the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit
and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall
bear the village’s costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may
review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the village.
Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs
apportioned to it.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.23  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.24  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.



(Ord. 07-O-31, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 49.25  CONSTRUCTION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC
RIGHT-OF-WAY AND COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish
regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small
wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, or
outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for
commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the act.



   (B)   Conflicts with other ordinances. This section supersedes all
sections or parts of sections adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (C)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this section, the wireless provider shall comply with the
requirements of this section to the maximum extent possible without violating
federal or state laws or regulations.



   (D)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:



      ANTENNA.  Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.



      APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing,
or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or
local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.



      APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a
wireless provider.



      APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village
for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well
as any applicable fee for the review of such application.



      COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.



      COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as
amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.



      COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in
47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in
47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.



      COVERED FACILITIES. A small wireless facility that is collocated;
(i) in a right-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside right-of-way in
property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.



      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.



      FEE. A one-time charge.



      HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or
site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed
in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible
for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has
been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and
determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with
Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a
locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an
ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that
meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the
Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of
the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office
is pending.



      LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule,
regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.



      MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not
larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12
inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11
inches.



      PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village to
perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.



      PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.



      PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal
government, the state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this state, that provides or has
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.



      RATE. A recurring charge.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for
compatible use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include village-owned aerial lines.



      SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of
the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure
of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that
has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all
other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with
the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The
following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.



      UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole
or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.



      VILLAGE UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the
village in public rights-of-way.



      WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii)
radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless
facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or
within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support
structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is
otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.



      WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to
provide telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless
support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services
provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services
provider for the application submitted to the village.



      WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a
wireless services provider.



      WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.



      WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless
services.



      WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a
monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other
existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting
wireless facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility
pole.



   (E)   Regulation of small wireless facilities.



      (1)   Use. Covered facilities shall be deemed permitted uses
subject to administrative review, (except as provided with respect to
variances and appeals), and not subject to zoning review or approval. Any
small wireless facilities other than a covered facility shall be subject to
the zoning regulations set forth in the village's zoning ordinance, the
regulations regarding construction of facilities in the public right-of-way
set forth in Chapter 49 of this code, and all other applicable local, state,
and federal laws.



      (2)   Permit required. No person shall install, or cause to be
installed, a covered facility within the village without first obtaining a
village small wireless facilities permit (a "Permit"). Permits and
applications for permits shall be subject to the following standards,
procedures, and requirements:



      (3)   Application requirements. A wireless provider shall
provide the following information to the village, together with the village's
small cell facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit
application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or
wireless support structure:



         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a
village utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice
Act of 1989;



         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless
facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location
and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on
which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location
where utility poles or structures would be installed. This should include a
depiction of the completed facility;



         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a
structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural
Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility
covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;



         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the
antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility;



         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and
completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if
approved;



         (f)   Evidence of the applicant's right to utilize the
structure on which the small wireless facilities are to be collocated;



         (g)   Certification that the collocation complies with
the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of
the applicant's knowledge;



         (h)   In the event that the proposed small wireless
facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than
the village, the wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence
of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation;



         (i)   Specifications and drawings demonstrating
compliance with the design standards set forth in division (G)(7) of this
section; and



         (j)   All applicable fees and rates related to such
application.



      (4)   Application process. The village shall process
applications as follows below, and the first completed application shall have
priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation
on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.



         (a)   Applications for collocation of covered facilities
on existing utility poles or structures.



            1.   An application to collocate a small wireless
facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or
replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall
be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the
village fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days after the
submission of a completed application.



            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall
notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved
remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application.



            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the
latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the
tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The
receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial
of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this section.



         (b)   Applications for collocation of covered facilities
on new utility poles or structures.



            1.   An application to collocate a small wireless
facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village
fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission
of a completed application.



            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall
notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved
remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed
application.



            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the
latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the
tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The
receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial
of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this section.



         (c)   Review and approval or denial; alternate
placements.



            1.   The village shall approve a permit
application if the application meets all requirements of this section and all
other applicable local, state, and federal laws; provided however, that the
village may impose reasonable conditions (which conditions shall be final
unless the applicant appeals pursuant to division (L), provided further that
with respect to an application for the collocation of a covered facility on a
new utility pole, the village may propose that the covered facility be
collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure
within 100 feet of the location proposed by the applicant. The applicant
shall accept such alternate location if it has the right to use the alternate
structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and
structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs. If
the applicant does not accept the alternate location, then it shall provide
to the village a written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits, or material costs reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this division.



            2.   If a permit is denied, the village shall
document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or
application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant. The applicant may cure the deficiencies
identified by the village and resubmit the revised application once within 30
days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an
additional application fee. The village shall approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or
it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30
days of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with
applicable fees, and recommencement of the village's review period.



            3.   If an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant must notify the
village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on
a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies
cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the
cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with
the small wireless facility.



      (5)   Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility
pole, the village and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment
agreement, provided by the village for the initial collocation on a municipal
utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate
on a small wireless facility on a village utility pole, the village and the
applicant shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment
agreement.



      (6)   Completeness of application. Within 30 days after
receiving an application, the village shall determine whether the application
is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the
village must specifically identify the missing information. An application
shall be deemed complete if the village fails to provide notification to the
applicant within 30 days after all documents, information and fees
specifically enumerated in the village's permit application form are
submitted by the applicant to the village. Processing deadlines are tolled
from the time the village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the
applicant provides the missing information.



      (7)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further
tolled by:



         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant
and the village; or



         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or
similar emergency that causes the delay.



      (8)   Consolidated applications. The applicant seeking to
collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the village
shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated
application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small
wireless facilities covered facilities if the collocations each involve
substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the
same type of structure. If an application includes multiple small wireless
facilities, the village may remove small wireless facility collocations from
the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for
which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The village may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.



      (9)   Duration of permits. The duration of a permit shall be
for a period of not less than five years, and the permit shall be renewed for
equivalent durations unless the village makes a finding that the small
wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with
the applicable village codes or any provision, condition or requirement
contained in this section. If the act is repealed, renewals of permits shall
be subject to the applicable village code provisions or regulations in effect
at the time of renewal.



      (10)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall
submit applications, supporting information and notices to the village by
personal delivery at the village's designated place of business, by regular
mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means,
including electronic mail.



   (F)   Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:



      (1)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for
each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.



      (2)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an
application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless
facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one
small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
structures.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or
local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied
by the required application fee. Application fees shall be nonrefundable.



      (4)   The village shall not require an application, approval
or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications
service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:



         (a)   Routine maintenance;



         (b)   The replacement of covered facilities with covered
facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the
wireless provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with division (E)(3)(d); or



         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance,
operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables
that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable
safety codes.



      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the
village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic
patterns or require lane closures.



   (G)   Collocation requirements and conditions.



      (1)   Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve
space on municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the
village's electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not
preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village
reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both
uses.



      (2)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider
shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in
safe condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and
conditions of this section. The wireless provider shall ensure that its
employees, agents or contracts that perform work in connection with its small
wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all
applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations.



      (3)   No interference with public safety communication
frequencies. The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications.



         (a)   A wireless provider shall install small wireless
facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable
interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment.



         (b)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by
and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations
addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other
spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.



         (c)   If a small wireless facility causes such
interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the
abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973
and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.



         (d)   The village may terminate a permit for a small
wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not
in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous
division (c). Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall
constitute a public nuisance.



         (e)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small
wireless facilities on village utility poles that are part of an electric
distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety
zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole. However, the
antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located
in the communications space on the village utility pole and on the top of the
pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with
applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. For purposes of this
division, the terms COMMUNICATIONS SPACE,COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE,
and ELECTRIC SUPPLY ZONE have the meanings given to those terms in the
National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers.



         (f)   The wireless provider shall comply with all
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.



         (g)   The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles,
or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set
forth in a village ordinance, written policy adopted by the village, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other
occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a
historic district.



      (4)   Alternate placements. Except as provided in this
collocation requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall
not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific
utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate
multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to
an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated
with a new utility pole, the village may propose that the small wireless
facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless
support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the
applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on
reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure
does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined
by the applicant. If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the
village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the
property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate
location does not satisfy the criteria in this division.



      (5)   Height limitations. The maximum height of a small
wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet above the utility pole or
wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is
collocated. New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures
on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher
of:



         (a)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing
utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities,
that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the village,
that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or
wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the village, provided the village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole
or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or



         (b)   Forty-five feet above ground level.



      (6)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes
a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height
limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation,
the applicant shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures,
terms and conditions set forth in § 22.255 of this code.



      (7)   Design requirements. The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards
applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the
right-of-way. The following minimum design standards shall be incorporated
with all small wireless facilities permit request.



         (a)   All types of covered facilities shall be designed
to blend into the surrounding streetscape with minimal visual impact.



         (b)   All new utility poles that do not exist at the
time of application shall be galvanized metal with a black exterior finish.



         (c)   Replacement poles may be of the same style, type,
and material as what currently exists.



         (d)   All wiring shall be located inside a conduit with
a finish that matches the pole and located either inside the pole or flush
mounted on the side of the pole not facing a public street.



         (e)   All ground based mechanical equipment associated
with the small wireless facility shall be screened from the public view with
landscaping or some other screening approach acceptable to the village.



         (f)   The orientation of covered facilities shall be
consistent with the orientation of existing utility equipment installed on
the same utility pole and other utility poles in the nearby area. Such
covered facilities shall be painted, textured, and designed in a manner
consistent with the utility pole's style color, texture and materials and
otherwise camouflaged and designed to blend in with the existing utility pole
such that the attached covered facilities are no more readily apparent or
plainly visible (as reasonably determined by the Village Administrator) then
the existing utility equipment located on the utility pole. Covered
facilities shall be concealed or screened by means of canisters, randomes,
shrouds or other similar concealment enclosures, which shall be flush mounted
to the utility pole and painted, textured, and designed in a manner
consistent with the utility pole's style, color, texture and material and
otherwise camouflaged and designed to blend in with the existing utility pole.



      (8)   Spacing. No new utility pole, wireless support
structure, or ground mounted equipment associated with one or more covered
facilities located in the public right of way may be installed within 600
feet of another utility pole, wireless support structure, or ground mounted
equipment.



      (9)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider
shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and
ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the
right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process
that addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do
not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances.



      (10)   Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall
comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility
poles and do not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.



      (11)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which
a permit is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the
permit, unless the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this
period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole
or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after
the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after
issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the
village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.



   (H)   Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this section
authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:



      (1)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or
controlled by the village or another unit of local government that is not
located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless
support structure without the consent of the property owner;



      (2)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park
district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park,
recreation or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected
district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in
an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a
different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code;
or



      (3)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under §
18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other
public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in § 16-102
of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public
commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this section do
not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless
facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of § 16-108.5 of the Public
Utilities Act.



      (4)   For the purposes of this section, PUBLIC UTILITY has the
meaning given to that term in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement
(a) to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable
service or video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install,
place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small
wireless facilities subject to this section.



   (I)   Pre-existing agreements.



      (1)   Existing agreements between the village and wireless
providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the
right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the village before June 1, 2018,
subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements
entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this section.



      (2)   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with
the village on the effective date of the act may accept the rates, fees and
terms that the village makes available under this section for the collocation
of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an
application submitted two or more years after the effective date of the act
by notifying the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms.
The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has
collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted
to the village before the wireless provider provides such notice and
exercises its option under this section.



   (J)   Annual recurring rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the
village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a
village utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year
or (ii) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider's use of space on the village utility pole. If the village has not
billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200
payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance
of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual
anniversary date thereafter.



   (K)   Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated
for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner
of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after
receipt of written notice from the village notifying the wireless provider of
the abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known
address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not
removed within 90 days of such notice, the village may remove or cause the
removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment
agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are
provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost
recovery. A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the village if
it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of
the village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of
the new wireless provider.



   (L)   Appeals. Any wireless provider aggrieved by any order,
requirement, decision or determination, including denial of or conditions
established in connection with a permit, variance or other approval made
under the provisions of this chapter may seek a review of such order,
requirement, decision, or determination by filing a request for appeal with
the Village Clerk, within 30 days after the notification of the order,
requirement, decision or determination. The request shall set forth in detail
the basis for the appeal. Such a request shall be considered by the Village
Board of Trustees based upon the relevant facts available as well as all
available material that had been submitted in conjunction with the
administrative review. The determination of the Village Board of Trustees
shall be a final decision for purposes of the Administrative Review Law, ILCS
Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.



   (M)   Dispute resolution. The Circuit Court of Lake/McHenry County
shall have jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small
Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute
concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal
utility poles within the right-of-way, the village shall allow the
collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than
$200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon
final resolution of the dispute.



   (N)   Indemnification. A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold
the village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal
injury or properly damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in
part, the use or occupancy of the village improvements or right-of-way
associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its employees,
agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under
this section and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify
or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or
caused by the sole negligence of the village or its employees or agents. A
wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against
the village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability.



   (O)   Insurance.



      (1)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless
provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:



         (a)   Property insurance for its property's replacement
cost against all risks;



         (b)   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by
law; or



         (c)   Commercial general liability insurance with
respect to its activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to
afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other
users of village improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily
injury and property damage.



      (2)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an
additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide
certification and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial
general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. A
wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the village. A wireless provider that
self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply
with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section.
A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the village.



(Ord. 18-O-21, passed 7-17-2018)



CHAPTER 50:  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Cable/video service provider fee imposed



   50.03   Applicable principles



   50.04   No impact on other taxes due from holder



   50.05   Audits of cable/video service provider



   50.06   Late Fees; payments



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE SERVICE. The term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.



   GROSS REVENUES.



      (1)   All consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions
received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to
provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable service or
video service area within the village.



      (2)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;



         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges;



         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or
video service equipment;



         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation,
installation and repair charges;



         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order
and service termination charges;



         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds
check charges and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments;



         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the
holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the
number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation
arrangement;



         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder’s network, such as a “home shopping” or similar channel,
subject to division (2)(i) below;



         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service
that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities
or applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the
other services, capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross
revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion
of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course
of business; and



         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-803(b).



      (3)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed,
such as bad debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi);



         (b)   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that
reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service;



         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled,
packaged or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video
service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services or the provision of
directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement and electronic publishing or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to non- cable service or non-video service in
accordance with the holder’s books and records and records kept in the
regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards or orders;



         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for
resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee
from the purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in
writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee
permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b), with respect to the service;



         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed
upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any
other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes;



         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and



         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping”
or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service.



      (4)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in
the calculation of GROSS REVENUES to the extent the treatment of the revenue
as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading
the payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b), which
would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-401.



   SERVICE. The provision of “cable service” or “video service” to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801, by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.



   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47
U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail or other services offered over the public internet.



(Ord. 07-O-32, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 50.02  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the village.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be
5% of the holder’s gross revenues.



   (C)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at
least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable
service or video service in the village.



   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay
the service provider fee to the village. The holder’s liability for the fee
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after
receipt of the ordinance adopting this section by the holder. The ordinance
adopting this section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address
listed on the holder’s application notice sent pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6), to the village.



   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be
due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.



   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing
cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the village in which a fee is paid.



   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-301(c), with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
division (B) above.



(Ord. 07-O-32, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 50.03  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.



   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



(Ord. 07-O-32, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 50.04  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any
tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
village’s simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as
it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the local unit of government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or
charges.



(Ord. 07-O-32, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 50.05  AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.



   (A)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and
to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch.
50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.



   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit
shall be paid within 30 days after the municipality’s submission of an
invoice for the sum.



(Ord. 07-O-32, passed 10-25-2007)



§ 50.06  LATE FEES; PAYMENTS.



   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by
ordinances adopted by the municipality pursuant to the Local Government
Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.



(Ord. 07-O-32, passed 10-25-2007)



CHAPTER 51:  STORM SEWERS AND STORMWATER



Section



   51.01   Stormwater management regulations



   51.02   Illicit discharges and illegal connections



   51.03   Prohibition



   51.04   Industrial or construction activity discharge



   51.05   Access and inspection of properties and facilities



   51.06   Notification of accidental discharge and spills



   51.07   Violations, enforcement and penalties



   51.08   Watercourse protection



§ 51.01  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.



   The Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance, as most recently
amended by the Lake County on October 13, 2015, is hereby adopted by
reference and is full force and effect within the village and is found in its
own compilation.



(Ord. 13-O-21, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 16-O-03, passed 1-14-2016)



§ 51.02  ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect
the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the
regulation of non-stormwater discharges to Lakemoor's separate storm sewer
system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. These
sections establish methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants
into the separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
The objectives of this chapter are to:



      (1)   Regulate the contribution of pollutants to Lakemoor’s
separate storm sewer system by any person;



      (2)   Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to
Lakemoor’s separate storm sewer system;



      (3)   Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result
of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to Lakemoor’s separate storm
sewer system; and



      (4)   To establish legal authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to
ensure compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   Responsibility for administration. The Lakemoor Department of
Public Works shall be responsible for the implementation and administration
of this chapter. Authorized staff within the Department or the Lakemoor
Police Department, shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions
contained herein.



   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge prohibited by this chapter
which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge
or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



      CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



      CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES general
construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.



      ILLEGAL CONNECTION. Either of the following:



         (a)   Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance,
whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to
enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances
which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of
whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or



         (b)   Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance
connected to Lakemoor’s separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.



      ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater
discharge to Lakemoor’s separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in
§ 51.03 of this chapter.



      INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial
permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).



      LAKEMOOR’S SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM.  Any facility designed
or used for



collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, highways, streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch
basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater
controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels,
reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is:



         (a)   Owned or maintained by the Village of Lakemoor;



         (b)   Not a combined sewer; and



         (c)   Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works.



      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM
WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A permit issued by the Illinois EPA under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



      NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.



      PERSON.  Except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any
individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private
corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution,
utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the
State, any interstate body or any other legal entity.



      POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease;
detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals;
non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish,
garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations,
so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform
and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and
cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.



      POLLUTION.  The contamination or other alteration of any
water’s physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any
constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature,
taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any
liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters
as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful,
detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or
environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild
animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.



      PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



      STATE WATERS. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches,
lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies
of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or
forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Illinois which are not
entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single
person.



      STORMWATER RUNOFF or STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and
drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation,
and resulting from such precipitation.



      STRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL. A structural storm water
management facility or device that controls storm water runoff and changes
the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the
quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow.



(Ord. 19-O-12, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 51.03  PROHIBITION.



   (A)   Prohibition of illicit discharges.



      (1)   No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge,
cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise
discharge into Lakemoor’s separate storm sewer system any pollutants or
waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater.



      (2)   The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition
provision above:



         (a)   Water line flushing performed by a government
agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to
storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing
drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), dechlorinated
swimming pool pumping (less than 1 PPM chlorine), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland
flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants;



         (b)   Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other
discharges specified in writing by the Village of Lakemoor as being necessary
to protect public health and safety;



         (c)   The prohibition provision above shall not apply to
any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued
to the discharger and administered under the authority of the State and the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in
full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and
other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has
been granted for any discharge to Lakemoor’s separate storm sewer system.



   (B)   Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction,
connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection
to Lakemoor’s separate storm sewer system is prohibited.



      (1)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (2)   A person violates this chapter if the person connects a
line conveying sewage to Lakemoor’s separate storm sewer system, or allows
such a connection to continue.



      (3)   Improper connections in violation of this chapter must
be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite
wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of
the Northern Moraine Wastewater Reclamation District, or applicable sanitary
sewer system operator.



      (4)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in
plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer
system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon
receipt of written notice of violation from the Village of Lakemoor requiring
that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time
period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be
completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer,
sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection
to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be
identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided
to the Village of Lakemoor.



(Ord. 19-O-12, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 51.04  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity
NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Village of Lakemoor prior to allowing discharges to
Lakemoor’s separate storm sewer system.



   (B)   Best management practice required. The village may adopt
requirements identifying best management practices for any activity,
operation, or facility that may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of the
United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of these
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit
discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all
terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs
shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary
for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 19-O-12, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 51.05  ACCESS AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES AND FACILITIES.



   Duly authorized representatives from the village shall be permitted to
enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as
may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.



   (A)   If a property or facility has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
by public works staff.



   (B)   The owner or operator shall allow village staff ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are
required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater.



   (C)   Village staff shall have the right to set up on any property
or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the village to
conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges.



   (D)   The village may require the owner or operator to install
monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary and make the
monitoring data available to village staff. This sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the owner or operator at his or her own expense. All devices
used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.



   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the
village and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the owner or operator.



   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing village staff access to a
facility is a violation of this chapter.



   (G)   If village staff has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which storm water is discharged, and village staff is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the village
staff may seek issuance of A search warrant from the circuit court of the
county where the property is located.



(Ord. 19-O-12, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 51.06  NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE AND SPILLS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of
any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges
from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, Lakemoor’s separate
storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of
such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge.



   (B)   Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in
person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the
nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in
person, or by phone shall be immediately after the incident. This shall be
report to the Village Hall or the Police Department after hours. A written
notice addressed and mailed or emailed to the Village of Lakemoor within
three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said
person or responsible parties shall also take immediate steps to ensure no
recurrence of the discharge or spill.



   (C)   In the event of such a release of hazardous materials,
emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be
immediately notified.



   (D)   Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above
is a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 19-O-12, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 51.07  VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Violations.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any
person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
chapter may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or
may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by
law.



      (2)   In the event the violation constitutes an immediate
danger to public health or public safety, village staff are authorized to
enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take
any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. The village staff is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as
outlined in division (E) below in this section.



   (B)   Notice of violation. Whenever the village staff finds that a
violation of this chapter has occurred, staff may order compliance by written
notice of violation.



      (1)   The notice of violation shall contain:



         (a)   The name and address of the alleged violator;



         (b)   The address when available or a description of the
building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has
occurred;



         (c)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;



         (d)   A description of the remedial measures necessary
to restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the
completion of such remedial action;



         (e)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall
or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed; and



         (f)   A statement that the determination of violation
may be appealed through the village’s adjudication process.



      (2)   Such notice may require without limitation:



         (a)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and
reporting;



         (b)   The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal
connections;



         (c)   That violating discharges, practices, or
operations shall cease and desist;



         (d)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater
pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;



         (e)   Payment of costs to cover administrative and
abatement costs;



         (f)   The implementation of pollution prevention
practices; and



         (g)   Date, time and locations of violation hearing
though the village’s adjudication process.



   (C)   Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice
of violation may appeal the determination of village staff through the
village’s adjudication officer.



   (D)   Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not
been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of
violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within the days prescribed by the
adjudication officer, village staff may enter upon the subject private
property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate
the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to
allow village staff to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above.



   (E)   Costs of abatement of the violation.



      (1)   Within 15 days after abatement of the violation, the
owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting
to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 15 days of such
notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the
notice, or if an appeal is taken within 30 days after a decision on said
appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property
and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment
or other collections methods used by the village.



      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation.



   (F)   Civil penalties. The village may impose a penalty not to
exceed $1,000 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day each
violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation



   (G)   Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of
this chapter, the village may issue a citation to the alleged violator
requiring such person to appear in the Circuit Court for the 22nd Judicial
Circuit, McHenry County, of the 19th Judicial Circuit Lake County to answer
charges for such violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.



   (H)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a
threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief
as provided by law.



   (I)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter
are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable
federal, state or local law and the village may seek cumulative remedies.



   (J)   Recovery of expenses. The village may recover attorney’s
fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this
chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses.



(Ord. 19-O-12, passed 5-7-2019)



§ 51.08  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through or along which a watercourse
passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation,
and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard
the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee
shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. 19-O-12, passed 5-7-2019)



CHAPTER 52: RESERVED



CHAPTER 53: SCHOOL, PARK AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS IMPACT FEES



Section



   53.01   Generally



   53.02   School cash contribution



   53.03   Park cash contribution calculation



   53.04   Annual adjustment of capital development fees



   53.05   Miscellaneous impact fees



§ 53.01  GENERALLY.



   In addition to other fees as may be established from time to time by
the village, a school and park cash contribution in lieu of land and other
impact fees shall be paid to the village pursuant to the calculations set
forth in Chapter 23, Section 3, and prior to the issuance of any building
permits for the construction of a new residential dwelling unit within the
village limits, as a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision of
any block lot or sublot or any part thereof, or any piece or parcel of land
falling within the village limits, each subdivider, developer or builder will
be required to pay said fees to the village.



(Ord. 19-O-01, passed 1-15-2019)



§ 53.02  SCHOOL CASH CONTRIBUTION.



   Fair market value: $55,000 / acre.



 


Type of Housing

 

Elementary



Grades: K-5th

 

Junior High



Grades: 6th-8th

 

High School



Grades: 9th-12Th

 

Total School



Contribution





Single Family Detached


2-bedroom
 

$137.13

 

$85.07

 

$33.00

 

$255.20



3-bedroom
 

$372.08

 

$306.59

 

$303.60

 

$982.27



4 or more bedroom
 

$534.42

 

$528.12

 

$594.00

 

$1,652.54



Single Family Attached (duplex, townhouse, rowhome, etc.)


1-bedroom
 

$0.00

 

$0.00

 

$0.00

 

$0.00



2-bedroom
 

$88.73

 

$85.07

 

$62.70

 

$236.50



3-bedroom
 

$235.95

 

$102.79

 

$97.35

 

$436.09



4 or more bedroom
 

$324.67

 

$272.92

 

$285.45

 

$883.05



Multi-Family (Apartment/Condominium)


Efficiency
 

$0.00

 

$0.00

 

$0.00

 

$0.00



1-bedroom
 

$2.02

 

$1.77

 

$1.65

 

$5.44



2-bedroom
 

$85.72

 

$74.43

 

$75.90

 

$237.05



3 or more bedroom
 

$235.95

 

$217.98

 

$194.70

 

$885.68





 



(Ord. 19-O-01, passed 1-15-2019)



§ 53.03  PARK CASH CONTRIBUTION CALCULATION.



   Fair market value: $55,000



   Park requirements: 10 acres per 1,000 residents



 


Type of Housing

 

Park Contribution





Single Family Detached


2-bedroom
 

$1,109.35



3-bedroom
 

$1,594.45



4 or more bedroom
 

$2,070.20



Single Family Attached (duplex, townhouse, rowhomes)


1-bedroom
 

$656.15



2-bedroom
 

$1,094.50



3-bedroom
 

$1,315.6



4 or more bedroom
 

$1,729.75



Multi-Family (apartments/condominiums)


Efficiency
 

$711.70



1-bedroom
 

$966.90



2-bedroom
 

$1,052.70



3 or more bedroom
 

$1,679.15





(Ord. 19-O-01, passed 1-15-2019)



§ 53.04  ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT OF CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FEES.



   The capital development fees in this chapter shall be calculated
pursuant to the standards set forth in Chapter 23, Section 3, and shall be
adjusted at the end of each Village fiscal year.



(Ord. 19-O-01, passed 1-15-2019)



§ 53.05  MISCELLANEOUS IMPACT FEES.



   As a condition of annexation, the owner, subdivider, or developer shall
be required to contribute for library, fire protection, municipal building,
and/or other municipal contribution fees, pursuant to the standards set forth
in Chapter 23, Section 3.



(Ord. 19-O-01, passed 1-15-2019)



CHAPTER 54:  FILING FEES AND RETAINED PERSONNEL FEES



Section



   54.01   Definitions



   54.02   Reimbursement of expenses by owner/petitioner



   54.03   Deposit to defray village expenses and fees



   54.04   Land area measurement



   54.05   Stay of proceedings



   54.06   Statement of expenditures



   54.07   Restoration of fund balance



   54.08   Default



   54.09   Waiver of requirements; extensions



   54.10   Unused balance refundable



§ 54.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MAJOR  DEVELOPMENT. Defined  by  the  Village Watershed Development
Code.



   MINOR  DEVELOPMENT. Defined  by  the  Village Watershed Development
Code.



   OWNER. The legal and/or beneficial owner of the real estate which is
the subject matter of the proposed project aforesaid.



   PETITIONER. The fee owner or trustee of record, trust beneficiary,
lessee, contract purchaser or option holder of the subject property or his or
her agent or nominee.



   PROJECT. Any activity associated with the annexation, subdivision or
development of land and/or with residential, commercial or industrial zoning
and/or building.



   PUBLIC ROAD DEVELOPMENT. Defined by the Village Watershed Development
Code.



   RETAINED PERSONNEL. Any engineer, attorney, planner, economist or other
technical, professional expert or employee paid and retained by the village
to assist or advise it directly or indirectly in planning, reviewing,
evaluating, advising, considering, approving, administering or accepting any
project by the village.



   WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT. Defined by the Village  Watershed Development
Code.



(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 3-8-2007)



§ 54.02  REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES BY OWNER/PETITIONER.



   The owner/petitioner shall pay and reimburse the village for any and
all expenses and fees directly or indirectly incurred by or charged to said
village by the retained personnel of said village and shall pay all costs and
expenses attributable to any and all hearings, meetings and conferences held
in connection with any project.



(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 3-8-2007)



§ 54.03  DEPOSIT TO DEFRAY VILLAGE EXPENSES AND FEES.



   (A)   The owner/petitioner of the following types of project shall
initially deposit with the Village Clerk the sums hereinafter specified,
which sums shall be used to defray the aforesaid village costs and expenses.



 

Projects
 
Fee




Amendments to zoning ordinance and conditional uses for property currently
within the village limits
 
Minimum of $1,000 for the first acre, plus $100 per acre in excess of 1 acre


Annexations, subdivisions, P.U.D.s, and other land developments, including
zoning and/or planning for residential, commercial and/or industrial uses
 
Minimum of $5,000 for the first acre, plus $200 for each acre in excess of 1
acre, with a deposit maximum of $50,000


Any development activity located in whole or in part within the flood hazard
boundary areas of the village which are subject to regulation by the village
 
$2,600


Construction activity and/or permits in connection with multi-family,
commercial and/or industrial activity involving more of one acre, than
$80,000 of project expenditures
 
Minimum of $2,500 for the first acre, plus $200 per acre in excess


Single One-Family Residential Property


Annexation
 
$1,000


Other improvement or development activity for one single family lot or parcel
 
$500


Variation
 
$1,000


Variations and appeals on property currently within the village limits
 
Minimum of $1,000 for the first acre, plus $100 per acre in excess of 1 acre


Zoning text amendment
 
$1,000


Watershed Development


Major development
 
Minimum of $2,600 for the first acre, plus $100 per acre in excess of 1 acre


Minor development
 
$2,600


Public road development
 
$2,600




 



   (B)   (1)   This deposit shall be paid to the Village Clerk at
the time of initial inquiry by an owner/ petitioner and prior to the time any
meetings are held at which any retained personnel will be present.



      (2)   Except as directed by the Village Board, no date shall
be set for a public hearing or any proposal presented to the Village Board or
any matter referred to the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission,
unless the owner/petitioner shall have complied with this chapter.



(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 3-8-2007; Ord. 10-O-19, passed 3-25-2010)



§ 54.04  LAND AREA MEASUREMENT.



   For purposes of calculating the numbers of acres in connection with any
annexation, subdivision or other land development herein, the gross area
encompassed within the legal description of the subject premises shall be
used.



(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 3-8-2007)



§ 54.05  STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.



   All proceedings in connection with any of the foregoing projects shall
be held in abeyance until the aforesaid sum is deposited with the Village
Clerk.



(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 3-8-2007)



§ 54.06  STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES.



   Any statement or bill submitted to the village by any retained
personnel shall segregate and identify the charges and fees incurred directly
or indirectly in connection with said project and a photocopy thereof shall
be forwarded by the Village Clerk to the owner/petitioner whenever such
charges or fees are withdrawn from the aforesaid sums deposited by the
owner/petitioner with the village.



(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 3-8-2007)



§ 54.07  RESTORATION OF FUND BALANCE.



   (A)   Whenever the amount deposited by the owner/petitioner,
aforesaid, has been drawn upon so that the balance thereof is one-half or
less of the original amount deposited, the Village Clerk or her designate is
authorized and directed to require the owner/petitioner to deposit with the
village an amount which will increase the available funds to the amount
initially deposited by said owner/petitioner with the village.



   (B)   All further proceedings with regard to such project shall be
held in abeyance until such subsequent demands by the Village Clerk have been
complied with by the owner/petitioner.



(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 3-8-2007)



§ 54.08  DEFAULT.



   (A)   If the owner/petitioner fails to reimburse the village in
accordance with this chapter, no action on any request made by the
owner/petitioner will be undertaken by the Board of Trustees, or by any other
official, quasi-official or deliberative individual or body thereunder; and
such request shall remain in abeyance until all outstanding fees are paid in
full interest in the amount of 1.5% per month shall accrue on all sums
outstanding for 30 days or more.



   (B)   In addition, the village, in its discretion, may suspend
action on building permit review, building permit or occupancy permit
inspections or similar activities until such time as the account is brought
current.



   (C)   Upon any failure to reimburse the village in accordance with
this chapter, the village may, in its discretion, elect to place a lien
against any real property associated with the owner/petitioner’s request.
Such lien shall be in an amount equal to the outstanding total amount owed to
the village. In addition, in the event that the village must incur any
attorneys fees or court costs in the collection of any amounts from
owner/petitioner, the owner/petitioner shall be responsible for said
attorneys fees and court costs, in addition to any sums due under this
chapter.



   (D)   Whenever any payments required to be made by an
owner/petitioner hereunder have not been paid for a period of six months, the
Village Board may, in its sole and absolute discretion, terminate and render
null and void the proposed project.



(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 3-8-2007)



§ 54.09  WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS; EXTENSIONS.



   The Village Board may, for good cause shown by an owner/petitioner in
writing, grant extensions of time for the making of such payments.



(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 3-8-2007)



§ 54.10  UNUSED BALANCE REFUNDABLE.



   Within a reasonable time after the completion of any project or upon
the presentment of the final statement of the retained personnel, whichever
time is later, any unpaid balance remaining in the fund deposited by the
owner/petitioner shall be paid to such owner/petitioner without interest.



(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 3-8-2007)



CHAPTER 55:  WATER



Section



   55.01   Installation of water mains



   55.02   Turning on



   55.03   Applications



   55.04   Use of public water mains and lines



   55.05   Service connection; permit and water meter and inspection
required



   55.06   Resale



   55.07   Tampering



   55.08   Service pipes; installation



   55.09   Water rates



   55.10   Penalty for delinquent bills



   55.11   Water bill liens



   55.12   Water connection charge



   55.13   Security deposit



   55.14   Water conservation



§ 55.01  INSTALLATION OF WATER MAINS.



   (A)   Any property owner who is required by village ordinance to
connect to an existing village water main, and any property owner or user who
otherwise voluntarily elects to connect to such existing village water main,
shall, at his, her or their own sole and exclusive expense, install such
water main as may be specified by the Superintendent of Public Works and/or
village-designated engineer:



      (1)   Along the entire road frontage of the subject property;



      (2)   Within existing easements located on the subject
property which have been provided for that purpose; or



      (3)   Within such other location or locations as may be
designated by the Superintendent of Public Works and/or village-designated
engineer.



   (B)   Provided, however, that, upon application by such property
owner or user, and for good cause shown, the Board of Trustees may vary the
requirements of this section.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004)



§ 55.02  TURNING ON.



   No water from the village water supply shall be turned on for service
into any premises by any person, but the Superintendent of Public Works or
some person authorized by him or her to perform this service.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004)



§ 55.03  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications to have water turned on shall be made in writing to the
Village Clerk, and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by
and accept all the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing the use
of the village water supply by the applicant.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004)



§ 55.04  USE OF PUBLIC WATER MAINS AND LINES.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public water main or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Building Department of the village.



   (B)   No connections to the municipal water mains shall be made,
except by licensed plumbers bonded to the village.



   (C)   All excavations for building water installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Street, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
village within 30 days.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004)



§ 55.05  SERVICE CONNECTION; PERMIT AND WATER METER AND INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   No connection with a water main shall be made without a permit
being issued and 24 hours notice having been given to the Building Inspector
and/or Superintendent of Public Works. All applications for connecting to the
village water service, except for single-family residences, shall be reviewed
and approved by the Village Engineer prior to the issuance of any connection
permit.



   (B)   All such connections shall be made by or under the supervision
of the Building Inspector and/or Superintendent of Public Works.



   (C)   Before connection is made with the water distribution system,
the premises to be served must be equipped with a meter purchased from the
village at a charge of $500 per water meter per residential unit (fee
includes inspection fee). The meter charge for a non-residential unit shall
be determined by the Superintendent of Public Works. Only water meters
purchased from the village shall be installed and utilized in connection with
the village’s water system. Meters shall be installed in a location that
will be easy for village personnel to access.



   (D)   The village shall inspect the water service to determine that
the construction thereof is in accordance with specifications established by
the village for such services.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004)



§ 55.06  RESALE.



   No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from
the village water supply to any premises other than that for which
application has been made and the meter installed, except in case of
emergency with the approval of the Superintendent of Public Works.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004)



§ 55.07  TAMPERING.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person not authorized by the President
and Board of Trustees to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the village
water works, the supply system or any meter.



   (B)   When a water meter is found broken, removed or otherwise
tampered with, the water user shall be mailed a photocopy of this section of
the Municipal Code. If the water meter is found to be broken, removed or
otherwise tampered with a second time, the user shall be billed, and shall
pay to the village, a fine of $500. In addition to the payment of the
foregoing fine, said user shall also pay to the village for any and all
unmetered water determined to have been received from the village and shall,
at the discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works, be required to
purchase a new tamperproof meter. The user shall also be subject to
prosecution by the village for violation of the terms and provisions of this
section and to the penalties provided for by the Municipal Code.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004)



§ 55.08  SERVICE PIPES; INSTALLATION.



   (A)   General. All service pipes from the mains of the premises
served shall be installed by, and at the cost of, the owner of the property
to be served or the applicant for the service. Such installation shall be
under the supervision of the Building Inspector.



   (B)   Conformance with State Plumbing Code. No service shall be
installed unless it conforms to the specifications of the State Plumbing Code
which is adopted, a copy of which is kept on file in the office of the
Building Inspector.



   (C)   Stopcocks. No owner or plumber shall be permitted to conduct
water pipes into any two distinct premises or tenements unless separate and
distinct stopcocks shall be placed on the outside of each such premises along
the sidewalk opposite the same, nor shall any pipe be allowed to cross lots
or buildings to adjoining premises.



   (D)   Repairs. All repairs for service pipes and plumbing systems of
buildings shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises
served. The village m ay in case of an emergency, repair any service pipes
and if this is done the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the
village by the owner of the premises served.



   (E)   Excavations. Excavations for installing service pipes or
repairing the same shall be made in compliance with the provisions of the
village ordinances relating to excavations in streets; provided that, it is
unlawful to place any service pipe in the same excavation with, or directly
over or under, any drain pipe or sewer pipe.



   (F)   Shut-off boxes. Shut-off boxes or service boxes shall be
placed on every service pipe, and shall be located in the public right-of-way
between the curbline and the sidewalk line where this is practicable. Such
boxes shall be so located that they are easily accessible and shall be
protected from frost.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004)



§ 55.09  WATER RATES.



    The user on all property or premises located in the village upon which
any building or structure has been or may be hereinafter erected, having
connection with any mains or pipe which exist or which may hereafter be
constructed and used in connection with the water supply system of the
village, shall pay a monthly service charge based upon the amount of water
meter reading for each month according to the following schedule:



 


Commercial users

 
$28.89 service fee plus a water charge of $4.93 per 1,000 gallons with a
minimum charge of 2,000 gallons. Minimum Bill $38.75


Industrial users
 
$30.76 service charge plus a water charge of $4.93 per 1,000 gallons with a
minimum charge of 2,000 gallons. Minimum Bill $40.62


Residential users
 
$10.30 service charge plus a water charge of $4.93 per 1,000 gallons of water
with a minimum charge of 2,000 gallons. Minimum Bill $20.16


Hydrant meter users
 
$69.00 service fee plus a water charge of $5.42 per 1,000 gallons of water
with a minimum charge of 2,000 gallons. Minimum Bill $78.84



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004; Ord. 18-O-10, passed 3-20-2018; Ord.
19-O-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 55.10  PENALTY FOR DELINQUENT BILLS.



   (A)   The water supply may be shut off from any premises for which
the bill remains unpaid for 45 days or more after it is rendered. When shut
off, such service shall not be renewed except upon payment of the charges due
plus $50 for turning on the water. Prior to any service disconnection, the
village shall send notice to the owner of record at the owner’s last known
address or the owner’s duly authorized designee, and the occupant of the
property, a notice which shall be printed in red and which shall be
substantially similar to the following:



 


   Issuance date:
                                 Effective
date:


   Utility
name                                    Cus
tomer name and address

   Utility contact
information                              Customer
 account number


URGENT!



This is a DISCONNECTION NOTICE!


Your utility service is in danger of disconnection because of unpaid and
delinquent account charges.

In order to stop disconnection, you must contact the Village and make full
payment of the delinquent account or, pursuant to your statutory rights, make
arrangements for a payment plan. If you have recently paid, please contact us
to confirm that the service will not be disconnected.

You can be shut off on or after (effective date), and you can still be shut
off until (date notice expires 30 days after initial shutoff date) or we send
you a new notice to replace this one.

Residential customers have certain rights regarding this notice, including
the right to a deferred payment arrangement and the potential to stop
disconnection for 60 days and start a medical payment arrangement if a doctor
or local board of health contacts us directly on behalf of a patient living
in your household. Please see the reverse side of this notice for further
details of your rights.

You will lose many of your rights if you wait to do something until after
disconnection.

If you have questions or concerns about this notice, please contact us
immediately at: Village of Lakemoor Water Billing, 28581 Route 120, Lakemoor,
Illinois or call (815)385-1117.

If we are unable to assist you, you have a right to contact and review your
rights with the government agency that regulates us:

The Illinois Commerce Commission's Consumer Services Division can be reached
at


1-800-524-0795 (TTY1-800-858-9277).


**The following to appear on the reverse side of the above Notice:

Your rights and responsibilities regarding this notice:

Payment methods: The Village accepts cash, checks or credit cards to pay
balances due. Credit cards may be subject to an additional fee.

Deferred Payment Arrangement (DPA): You may be eligible for a payment plan
known as a DPA in order to prevent disconnection unless you failed to
complete a previous DPA in the past 12 months. Please contact us at
(815)385-1117 to ask about payment options to avoid disconnection.


Reinstatement: You can reinstate a previous DPA that defaulted by catching up
with all the payments that were due up to now. We may charge you a
reinstatement fee unless this is your first time reinstating the DPA.


Renegotiation: If you lose or change income, you may be able to renegotiate
your DPA.

Financial Aid: Help with utility bills may be found in the Low-Income Home
Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP). Along with the aid, LIHEAP qualification
gives you extra rights. Contact LIHEAP at (217) 557-0173. We may know of
other aid available. To find out, contact us at (815)385-1117.

Medical Certification: If you haven't used a medical certificate in the past
12 months or you paid off a previous medical certificate, a medical
certificate from a doctor or local board of health can stop disconnection for
60 days or have service restored as long as they contact us within 14 days
after shutoff. The medical certificate must contain:

1)   Name and contact information for the doctor or board of health;

2)   Your service address and the name of the patient;

3)   A statement that the patient lives at the address; and

4)   A statement that disconnection of utility service will aggravate an
existing medical emergency or create a medical emergency for the patient.

The doctor or local board of health can call us to certify, but they must
provide a written medical certificate with the above information within 5
days after calling. The medical certificate also puts you on a medical
payment arrangement to pay off the bill over time. The term of the payment
plan will be better if we receive the certificate before your service is
disconnected.

Active Duty Military: If someone living with you is on active U.S. military
duty, State law offers certain protections for your electricity and natural
gas service. Please contact us if someone in your household is on active duty.

Deposits: We can demand a deposit from you if we shut you off or if you pay
late 4 times and carry a past due balance older than 30 days at any time in a
12 month period. The deposit will be about twice the size of your average
bill, and you can pay it in 3 installments. You can be disconnected for not
paying a deposit.

Reconnection: If we shut you off, your service will be restored when you pay
in full or take care of the problem if we shut you off for something other
than a bill or deposit. You may be required to pay a reconnection fee.

Complaints:If you have a complaint or problem with us, do not wait until
after we shut you off to try to take care of it! If you contact us to try to
take care of a problem, we must try to work with you to resolve or explain
the problem. If we can't help you, you can contact the Illinois Commerce
Commission's Consumer Services Division at: 1-800-524-0795 (TTY
1-800-858-9277). Before calling the ICC, you must try to work things out with
us first. Please call us at (815)385-1117.

Regulations: You can review the main set of rules that affect you at
http://www.ilga.gov/commission/jcar/admincode/083/08300280sections.html.



 



      (B)   The village shall, upon the date given for
disconnection, attempt to contact the owner and the tenant of the property
prior to the actual disconnection. All service disconnections shall take
place before 2:00 p.m. on a non-holiday weekday when the village has normal
business hours. Upon disconnection of the sewer, the village shall
immediately red-tag the residence as a declaration that such residence is
uninhabitable and immediately notify the County Department of Health that
such service has been disconnected and the property issued a red-tag. Once
all fees are paid in full, the village will schedule the reconnection at the
first availability of the reconnection service.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004; Ord. 10-O-03, passed 1-28-2010; Ord.
16-O-20, passed 9-8-2016; Ord. 18-O-22, passed 7-17-2018)



§ 55.11  WATER BILL LIENS.



   In the event that water service charges, including any penalty then
due, are not paid within 30 days after the date of billing, such charges and
penalties shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and
thereafter the village may file suit against the delinquent owner or owners
to recover the unpaid user service charges as well as any and all court costs
and attorney fees incurred by the village in filing such civil suit. The
village shall also file a statement of lien claim with the County Recorder of
Deeds. This statement of lien claim shall include the legal description of
the property to which water service was provided, the amount of the unpaid
water user service charges, all recording charges and penalties. The village
shall cause notice of its claim for lien to be sent to the occupant of the
subject premises, if known, and to the owner's last known address or the
owner's designee. The failure of the village to record the lien with the
County Recorder of Deeds, or to mail the notice of delinquency and lien to
the owner, the owner's designee, user or occupant of the property shall not
in any way diminish the village's right to collect and/or lien the property
at any point prior to the balance of the account being paid in full.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004; Ord. 18-O-22, passed 7-17-2018)



§ 55.12  WATER CONNECTION CHARGE.



   (A)   Pursuant to authority granted in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-150-1, and upon authority contained in other provisions of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, there is hereby established within the village a charge
for connection into the water system of the village.



   (B)    Such charge is to be assessed against new or additional users
of the water collection and treatment system and shall be known as a
“connection charge” and shall be payable as follows.



 


Meter Size

 

Minimum Connection Fee



3/4 inch (minimum)
 

$2,830.86



1 inch
 

$4,723.66



1-1/2 inches
 

$7,006.85



2 inches
 

$8,529.32



3 inches and larger
 

To be determined by the Superintendent of Public Works




 



   (C)   For any property or portion thereof for which a water
connection charge has been paid or established, and which, by alteration,
enlargement or change of use, becomes subject to a higher rate for the water
connection charge by reason of such enlargement, alteration or change of use,
the owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the water
service shall be jointly and severally liable to notify the village thereof,
and pay to the village the difference between the present cost of the
original connection charge and the rate applicable at the time of
enlargement, alteration or change of use. Notice thereof shall be given to
the village no later than 14 days before the enlargement, alteration or
change of use, and in the event the village is not notified within such time,
an additional charge of $100 may be assessed for such failure, in addition to
any penalties otherwise provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004; Ord. 19-O-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 55.13  SECURITY DEPOSIT.



    Pursuant to authority granted the village in the Illinois Municipal
Code, it is hereby established that there shall be a security deposit
required to be paid to the Village Treasurer in the amount of $2,000 for fire
hydrant water meter. The deposit will be released at the time of the meter
return and deposit return approved by the Director of Public Works. Any
damage to Village property while using the meter will be the sole
responsibility of the user and the deposit may be used towards the repair
costs.



(Ord. 04-O-06, passed 5-27-2004; Ord. 19-O-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 55.14  WATER CONSERVATION.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to grant authority to the
President to regulate the use of village water during periods of peak demand
in order to conserve the village water and water pressure.



   (B)   No person shall use water from the village water system for
outside/outdoor use, including, but not limited to, sprinkling of streets,
driveways, sidewalks, patios, decks, cars, lawns and plants, filling of
swimming pools or ponds or for any other recreation non-essential purpose, as
may be established by the order of the President or his/her designee, in
violation of the following provisions.



      (1)   Condition yellow. Conditional yellow shall allow the
outside use of the village’s water supply for landscaping, lawn watering
and other outdoor purposes only on alternate days. Lots with odd-numbered
addresses will be permitted to use village water outside on odd-numbered days
and lots with even-numbered address will be permitted to use village water on
even-numbered days.



      (2)   Condition red. Condition red shall prohibit the use of
village water for all outside uses, including, but limited to, the uses
described in division (B)(2) above.



   (C)   The village shall cause signs to be posted in public places
throughout the village, advising residents of the watering conditions in
effect, if any.



   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any portion of this
section between May 15 and September 15 of any calendar year shall be fined
not less than $25, nor more than $750, for each offense. Each day that a
violation continues or persists shall be deemed a separate offense. In
addition, the village shall have the power to shut off or cause to be shut
off the water from the premises of any person who violates or refuses to
comply with the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 05-O-14, passed 7-14-2005)



CHAPTER 56:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE



Section



   56.01   Definitions



   56.02   Registration of telecommunications providers



   56.03   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee



   56.04   Collection, enforcement and administration of
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fees



   56.05   Compliance with other laws



   56.06   Existing franchises and licenses



   56.07   Penalties



   56.08   Enforcement



   56.09   Severability



   56.10   Conflict



   56.11   Waiver and fee implementation



§ 56.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS CHARGES. The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the
act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the
village, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in
money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services
and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid. GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel point within the village, charges for the channel
mileage between each channel point within the village, and charges for that
portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the village.
However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:



      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a
charge made under:



         (a)   The fee imposed by this section;



         (b)   Additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill
under ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §§ 9-221 or 9-222, Public Utilities Act;



         (c)   Amounts collected under the state statutes;



         (d)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise
Tax Act, being ILCS Ch. 35, Act 630;



         (e)   911 surcharges; or



         (f)   The tax imposed by I.R.C. § 4251 (26 U.S.C. §
4251).



      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received
outside the village;



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment
that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 9-222.1, Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption
and during the period of time specified by the village;



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other
than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;



      (7)   Bad debts (BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is
related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during-the reporting period in which the payment
is made);



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunications devices; or



      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided to the village.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any municipal street, alley, water or public
right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including
utility easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to
locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications
facilities. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal
village property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence
and shall not include village buildings and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Or any like
term, any retailer having or maintaining within the state, directly or by a
subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities,
sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within the state under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or
other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether
such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in the state.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location,
as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the
location of the customer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment
as defined by the location in the state where bills are sent.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic
or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics,
laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. Unless the context
clearly requires otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless
telecommunications as hereinafter defined. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for
use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities and all telecom- munications resold in the subsequent
provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales
for resale. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable
services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of
1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable
or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to
the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the
Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. §§ 76.1550 and following) as
now or hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.



      (1)   Any telecommunications retailer; and



      (2)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer
that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public
right-of-way that is used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER. Every person
engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as
defined in this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business within the state, who, to the
satisfaction of the village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection
and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such
retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications
in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business within the village/state.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes cellular mobile telephone
services, personal wireless services as defined in § 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Pub. Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. §
332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services and paging services.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



§ 56.02  REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.



   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this chapter
shall register with the village within 30 days after the effective date of
this chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later,
on a form to be provided by the village; provided, however, that, any
telecom- munications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to § 56.04(C)
of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
section.



   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the
village pursuant to division (A) above has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by § 56.04(C), as
the case may be, to the village within 30 days from the date of the
occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the
telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on
file with the village.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



§ 56.03  MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.



   (A)   A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1% of
all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the village for telecommunications originating or received
in the village.



   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this chapter, the village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this chapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.



   (C)   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced and administered as
set forth in § 56.04 of this chapter.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



§ 56.04  COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES.



   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from
each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service
address.



   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the Village President, the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not later than the last day of the month subsequent
to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however,
that, the telecom- munications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2%
of the village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.



   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village
shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village
Treasurer, which shall contain such information as the Village Treasurer may
reasonably require.



   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected
pursuant to this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee
collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by
the telecommunications retailer to the village. The charge imposed under
division (A) above by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this
chapter shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications
retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable
at law in the same manner as the original charge for such services.



   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure
maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this
chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due,
or to become due, under this chapter, from the telecommunications retailer
who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the Village Treasurer may
request, and telecommunications retailer shall provide, written
substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made
more than three years after the date of the erroneous payment unless:



      (1)   The credit is used only to offset a claim of
underpayment made by the village within the applicable statutory period of
limitations; and



      (2)   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.



   (F)   Amounts paid under this chapter by telecommunications
retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following
acts as described immediately below:



      (1)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, being ILCS Ch. 35, Act 630;



      (2)   “Gross receipts” for purposes of the municipal
utility tax as prescribed in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2;



      (3)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the municipal
telecommunications tax as prescribed in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17;



      (4)   “Gross revenue” for purposes of the tax on annual
gross revenue of public utilities prescribed in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
2-202, Public Utilities Act.



   (G)   The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit
the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
chapter to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any
underpayment of the amount of the village infrastructure maintenance fee due
to the village by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the
village, plus 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an
audit, plus any costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit, in an
amount not to exceed 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined in
an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the village within 21 days after the date
of issuance of an invoice for same.



   (H)   The Village President, or his or her designee, may promulgate
such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be
required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers
that are registered pursuant to § 56.02 of this chapter of such regulations.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



§ 56.05  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:



   (A)   Generally applicable taxes;



   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under or within, use of
or repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free
standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided;



   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such
generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over,
under or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and



   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code
concerning uses or structures not located on, over or within the right-of-way.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



§ 56.06  EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.



   Any franchise, license or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the village entered into before the effective date of this
chapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid
according to and for their stated terms, except for any fees, charges or
other compensation to the extent waived.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



§ 56.07  PENALTIES.



   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the
Village Municipal Code.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



§ 56.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



§ 56.09  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



§ 56.10  CONFLICT.



   This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior
hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



§ 56.11  WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION.



   (A)   The village hereby waives all fees, charges and other
compensation that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the
village by a telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing village
franchise, license or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer
during the time the village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee. This waiver shall only be effective during the time the
infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this chapter is subject to
being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by
the telecommunications retailer from the customer.



   (B)   The Village Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by
certified mail/return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer
with whom the village has a franchise.



   (C)   The village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in
this chapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month
not less than 90 days after the village provides written notice by certified
mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the village has an
existing franchise, license or similar agreement that the village waives all
compensation under such existing franchise, license or similar agreement
during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and
collected by the retailer and remitted to the village. The infrastructure
maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective
date as established in the preceding sentence.



(Ord. 97-O-22, passed 12-11-1997)



CHAPTER 57:  STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT



Section



   57.01   Adoption; definition



   57.02   Gifts



   57.03   Political activities



   57.04   Penalties



   57.05   Existing ordinances or policies



   57.06   Severability



§ 57.01  ADOPTION; DEFINITION.



   (A)   (1)   The regulations of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-15, and
ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 10-10 through 10-40, of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq., (hereinafter
referred to as the “Act” in this chapter) are hereby adopted by reference
and made applicable to the officers and employees of the village to the
extent required by ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5.



      (2)   (a)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective
after the effective date of this chapter shall be incorporated into this
chapter by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance,
offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities.



         (b)   However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of
the village.



   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, the terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE
shall be defined as set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c).



(Ord. 04-O-05, passed 5-13-2004)



§ 57.02  GIFTS.



   (A)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act by any officer or any employee of the
village is hereby prohibited.



   (B)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or
made to an officer or employee of the village under the Act is hereby
prohibited.



(Ord. 04-O-05, passed 5-13-2004)



§ 57.03  POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act by
any officer or employee of the village is hereby prohibited.



(Ord. 04-O-05, passed 5-13-2004)



§ 57.04  PENALTIES.



   The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5, for similar violations
of the Act.



(Ord. 04-O-05, passed 5-13-2004)



§ 57.05  EXISTING ORDINANCES OR POLICIES.



   This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or polices are
less restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter
shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §
70-5(a).



(Ord. 04-O-05, passed 5-13-2004)



§ 57.06  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If the State Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional
in its entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the
State Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further
appeals or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further
action by the corporate authorities of the village if the Act is found
unconstitutional by the State Supreme Court.



   (B)   If the State Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional, but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the
Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the
Act as adopted by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect;
however, that part of this chapter relating to the part of the Act found
unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
corporate authorities of the village.



(Ord. 04-O-05, passed 5-13-2004)


