6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 1/460
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Marion, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including
ordinance 3675, passed March 20, 2017. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance
supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 3082
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
PROPOSED ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Marion, state of Illinois, as follows:
Section 1: Sterling Codifiers has drafted certain ordinances to be compiled as the city code.
Section 2: There exists within those documents ordinances that have not yet been adopted by the
city, (new ordinance), and ordinances that modify ordinances that have been previously adopted by
the city.
Section 3: Any modifications made to the previous ordinances by the proposed codification of the
official city code is hereby adopted as amended as the proper and correct ordinance of the city of
Marion.
Section 4: The new ordinances that are presented for codification, are hereby officially adopted by the
city of Marion as ordinances for the city.
Section 5: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in effect after passage and publication according to law.
Approved by Council this 8th day of July, 2013.
Signed by the Mayor this day of , 2013.
AYES
NAYS
ABSTENTIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 2/460
Robert L. Butler, Mayor
Alice F. Rix, City Clerk
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
MARION CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the
official city code of Marion. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the MARION CITY
CODE and is hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section 1-1-4 of this chapter. Any
reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of
the same number, its appropriate chapter and title headings, and to the general penalty clause relating
thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal
documents. (2013 Code)
1-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative
ordinances of the city, codified pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-4 to
5/1-2-6 and 5/1-3-1 to 5/1-3-4. (1977 Code § 1.01.030; amd. 2013 Code)
1-1-3: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all
courts and in administrative tribunals of the state as the ordinances of the city of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (2013
Code)
1-1-4: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section
or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 3/460
requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifier, and the said
ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each
such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this
code. (2013 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section
or any page of this code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed
or omitted. Said code, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city clerk when directed so to
do by order of the city council. (2013 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed by the mayor and city council prior to the adoption of this
code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by necessary implication
herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
A. Tax levy ordinances.
B. Appropriation ordinances.
C. Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations.
D. Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations.
E. Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of
warrants.
F. Salary ordinances.
G. Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places.
H. Improvement ordinances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 4/460
I. Bond ordinances.
J. Ordinances relating to elections.
K. Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city.
L. All special ordinances. (2013 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the
conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this
code or by virtue of section 1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances
with respect to such provisions only. (2013 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Prior Acts: Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment of any ordinance or part
or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of
ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this code, nor be
construed as a waiver of any fee or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such
ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the
collection of any such fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor
to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed, or
deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall
continue in full force and effect. (1977 Code § 1.01.080; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same
subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the
provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing
provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or
provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2013 Code)
D. Repealed Ordinances Not Revived: The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing
clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (1977 Code
§ 1.04.090)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 5/460
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code, or any codes or
portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid
or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein
by reference. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. If for any reason, this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original
ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (1977 Code § 1.01.110; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
A. General And Liberal Construction:
1. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code shall be liberally
construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully
carried out. (2013 Code)
2. The provisions of this code, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to
effect their objectives and to promote justice. (1977 Code § 1.04.080)
B. Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and
general welfare. (2013 Code)
C. Computation Of Time: Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to
be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day
is Sunday or a holiday, in which case, it shall also be excluded. (1977 Code § 1.04.070)
D. Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or some other
city officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the
department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
E. Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to
firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
F. Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. (2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 6/460
G. May; Shall; Must: The word "may" is permissive; the words "shall" and "must" are mandatory. (1977
Code § 1.04.010)
H. Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the
common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others
as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and
understood according to such meaning.
I. Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons
and things as well as to one person and thing. (2013 Code)
J. Officers, Employees, Boards And Commissions Generally: Whenever any officer, employee, board
or commission is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of the city of Marion". (1977 Code § 1.04.020; amd. 2013 Code)
K. Tense: Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa,
unless manifestly inapplicable. (1977 Code § 1.04.040)
L. Reference To Marion City Code: Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Marion city
code", or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all
amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (1977 Code
§ 1.01.050)
M. Reference To Specific Ordinances: The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect
matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this code, but such
reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code.
(1977 Code § 1.01.070)
N. Prohibited Acts: Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it
shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such
act or omission. (1977 Code § 1.04.060)
O. Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the
content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for
organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to city ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2013 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have the meanings herein
ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 7/460
implication.
CITY: The city of Marion, Illinois, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Marion, Illinois, and
such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any
constitutional or statutory provision.
CODE: The city code of the city of Marion.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Marion. "All its members" or "all commissioners" means the
total number of commissioners holding office. The term "city council" includes the mayor.
COUNTY: The county of Williamson, state of Illinois.
LAW: Denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state of Illinois, the
ordinances of the city of Marion, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may
be promulgated thereunder.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity
creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of inhabitants of the city, or any activity
which, by its perpetuation, can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a
person or persons within the community.
OATH: Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the
words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the
provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common
or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club,
company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence
of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property
is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right
or interest therein.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 8/460
merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and adjacent property line intended for the
use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or
other public ways in the city which have or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or
such other public property so designated in any law of the state of Illinois.
TENANT AND OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the
whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for
the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters,
but when the written signature of any person is required by law on any official or public writing or
bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person or, in case such person is unable to write, by
such person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1977 Code § 1.04.010; amd. 2013 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed
to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of
such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2013 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. General Penalty Imposed:
1. Fine; Imprisonment: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this code, any person found to
have been in violation of any of the terms and provisions of this code shall be fined in an amount
not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such
fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. A violation hereof may be established by a
preponderance of the evidence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 9/460
2. Additional Penalties: In addition to the fine described in subsection A1 of this section, the circuit
court may impose a period of "conditional discharge", as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/5-1-4, or "court supervision", as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-21, for
a period of up to six (6) months, an order of restitution, an order to perform community service,
an order to complete an education program and/or any other appropriate penalties or conditions
authorized in any section of this code or stand alone ordinance or any conditions for conditional
discharge set forth in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3 or for court supervision in 730 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3.1, as the foregoing are amended from time to time.
3. Costs And Fees: Any person violating the terms or provisions of this code shall be subject, in
addition to the penalties set out in this subsection, to the payment of court costs and reasonable
attorney fees.
4. Default In Payment: A default in the payment of a fine or any installment of a fine may be
collected by any means authorized for the collection of monetary judgments. The village attorney
may retain attorneys and private collection agents for the purpose of collecting any default in
payment of any fine or installment of that fine. Any fees or costs incurred by the village with
respect to attorneys or private collection agents retained by the village attorney under this
subsection A4 shall be charged to the offender.
B. Acts Consistent With Criminal Laws Of State: If, by the terms of an ordinance, an act that would be
consistent with the criminal laws of the state is declared to be a misdemeanor, the penalty therefor
shall be for a period of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary not to exceed
six (6) months. The matter shall be prosecuted under the rules of criminal procedure of the state,
and the village shall be required to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. (2013 Code)
1-4-2: CODE ENFORCEMENT; CITATIONS:
A. Authority To Appoint Enforcement Officials: The mayor shall have authority to appoint such
individuals as may be deemed necessary, including a code enforcement officer, to enforce city
ordinances and to issue citations for the violation of such ordinances.
B. Citations:
1. Issuance: The individuals referenced in subsection A of this section, including the code
enforcement officer, shall have authority to issue citations to any individual or entity for violation
of any city ordinance pertaining to real estate and the use thereof including, but not limited to,
failure to maintain rental property in compliance with city ordinances; allowing grass, weeds or
other nondecorative vegetation to grow more than six inches (6") in height; allowing
accumulation of debris and garbage, as defined by city ordinance, or other obnoxious material;
allowing derelict, inoperable or abandoned vehicles to remain on the real estate; and allowing
dogs, cats or other animals to create a nuisance because of lack of cleanliness or noxious
odors. (Ord. 2213, 7-14-2008)
2. Report To City Attorney: The code enforcement officer, upon issuing such citation, shall report to
the city attorney the fact in order that appropriate action may be taken including filing of
complaint in the circuit court if necessary. (Ord. 2213, 7-14-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Penalty: Any person or entity that violates a city ordinance for which a violation and citation is
issued may be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) upon conviction. (Ord.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 10/460
2213, 7-14-2008)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
B. Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable
or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the
same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically
declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2013 Code)
Chapter 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
1-5-1: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS:
A. Public Inspection Of Ordinances And Resolutions: Every ordinance or resolution appropriating any
money shall remain on file with the city clerk for public inspection at least ten (10) days before the
final passage or adoption thereof.
B. Ordinances:
1. Passage: All ordinances presented to the council shall be placed upon passage by motion of a
member thereof, on which there shall be a roll call, and each member of the council shall vote
"yea" or "nay" thereon. If three (3) members of the council shall vote yea on the motion to pass,
then said ordinance shall be passed; but before it shall take effect, it shall be signed by the
mayor or any two (2) commissioners and recorded by the city clerk in the book of ordinances.
2. Publication: The city clerk shall cause every ordinance of the council making any appropriation
or imposing any fine, penalty or forfeiture to be published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city, within thirty (30) days after the passage thereof.
3. Memorandum On Each Ordinance: The city clerk shall make, at the foot of the record of each
ordinance, a memorandum of the date of its passage, the signing of the same by the mayor, or
commissioners, the date of the recording, and of the publication of the same. (Ord. 11, 12-2-
1929; amd. 2013 Code)
4. Effective Date: All ordinances shall take effect from and after their passage, signing and
recording, except such ordinances as are, by law, required to be published, and all such
ordinances shall take effect ten (10) days from and after their publication as required by law, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 11/460
except, further, when certain ordinances are required to be submitted to a vote of the people,
then and in that case, such ordinances shall take effect and become valid and binding when the
same have been ratified by a vote of the people as provided by law.
5. Filing: All ordinances passed by the council shall be deposited in the office of the city clerk and
become a part of the files of his office.
6. Preservation; Correction Of Errors: The city clerk shall file and carefully preserve the originals of
all ordinances deposited in his office. He may correct any errors in the numbering of any
ordinance or sections thereof, and insert the proper numbers; and he may omit words inserted
by clerical mistake or supply with brackets words omitted by clerical mistake.
7. Repealed Ordinances In Force: Whenever any ordinance or any part thereof shall be repealed
or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part so repealed or modified shall
continue in force until the taking effect of the ordinance repealing or modifying the same. No
ordinance or part thereof repealed by the council shall be deemed to be revived by the repeal of
the repealing ordinance, unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. (Ord. 11, 12-2-1929)
1-5-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
A. Description: A seal, in circular form, with the words, "City of Marion, Williamson County, Illinois",
shall be the seal of the city, to be used in all cases that have been or shall be hereafter provided by
law or the ordinances of the city, and in all cases in which it is or may become necessary to use a
seal by the corporation. In no case shall the impression of the corporate seal be binding upon the
city unless it is authorized by law or the ordinances of the city and is attested by the official
signature of the city clerk. (1977 Code § 1.12.010)
B. Custodian: The corporate seal shall be and remain in the custody of the city clerk and his
successors in office, to be used by him in all cases provided by the ordinances of the city. (1977
Code § 1.12.020)
Chapter 6
FORM OF GOVERNMENT; MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: COMMISSION FORM OF GOVERNMENT; STATUTES ADOPTED:
The law entitled "the commission form of municipal government" is adopted as a part of the laws
governing the city. (1977 Code § 1.08.010)
1-6-2: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
A. Regular Council Meetings: The regular meetings of the city council shall be held at the council
chambers on the second and fourth Monday evenings of each month in the year. The time of
holding said meetings shall be six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M.; provided, however, that if any such
regular meeting falls upon any holiday, recognized as such by either the laws of the United States
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 12/460
or the laws of the state of Illinois, then said regular meeting so falling on said holiday shall be held
the day following at the time and place aforesaid. (1977 Code § 2.04.010; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Public Participation:
1. Comments Invited: Comments from the public shall be invited at each city council meeting. At
the close of each council meeting, or at such time as deemed appropriate by the mayor or other
person presiding at the meeting shall ask for and permit comments on any subject. All state laws
and city ordinances relating to open meetings, and to posting and filing copies of the agenda,
shall be complied with.
2. Disruptions Prohibited: Nothing herein shall permit any person or group to disrupt any meeting
of the city council. Any person disrupting any meeting shall be advised by the mayor or person
presiding at the meeting, or any police officer to cease the disruption. If the person fails to cease
the disruption, the person may be ejected from the meeting, and any person so disrupting a
meeting shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
3. Vulgar And Slanderous Remarks: Nothing herein shall permit any person or group to disparage
the mayor or members of the city council or to engage in vulgar or slanderous remarks. Any
person engaging in such activity will be required to end their comments. In the event that any
person or group shall refuse to cease making such remarks shall be fined not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 3128, 10-14-2013)
4. Time Limits: Persons desiring to speak at a meeting of the city council, shall obtain recognition
by the mayor or person presiding at the meeting of the city council before speaking. Unless
otherwise allowed by a majority of the members of the city council present or by the mayor, no
person shall speak to the city council for more than five (5) minutes. No group or organization
may collectively speak to a meeting of the city council for more than thirty (30) minutes nor shall
any one member thereof speak for more than five (5) minutes. (Ord. 3128, 10-14-2013; amd.
Ord. 3134, 11-25-2013)
5. City Officers And Employees: Nothing in this section shall prohibit any member of the city
council from speaking at any time and at any length, subject to rules of order, and nothing herein
shall prohibit any city officer or employee from asking for recognition and making a comment or
suggestion at any time during the city council proceedings. (Ord. 3128, 10-14-2013)
1-6-3: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
At each meeting of the council, the following order of business shall be observed, together with usual
and proper decorum:
A. Roll call.
B. Reading of the minutes.
C. Report from the department of public affairs.
D. Report from the department of accounts, finances and streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 13/460
E. Report from the department of public health and safety.
F. Report from the department of public works.
G. Report from the department of public property.
H. Petitions and communications.
I. Unfinished business.
J. New business.
K. Adjournment. (1977 Code § 2.04.020; amd. 2013 Code)
1-6-4: COMPENSATION:
A. Salaries: Salaries for the mayor and commissioners shall be as follows:
Effective
May 1, 2003
Effective
May 2015
Mayor $45,000.00 $50,000.00
Commissioners 15,000.00 20,000.00
(Ord. 1699, 8-24-1998; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 3168, 3-10-2014)
B. Expense Allowance: Effective May 1, 1991, in addition to the salaries set forth in subsection A of
this section, the commissioners, except the mayor as ex officio liquor control commissioner, shall
receive the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month as an expense allowance. (Ord. 1357,
12-3-1990; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
1-7-1: REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED:
There are established certain regulations for the conduct of the affairs of the various departments of
the city and their employees, which regulations are set out in this chapter. (1977 Code § 2.76.010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 14/460
1-7-2: COMMISSION DEPARTMENTS:
A. Department Of Public Affairs:
1. The mayor shall have and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties provided or
prescribed by law or the ordinances of this city.
2. The mayor shall be in charge of and have jurisdiction over the department of public affairs, and
as such shall have general supervision and oversight of all departments and employees, officers
of the city as well as all other employees, boards, councils or committees not otherwise assigned
by law or ordinance.
3. The mayor shall be the chief executive officer and representative of the city, and shall preside at
all meetings of the council.
4. The mayor shall have charge of and cause to be prepared and published all statements and
reports required by law or by the ordinances of the council.
5. The mayor shall grant all licenses or permits, except as provided by law or ordinances, and in
the absence temporary of any of the commissioners to act shall exercise temporary supervision
over the department assigned to said commissioner.
6. The mayor shall execute all deeds and other contracts required to be executed on behalf of the
city.
7. The mayor shall have supervision of all purchases of materials, equipment and supplies of said
department and the offices and departments assigned thereto.
8. The mayor shall have charge of and supervision over the city hall and all other city property,
equipment and employees not otherwise assigned by law or ordinance.
9. The mayor shall have charge of and supervision over the city clerk and deputy city clerk, safety
director, human resource director, and city administrator, IT director, and code enforcement
director.
B. Department Of Accounts, Finance And Water:
1. The commissioner to whom the department of accounts, finance and water is assigned shall
have charge of and supervision over all accounts and records of the city. He shall inspect or
cause to be inspected all records or accounts required to be kept in any of the offices or
departments of the city, and shall cause proper accounts and records to be kept and proper
reports to be made. He shall audit or cause to be audited at frequent intervals the accounts of
every officer or employee who does or may receive or disburse money. He shall have charge of
the purchase, care and distribution of all supplies and other articles not otherwise provided by
law or ordinance or requisitions signed by the heads of the departments. He shall examine or
cause to be examined and report to the council upon bills, accounts, payrolls and claims before
they are acted upon or allowed, unless otherwise provided by law. He shall procure from all
persons or corporations operating public service utilities in the city, and cause to be placed on
file such reports as they are by law or ordinance or otherwise required to make to the city, or any
of its officers, and shall collect or cause to be collected all license fees, franchise fees, taxes,
special assessments, rentals or other monies which may be due or become due to the city,
unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. He shall report to the council any failure to make
reports or to pay monies to the city with such recommendation in relation thereto as he may
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 15/460
deem proper. The city finance director-treasurer, and all employees assigned to the finance
director-treasurer's office shall be under the direction and supervision of the commissioner to
whom the department of accounts, finance and water is assigned.
2. The commissioner in charge of this department shall also be vice president of the council and in
the absence of the mayor or the mayor's inability to act shall preside over the council and shall
perform all the usual duties of the department of public affairs.
3. The commissioner in charge of this department is assigned and shall have charge of and
supervision over the water utility of the city, including all water mains, buildings, apparatus and
other property belonging thereto, and the appointment of officers and employees thereof are
hereby assigned to said department and shall be under his control and supervision. He shall
have supervision of all purchases of apparatus and supplies of said department, except as
provided by law or ordinance, and the officers and employees assigned thereto.
C. Department Of Streets And Public Improvements:
1. The commissioner of the department of streets and public improvements is assigned and shall
have charge of and supervision over the city cemeteries including buildings, streets apparatus,
equipment and other property belonging thereto and the employees thereof, except as that
service is provided by law or ordinance.
2. The superintendent of the street department and all employees therein, are assigned to the
department of streets and public improvements and shall be under the control and supervision of
the commissioner of said department. He shall have supervision over the purchase of materials
and supplies for construction or repair work or which are otherwise used in his department. He
shall have charge of the excavations to be made in the streets or alleys for the purpose of
repairing, tapping, inspecting or otherwise, and of issuing permits for said excavations. He shall
have charge of the erection, repair and replacement of traffic control signs and equipment and
street name signs. He shall have charge insofar as he lawfully may, of the electric lighting
system and shall have charge of and direction of the lighting of streets, alleys, public grounds,
bridges, viaducts and buildings not otherwise assigned by law or ordinance. He shall, insofar as
authorized by law, have supervision over all public service utilities and all persons or
corporations rendering service in the city under any franchise, contract or grant made or granted
by the city or state, and shall report to the council any failure of such person or corporation to
render service or to observe the rules or conditions of any franchise, contract or grant under
which such public service utility is operated.
D. Department Of Public Property: The commissioner to whom the department of public property is
assigned shall have charge of and supervision over the sewer department including the employees
thereof, wastewater treatment facilities, buildings, sewer mains, lift station apparatus, equipment,
vehicles and other property belonging thereto, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
E. Department Of Public Health And Safety: The commissioner to whom the department of public
health and safety is assigned shall have charge of and supervision over the police department and
the fire department, the personnel, equipment and apparatus employed by or used in each
department and the purchase of apparatus and supplies for each department, except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance. (Ord. 3255, 4-27-2015)
1-7-3: DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES AND RISK MANAGEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 16/460
A. Department Established; Administration: There is hereby established the department of human
resources and risk management which will be administered by the director of human resources
and risk management at the direction of the mayor and the city administrator.
B. Director Of Department:
1. Appointment: The director of human resources and risk management shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the advice of the city administrator and the consent of the city council. (Ord. 2249, 3-
30-2009)
2. Qualifications: The director shall have the professional experience, qualifications, and training to
successfully perform the complex functions of this position. He shall also have satisfied the
following:
a. Have a minimum of a four (4) year college degree in business, management, administration,
human resources or other related fields or equivalent combination of education, skill, and
experience in these fields.
b. Have a workable knowledge of database, spreadsheet, and word processing software.
c. Have a thorough knowledge of workforce methods and techniques in relation to planning,
coordinating, analyzing, implementing and managing human resources and risk management
programs and policies. (Ord. 2249, 3-30-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
3. Duties: It shall be the responsibility of the human resources and risk management director to
plan, direct, and review the human resources policy and coordinate activities such as
employment policies and procedures, development and training, employment data and records,
risk management compensation, benefits, labor relations, workers' compensation, and
workplace safety. In addition, the director shall implement and monitor the city's compliance in
regards to human resources and safety laws. The following are the essential duties of the
director:
a. Recommend, implement and monitor compliance with laws, regulations and policies of the city
applicable to human resources and safety.
b. Coordinate with supervisory and management personnel the hiring of city employees
including, but not limited to, posting new jobs internally, advertising new positions, receiving
and maintaining job applications, verifying references, coordinating background checks of
prospective employees where applicable and recommending applicants.
c. Coordinate and administer the drug/alcohol testing procedures.
d. Provide reports and recommendations relating to the city's human resources policies,
procedures and practices to the city administrator, mayor and city council. (Ord. 2249, 3-30-
2009)
e. Administer benefit programs which includes communicating with employees and providing
technical assistance to employees in the understanding, enrollment and procedures of city
benefit programs which shall include keeping of records of participation, changes and
terminations in programs. The director shall consult with the finance director-treasurer's office
on employee benefit additions or changes. (Ord. 2249, 3-30-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 17/460
f. Ensure compliance with workers' compensation laws and act as a liaison for the city with
compensation insurance carriers. Investigate, where necessary, job related claims and confer
with necessary personnel.
g. Coordinate the city's safety and training program including injury and illness prevention.
Investigate incidents and accidents, conferring with employees and supervisors on
recommended actions. Ensure employees are equipped with and utilizing required safety
equipment and/or apparel.
h. Coordinate, investigate and consult with supervisors, commissioners, and employees to
resolve sensitive and significant personnel issues which may include discussion with the city
labor attorney and union representatives. Consult and advise supervisors and commissioners
in appropriate resolution of employee relations issues.
i. Assist the city administrator and city council in negotiations with city union bargaining units.
j. Perform such duties as directed or assigned by the mayor or the city administrator.
4. Compensation: The director of human resources and risk management shall receive
compensation and benefits as the mayor and city council shall fix from time to time. (Ord. 2249,
3-30-2009)
1-7-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF SUPERINTENDENTS:
A. Inventory: Each department superintendent, including the police chief and fire chief, shall make, or
cause to be made by someone assigned to his department, a complete inventory of all equipment,
motor vehicles, machinery and tools as well as all supplies of whatsoever nature allotted or
assigned to that department. One copy of the inventory shall be kept on file by the department
superintendent, one copy filed with the city clerk, and one copy filed with the commissioner in
charge of the department. Such a corrected and current inventory shall be similarly filed on or
before the first day of each year thereafter. (1977 Code § 2.76.020; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Equipment:
1. It shall be the responsibility of the superintendent of each department to keep all equipment in a
state of good repair at all times. However, no major repair requiring a considerable outlay of city
funds shall be undertaken without prior approval of the commissioner in charge of the
department. (1977 Code § 2.76.030; amd. 2013 Code)
2. It shall be the responsibility of the superintendent of each department to be in position to
account daily for all hand tools and equipment charged to his department. (1977 Code
§ 2.76.040)
C. Cooperation With Other Departments: It shall be the responsibility of each department
superintendent to encourage cooperation in all things between his department and the other city
departments in order that the best interests of the city and its citizens may be served. (1977 Code
§ 2.76.050)
D. Logbook:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 18/460
1. It shall be the responsibility of the superintendent of each department to keep and maintain a
logbook for the purpose of recording therein each call or complaint received by each such
department.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to have printed and to keep on hand a supply of
forms for distribution to each department superintendent. The form to be used is as follows:
City of Marion
Department
Number:
Date: Time: City employee receiving call:
Name of party making call or reporting problem:
Location of problem:
Nature of problem:
Response given to call:
Date and action of follow-up taken:
Signed by superintendent of department
(1977 Code § 2.76.060)
1-7-5: USE OF CITY EQUIPMENT:
A. The various items of city equipment shall be freely and unhesitatingly interchanged between
departments as the occasion demands. If a piece of equipment required by one department is then
in use by another, the department having the greatest and most pressing need for the equipment
shall have priority for the use of such equipment regardless to which department the equipment is
originally assigned. (1977 Code § 2.76.100)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 19/460
B. If a piece of equipment assigned to one department is temporarily used by another department and,
while in such temporary use, breaks down or falls into a state of disrepair, the department
temporarily using the equipment will promptly have the necessary repairs made, and the cost
thereof shall be charged to the department having the repairs made. (1977 Code § 2.76.110)
1-7-6: RAIN GEAR FOR CERTAIN EMPLOYEES:
A. Each person in the water, sewer, street and cemetery departments shall be issued raincoats and
boots for which each person shall sign a receipt. (1977 Code § 2.76.120; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Each person shall be responsible for his individual rain gear.
C. The gear is to be kept, when not in use, in each department's facility.
D. Each person shall be accountable for such gear and shall not use such gear for any but city
purposes.
E. It shall be the department superintendent's responsibility to enforce this section. (1977 Code
§ 2.76.120)
1-7-7: VEHICLE LOGBOOKS:
Each truck or vehicle in each department shall have a logbook to be kept with each vehicle in which
shall be recorded a reading of the mileage from the odometer taken each time the vehicle is fueled or
otherwise serviced. All service or maintenance work done on each vehicle shall be logged in the same
book indicating the date, mileage, and description of work noted. The logbook on each vehicle shall be
turned in to the superintendent of the department each Friday evening and returned to each vehicle
the following Monday or regular business day; except, that the logbook for each police vehicle shall
remain with such vehicle at all times. (1977 Code § 2.76.130)
Chapter 8
CITY OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
1-8-1: ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
A. The elective officers of the city shall consist of such as shall be provided for by law from time to
time. (1977 Code § 2.08.010)
B. The terms of municipal officers elected in 2011 shall commence on April 28, 2011. Thereafter, the
terms of elected municipal officers shall begin the first regular or special meeting of the corporate
authorities after receipt of the official election results from the county clerk of the regular municipal
election at which the officers were elected. (Ord. 2346, 4-25-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 20/460
1-8-2: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL:
A. Appointive Officers Designated: The appointive officers of the city shall consist of a city
administrator, city clerk, city finance director-treasurer, chief of police, fire chief, code enforcement
officer, cemetery superintendent, street superintendent, water department superintendent, sewer
department superintendent, animal control officer and human resources and risk management
director. (1977 Code § 2.08.020; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Appointment: The council shall, at the first regular meeting after their election and qualification, or
as soon thereafter as practicable, elect by a majority vote the appointive officers named in
subsection A of this section.
C. Other Appointive Positions: The council may, from time to time, as deemed best by them, create
and fill city offices and employment other than prescribed in this section, as provided by law.
D. Removals: The council may, by a majority vote of all of its members, remove any appointive official
or employee of the city except as otherwise provided by law.
E. Discontinuance Of Offices: The council may, from time to time, discontinue offices and employment
by ordinance. (1977 Code § 2.08.030)
1-8-3: OATH OF OFFICE:
The mayor and commissioners and all city officers elected or appointed shall, before entering upon
the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the oath or affirmation prescribed by the
constitution; which oath or affirmation may be administered by the city clerk, except his own oath,
which shall be administered by the mayor; and which oath or affirmation so subscribed shall be filed in
the office of the city clerk. The oath or affirmation to be subscribed by the mayor and commissioners
and all city officers shall be in the following form:
I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of , of the
City of Marion, Illinois to the best of my ability.
(1977 Code §§ 2.56.010, 2.56.020)
1-8-4: EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK ADOPTED:
The employee handbook for the city is hereby adopted by reference. Said employee handbook is on
file in the office of the city clerk for public use and inspection. (2013 Code)
1-8-5: DRUG FREE WORKPLACE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 21/460
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A "controlled substance" as defined in the Illinois controlled
substances act or "cannabis" as defined in the cannabis control act of the state of Illinois.
WORKPLACE: A site for the performance of work for the city of Marion, Illinois.
B. Drugs And Alcohol Prohibited: The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or
use of controlled substance or alcoholic beverage by a city employee at a workplace is hereby
prohibited. This prohibition shall apply to the employees of any contractor contracting with the city
for goods or services.
C. Contractor Certification Of Drug Free Workplace: No contract will be awarded by the city unless the
contractor has certified to the city it will maintain a drug free workplace as set forth herein. The
certification required by this subsection shall be made on forms provided by the city.
D. Drug Free Awareness Program: The city shall establish an ongoing drug free awareness program
to inform its employees about:
1. The danger of drug or alcohol abuse in the workplace.
2. The city policy of maintaining a drug free workplace.
3. The available drug or alcohol counseling, rehabilitation, and employee assistance programs.
4. The required participation in such counseling or rehabilitation program if convicted of a violation
of any criminal drug statute.
E. Copies Of Provisions:
1. All city employees will be provided with a copy of this section as well as those who enter city
employment hereafter.
2. A copy of this section shall be prominently displayed in each city workplace. (Ord. 1481, 6-21-
1993)
F. Violations:
1. Any city employee found to be in violation of the federal or state criminal drug statutes by any
judicial body authorized to make such findings or any city employee determined to be in violation
of subsection B of this section independent of a judicial proceeding shall be subject to
appropriate personnel action up to and including termination. (Ord. 1481, 6-21-1993; amd. 2013
Code)
2. Any city employee convicted of the violation of any criminal drug statute, such violation occurring
in the workplace, shall notify the city of such conviction no later than five (5) days thereafter.
(Ord. 1481, 6-21-1993)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 22/460
ARTICLE A. CITY ADMINISTRATOR
1-8A-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS:
There is hereby created the office of the city administrator. The city administrator shall be appointed
by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. The city administrator shall be chosen
on the basis of executive, administrative, and educational qualifications with special emphasis on the
actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice with respect to the office. The city
administrator shall have the minimum of a four (4) year college degree with major course study in
public administration, and financial and personnel management or have work experience in those and
related fields. To create a feeling of greater personal responsibility and to exhibit to the citizenry a
sense of concern for the welfare of the city, the city administrator shall reside within the city limits.
Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall receive such appointment during his term
of office. (Ord. 2194, 3-31-2008; amd. Ord. 3081, 3-11-2013)
1-8A-2: COMPENSATION:
The city administrator shall receive such compensation and benefits as the mayor and city council
shall fix from time to time. (Ord. 2194, 3-31-2008)
1-8A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city administrator shall be responsible to the mayor for the proper administration of such affairs of
the city as may be assigned. In discharging this responsibility the city administrator shall, subject to
direction of the mayor:
A. Coordinate the administrative functions of all departments, offices and agencies of the city.
B. Recommend appointments and when necessary for the good of the city, recommend suspension or
removal of any city employee.
C. Attend city council meetings and participate when requested.
D. Recommend to the mayor and city council such action as may be appropriate for the enforcement
of law and the ordinances of the city.
E. Assist the mayor and city council in preparation of ordinances or resolutions.
F. Assist the mayor as chief administrative officer of the city and perform such duties as directed by
the mayor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 23/460
G. Coordinate activities between departments in consultation with the commissioner in charge to
ensure efficient utilization of resources and maximize interdepartmental coordination.
H. Assist the city finance director-treasurer and respective commissioner in preparation of the city's
annual budget.
I. Make such reports to the mayor and city council as may be required from time to time concerning
the operations of the city departments and offices.
J. Consult with the director of safety and the director of human resources and risk management to
recommend to the mayor for presentation to the city council such personnel rules and regulations
as may be considered useful in management of city affairs including, but not limited to, changes or
additions to the city personnel manual.
K. Research and collect information and assist departments in preparation of applications for grants
and loans from governmental or private entities for city programs, offices, and services.
L. Participate to the extent requested in collective bargaining agreements and advise the council
periodically during collective bargaining negotiations about issues being considered and the
positions of such issues being taken in order that the city council may apprise of the position of the
council before being presented with an agreement for final approval.
M. Assist the mayor and city council in investigating and responding to inquiries and complaints
related to the operations of the city.
N. 1. Formulate in conjunction with the mayor, city council, department heads and others that may be
designated, a long range strategic plan for the city.
2. Assist the commissioner of streets and public improvements and the commissioner of public
property in formulating a cycle of review of city infrastructure.
3. Analyze current or potential municipal operations and provide recommendations to the mayor
and city council.
O. Assist with the retention of current businesses and serve as a resource for new businesses.
P. Serve as the TIF coordinator.
Q. Conduct ongoing marketing for prospective businesses/industries.
R. Serve as a liaison to and have a working relationship with Marion chamber of commerce, Marion
Main Street, Williamson County tourism, and other community partners.
S. Oversee the city website in conjunction with the internet technology director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 24/460
T. Other duties as directed. (Ord. 3081, 3-11-2013)
ARTICLE B. FINANCE DIRECTOR-TREASURER
1-8B-1: OFFICE ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE:
In order to recognize the various duties performed by the city treasurer, the city council hereby
establishes the position of finance director which will also be held by the city treasurer. (Ord. 1944, 4-
12-2004)
1-8B-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The finance director-treasurer shall perform all duties and shall possess all powers authorized or
established by the ordinances of the city or the statutes of the state for the office of city treasurer.
B. The finance director-treasurer shall report directly to the mayor and finance commissioner, and in
addition to the duties assigned by state statute to the city treasurer, the finance director-treasurer
shall have the following responsibilities:
1. Oversee the payroll system including the maintenance and custody of all payroll and general
personnel records except the records of the board of fire and police commissioners.
2. Oversee the accounts payable system including the maintenance and custody of all accounts
payable records except for the records kept by the water office and the payments which are
generated by warrants.
3. Keeping the general ledger and accounts of the city.
4. Responsibility for the annual audit.
5. Working with the mayor and council in preparation of the city annual appropriation and annual
internal budget.
6. Receiving all revenue to the city except amounts collected by the water office and city clerk.
7. Collecting all revenue from the water office and city clerk on a monthly basis.
8. Providing financial planning analysis, forecasting and investment advice to the city.
9. Reporting to the mayor and council on the financial status of the city.
10. The finance director-treasurer, whenever possible, should sign all checks for the withdrawal of
funds. Each check must be cosigned by the finance commissioner whenever possible and, if not
available, then another commissioner designated by the city council.
11. Any other duties the mayor and council would desire the finance director-treasurer to perform.
(Ord. 1944, 4-12-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 25/460
ARTICLE C. DEPUTY CITY CLERK
1-8C-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of the deputy city clerk. The deputy city clerk shall be appointed by
the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 3009, 10-24-2011)
1-8C-2: BOND:
Before entering upon his or her duties of office, the deputy city clerk shall execute a bond in such
amount as is provided by statute, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties. (Ord.
3009, 10-24-2011)
1-8C-3: DUTIES:
The deputy city clerk shall, in the absence of the city clerk, execute all documents required by law to
be executed by the city clerk and may affix the seal of the clerk wherever required. In signing any
document, the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the clerk followed with the word "By" and the deputy
clerk's own name and the words "Deputy Clerk". The duties shall be as assigned by the mayor, city
administrator or city clerk. (Ord. 3009, 10-24-2011)
ARTICLE D. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
1-8D-1: POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of code enforcement officer (COE). (Ord. 2205, 6-30-2008)
1-8D-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The following generally describes the knowledge and ability required to enter the job and/or be
learned within a short period of time in order to successfully perform the assigned duties:
A. Ability to work independently and carry out assigned duties.
B. Has a valid driver's license.
C. Ability to operate a computer and supporting word processing and spreadsheet applications.
D. Ability to respond to inquiries, complaints and requests for services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 26/460
E. Understand and follow oral and written instructions.
F. Communicate clearly and concisely, both orally and in writing.
G. Establish and maintain effective working relationships with those contacted in the course of work.
(Ord. 2205, 6-30-2008)
1-8D-3: DUTIES:
A. Under the supervision of the director of code enforcement, the code enforcement officer will
perform a variety of technical duties in support of the city's local code enforcement program;
monitor and enforce a variety of applicable ordinances, codes and regulations related to zoning,
land use, nuisance housing, building codes, health and safety, blight, graffiti, floodplain
management and other matters of public concern; and serve as a resource and provide
information on city regulations to property owners, residents, businesses, the general public, and
other city departments.
B. The COE may perform all of the following listed duties and/or may be required to perform additional
or different duties from those set forth below to address business needs and changing business
practices: (Ord. 2205, 6-30-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
1. Perform a variety of field and office work under the supervision of the director of code
enforcement in support of the city's local code enforcement program; enforce compliance with
city regulations and ordinances including those pertaining to zoning, land use, nuisance housing,
building codes, health and safety, blight, graffiti, floodplain management and other matters of
public concern.
2. Receive and respond to citizen complaints and reports from other agencies and departments on
alleged violations of city zoning and related municipal codes and ordinances; interview
complainant and witnesses; conduct investigations and provide recommendations for resolution.
3. Conduct field investigations; inspect properties for violations; attempt to make contact at the
residence or business in order to resolve violation; issue and post warning notices, notices of
violation, corrective notices, orders to comply and related documentation for code violations;
schedule and perform all follow up functions to gain compliance including letters, inspections,
calls, meetings, discussions, and negotiations to ensure compliance with appropriate codes and
ordinances.
4. Prepare evidence in support of legal actions taken by the city; appear in court as necessary;
testify at hearings and in court proceedings as required.
5. Maintain accurate documentation and case files on inspections, enforcement actions and other
job related activities including accurate and detailed information regarding code enforcement
activity to substantiate violations; draw diagrams and take photographs.
6. Prepare a variety of written reports, memos, and correspondence related to enforcement
activities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 27/460
7. Patrol assigned areas in a city vehicle to identify and evaluate problem areas and/or ordinance
violations; determine proper method to resolve violations.
8. Attend meetings, as directed, and serve as a resource to other city departments, the general
public, and outside agencies in the enforcement of zoning regulations; provide research and
reports needed for meetings and explain municipal codes and ordinances to members of the
general public and other interested groups.
9. Operate the computer to enter, process, and acquire data relative to complaints, inspection sites
and effective code enforcement.
10. Locate vacant residences and businesses; post the property as necessary; check vacant
buildings regularly for transient activity, graffiti, and other forms of vandalism.
11. May assist in researching, drafting, and rewriting municipal codes; participate in the
development of forms and processes utilized to address various issues.
12. Perform other related duties as required. (Ord. 2205, 6-30-2008)
1-8D-4: PHYSICAL DEMANDS AND WORKING ENVIRONMENT:
The conditions herein are representative of those that must be successfully performed by the code
enforcement officer. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities
to perform the essential job functions.
A. This position may require the employee to travel from site to site; may be exposed to noise, dust,
inclement weather conditions and other conditions present in inspecting buildings.
B. This position requires sufficient physical ability and mobility to work in an office and field
environment; to stand, stop, reach, bend, kneel, squat, climb ladders, and walk on uneven terrain,
loose soil and sloped surfaces; to lift and/or carry light weights; to operate office equipment
requiring repetitive hand movement and fine coordination including use of computer keyboard;
ability to operate a vehicle to travel to various locations; and to verbally communicate to exchange
information. (Ord. 2205, 6-30-2008)
ARTICLE E. CITY SAFETY DIRECTOR
1-8E-1: POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of city safety director which shall be under supervision of the
department of public affairs. (Ord. 2306, 4-26-2010)
1-8E-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the responsibility of the city safety director to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 28/460
A. Oversee the safety of all city employees;
B. Put in place and implement such programs as in the determination of the city safety director will
improve and enhance the safety and physical well being of all city employees; and
C. Report to the city council from time to time an account of his activities and the results of any
programs undertaken. (Ord. 2306, 4-26-2010)
1-8E-3: EXPENDITURES:
As it becomes necessary for the city safety director to expend funds in furtherance of the responsibility
of the position of city safety director, application shall be made to the city council therefor. (Ord. 2306,
4-26-2010)
ARTICLE F. 911 COORDINATOR
1-8F-1: POSITION CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the position of 911 coordinator who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
1-8F-2: NARRATIVE OF POSITION:
A. The 911 coordinator is a full time, nonunion, salaried position, working forty (40) hours, Monday
through Friday, eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
B. The 911 coordinator shall report directly to the chief of police but shall also be under the auspices
of the mayor, the city administrator, the police/fire commissioner as well as the joint emergency
telephone systems board (JETSB). (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
C. The 911 coordinator shall work with the police department's communications supervisor in order to
create the smoothest operating facility possible under all types of conditions. The 911 coordinator
shall also work with: (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
1. The JETSB to implement and maintain goals and objectives related to the city's 911 system.
(Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
2. The PSAP (public safety answering points) to assure an efficient and effective 911 system.
3. All citywide emergency services agencies (police, fire, ambulance) to meet their needs.
4. The citizens of the city in order to educate and better inform them about the 911 system. (Ord.
3030, 1-9-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 29/460
1-8F-3: DUTIES:
The duties of the 911 coordinator shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Coordinate with city hall, including the water and street departments, with regards to mapping
issues and the naming of streets.
B. Maintain all aspects of the 911 geographic information system (GIS). (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
C. Prepare and maintain the official records of the JETSB.
D. Attend JETSB meetings, special meetings, and committee meetings; issue meeting notices; and
take and distribute minutes of meetings. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
E. Coordinate public awareness and public relations activities to include programs and presentations
about the enhanced 911 system and conduct educational programs for schoolchildren and/or
school districts. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
F. Draft an annual budget with the assistance and guidance of the JETSB; work with the city finance
director-treasurer's office to monitor cash flow; and advise the JETSB on budgetary impacts. (Ord.
3030, 1-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
G. Maintain an inventory of all JETSB owned equipment and relay same to the city clerk for inclusion
in the overall city inventory.
H. Keep up to date manuals for all JETSB owned equipment; test PSAP equipment; and coordinate
with the chief of police, or his designee, the repair or replacement of all JETSB owned equipment.
(Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
I. Perform periodic random testing of the 911 system, including call overflow. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
J. Negotiate, monitor and manage JETSB contracts and purchases as directed. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012;
amd. Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
K. Maintain an accurate database for the population being served.
L. Maintain an accurate listing of emergency service providers and emergency service number (ESN)
boundaries, including all police, fire and emergency medical service (EMS) providers and provide
updates to all PSAPs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 30/460
M. Maintain an accurate listing of contact persons, addresses and phone numbers for each police, fire
and emergency medical service (EMS) provider and provide any updates to all PSAPs. (Ord. 3030,
1-9-2012)
N. Report to the JETSB regarding any problems, policies or other matters pertinent to the board. (Ord.
3030, 1-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
O. Work with Marion citizens and businesses to ensure address numbers are both visible and legible
to emergency services.
P. Provide reports to the city council regarding activity, equipment, problems or information as
necessary or requested. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
Q. Act as the JETSB's liaison with the telephone companies (or other service providers); the ICC
(Illinois commerce commission); each participating governmental agency; emergency service
providers; equipment maintenance contractors; and the public. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012; amd. Ord.
3271, 8-10-2015)
R. Respond to complaints, questions and/or inquiries from the public in a timely manner.
S. Conduct critiques, prepare reports and make recommendations to the chief of police to ensure any
issues are resolved.
T. Remain current in new trends of emergency communications and 911. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
U. Attend approved meetings and/or conferences of affiliated associations such as Marion's JETSB
representative; keep up to date on matters affecting the JETSB and keep the JETSB apprised of
such matters; and provide a quarterly status report to the JETSB regarding the overall status of the
911 program. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
V. Maintain a level of familiarity with ICC regulations as they apply to the 911 system.
W. Oversee the implementation and renewal of intergovernmental agreements and other written
documentation as required by the ICC and other regulatory commissions.
X. Be available in an "on call" status in order to provide assistance in any type of emergency, as
needed by the PSAP or at the direction of the chief of police or his designee. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
Y. Work with the JETSB's legal counsel on legal matters, as directed by the JETSB. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-
2012; amd. Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 31/460
Z. Provide expertise, recommendations and assistance for the efficient operation and maintenance of
the entire 911 system.
AA. Work with the various PSAP personnel to efficiently maintain, update and upgrade the 911 CAD
(computer aided dispatch) systems.
BB. Coordinate the testing of 911 lockboxes on an annual basis and assist in training users and
dispatchers in their use.
CC. Maintain and distribute a list of lockbox contact persons to all PSAPs. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
DD. Perform a periodic review to determine if agencies serving as a PSAP remain in compliance with
the criteria and standards of operating as established by the city's JETSB. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012;
amd. Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
EE. Provide PSAP administrators with the opportunity to obtain current 911 training opportunities.
FF. Work with the communications supervisor and the chief of police during the transition and move to
the new police department (estimated 2012). (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
GG. Coordinate and/or conduct training for PSAP personnel in the utilization and operation of JETSB
and 911 equipment.
HH. Maintain the JETSB standard operating procedures (SOPs) manual.
II. Draft SOPs and policies for review by the communications supervisor and the chief of police prior to
being submitted to the city's JETSB for approval. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3271, 8-10-
2015)
JJ. Be available for emergency part time dispatch fill in when unable to fill in with regular or other part
time dispatchers.
KK. Oversee the transition in the next generation 911. (The next generation 911 [abbreviated NG-911]
refers to an initiative aimed at updating the 911 service infrastructure in the United States and
Canada in order to improve public emergency communications services in a wireless mobile
society. In addition to calling 911 from a phone, it intends to enable the public to be able to transmit
text, images, video and data to the 911 center [the public safety answering point or "PSAP"]. The
initiative also envisions additional types of emergency communications and data transfer. This NG-
911 infrastructure is intended to replace the current services over time. The national emergency
number association, or "NENA", first identified the need for NG-911 in 2000 and started
development actions in 2003 and has developed the full definition and standards for NG-911.)
(Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 32/460
1-8F-4: COMPENSATION:
The 911 coordinator shall receive such compensation and benefits as the mayor and city council shall
fix from time to time. (Ord. 3030, 1-9-2012)
Chapter 9
ETHICS
1-9-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of section 5-151 and article 102 of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this chapter), are
hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to the
extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. (Ord. 1948, 5-3-2004)
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c). (Ord. 1948, 5-3-2004)
1-9-3: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which
regulate the conduct of city officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or
policies are less restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail in
accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a). (Ord. 1948, 5-3-2004)
1-9-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Gifts:
1. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the act by an
officer or any employee of the city is hereby prohibited.
2. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the
city under the act is hereby prohibited.
B. Political Activities: The participation in political activities prohibited under the act by any officer or
employee of the city is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 1948, 5-3-2004)
1-9-5: PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 33/460
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar violations of the act. (Ord. 1948, 5-3-2004)
1-9-6: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date hereof shall be incorporated
into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and
making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 1948, 5-3-2004)
1-9-7: UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF PROVISIONS:
A. If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this chapter shall be
repealed as of the date that the Illinois supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to
any further appeals or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the city council if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court.
B. If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality
of the remainder of the act or does not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the
act as adopted by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
chapter relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without
further action by the city council. (Ord. 1948, 5-3-2004)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLAN COMMISSION
2-1-1: CREATED:
A city plan commission is hereby created. (2013 Code)
2-1-2: COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The plan commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the city council. Each member shall serve a term of two (2) years or until a
successor is appointed. The city administrator shall be an ex officio member of the commission. (2013
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 34/460
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
A. Chair: The mayor shall designate a member of the plan commission to serve as chair.
B. Rules Of Procedure: The commission shall establish and adopt rules of procedure for the conduct
of the business thereof. (2013 Code)
2-1-4: GENERAL POWERS:
A. Official Comprehensive Plan:
1. The plan commission shall prepare and recommend to the city council a comprehensive plan for
the present and future development or redevelopment of the city.
2. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of
which, when adopted, shall be the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the city.
3. The plan may include reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys, public grounds
and other improvements.
4. Such plan may be implemented by ordinances:
a. Establishing reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and of areas subject to
redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein defined.
b. Establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of
public streets, ways for public service facilities, school grounds, size of lots to be used for
residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and
sewage collection and treatment.
5. The plan commission shall recommend changes from time to time in the official comprehensive
plan.
B. Improvements: The plan commission shall prepare and recommend to the city council from time to
time plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the official comprehensive plan.
C. Other Powers: The plan commission shall exercise such powers as may be conferred by the city
council. (2013 Code)
Chapter 2
GREATER EGYPT REGIONAL PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2-2-1: MAYOR AS CITY REPRESENTATIVE; TERM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 35/460
The mayor of the city is hereby designated to serve as the municipal representative member for the
city on the greater Egypt regional planning and development commission, and his term shall begin
and end in accordance with the amended resolution for establishment of the commission or the
bylaws or other resolutions of the commission. (Ord. 875, 3-14-1977)
2-2-2: PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENT:
The city shall pay its assessment to the commission as the same becomes due and payable
throughout the term of the city's membership in the commission. (Ord. 875, 3-14-1977)
Chapter 3
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
APPOINTMENT COMMITTEE: Shall consist of the mayor, the commissioner of public health and
safety, the merit board, the human resources and risk management director and the chief of the
appropriate department.
BOARD: The board of fire and police commissioners of the city of Marion.
FIREFIGHTER: Any person holding a position in the Marion fire department, except as modified in this
chapter.
OFFICER: Any sworn officer holding a position in the Marion police department, except as modified in
this chapter. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003; amd. 2013 Code)
2-3-2: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There is hereby created, pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1 and article VII, section 6 of
the Illinois constitution, a board of fire and police commissioners which shall consist of three (3)
members who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval and consent of a majority of the city
council. The term of office shall be three (3) years, and members shall serve until their successors are
appointed and have qualified. No appointments shall be made by any mayor within thirty (30) days of
the expiration of his/her term of office. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003)
2-3-3: MEMBERSHIP RESTRICTIONS; REMOVALS:
No person holding an office in the city shall be a member of the board. The acceptance of any such
office by a member of the board shall be treated as a resignation of his/her position as a member of
the board. Members are subject to removal for cause by a majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 1925,
10-6-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 36/460
2-3-4: AUTHORITY:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall have the duty and authority to compile the register of
eligible names resulting from the examination process for original appointment in the classified
services of the fire and police departments; the promotional eligibility register for promotional
appointments; and shall serve as the body to hear appeals from any suspension, demotion or
termination which may be imposed by the city against any police officer or firefighter, and to hear
appeals as a result of complaints brought against a member of the police or fire department by a
member of the public. The board shall have the authority to discipline or discharge police officers or
firefighters. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003)
2-3-5: MEETINGS:
A. Notice; Closed Sessions: Notice of regular or special meetings shall be posted in accordance with
the open meetings act and open to the public. During any regular or special meeting, a closed
session may be held upon a proper motion made by a member of the board. Closed sessions may
be limited to board members and such invited persons as the board may deem necessary.
B. Quorum: Two (2) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of all business.
C. Chairperson And Vice Chairperson: The board shall elect a chairperson to serve during the fiscal
year. The chairperson shall serve for one year or until a successor is duly elected and qualified.
The board may designate one member to serve as vice chairperson. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003)
2-3-6: OFFICERS AND ADVISERS:
A. Secretary: The board shall elect a member as secretary to keep the minutes of the board's
proceedings and who shall be custodian of all records pertaining to the business of the board and
who shall keep a record of all examinations held.
B. Attorney For Board: The city attorney shall represent the board and handle all matters before the
board upon behalf of the city. In the event that the city attorney shall represent the board, the city
may employ an attorney of its choosing to serve as prosecutor before the board. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-
2003)
2-3-7: GOVERNING RULES:
A. Formulate And Distribute: The board shall formulate rules to carry out the purposes of these
provisions. All rules and revisions thereto shall be made available for distribution but not more than
ten (10) days from the date of adoption.
B. Substance And Application: The governing rules shall apply only to the examination process for
certification to the eligibility list and promotional register and to the appeals process which may be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 37/460
filed by an officer or firefighter as a result of a suspension, demotion or termination imposed by the
city.
C. Limitation Of Rules: No governing rules of the board shall apply to the operation of the police or fire
department or the conduct of each department's members.
D. Examination Process: The board of fire and police commissioners shall have the authority to
promulgate rules governing the examination process for original appointment and promotion in the
classified service of the fire and police departments. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003)
2-3-8: PROCEDURES FOR APPOINTMENT, PROMOTION AND REMOVAL OF
POLICE AND FIRE PERSONNEL:
A. Application Process:
1. Application Forms: Application forms for positions in the police or fire department shall be
available in the city clerk's office. Completed forms shall be kept on file pending publication of
the test date. Upon publication of the test date, the clerk shall notify, by mail, those persons who
have completed an application form that said form will be available in the clerk's office during
regular business hours. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003; amd. 2013 Code)
2. Time For Filing; Preemployment Agreement: Applications for positions in the police or fire
department shall consist of a completed application form provided by the city. Applications shall
be submitted to the city clerk's office by the deadline determined by the board with respect to
each examination. Such dates shall be included in the publication of the examination notice. In
addition, each person submitting an application shall submit a signed preemployment agreement
on the form provided by the city clerk.
3. Informational Booklet: Upon submission of a completed application form and the signed
preemployment agreement, each applicant shall receive a written explanation of the testing
procedures for original appointment to the police or fire department. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003)
B. Appointments: The board, upon compilation of an eligibility list for original appointment to either the
fire department or police department, shall deliver to the mayor an alphabetical list of names of all
qualified and eligible persons for the positions. The mayor, in conjunction with the appointment
committee, shall make all appointments to the fire and police departments from the list of eligible
candidates, or the mayor, in conjunction with the appointment committee, may appoint a former
employee of the fire or police department who was in the employment of the city within the
immediate preceding three (3) years. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003; amd. Ord. 2028, 8-1-2005)
C. Promotions:
1. The board, upon completion of an eligibility register for promotional appointments to either the
police department or fire department, shall deliver to the appointment committee an alphabetical
list of the names of all qualified and eligible people for said positions. The appointment
committee shall make all promotional appointments to the police and fire departments from the
list of eligible candidates. Any certificate of appointment issued to any officer or member of the
police or fire department shall be signed by the mayor. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 38/460
2. If a candidate does not wish to be certified as one of the eligible candidates for promotion, then
his name will be dropped from the eligibility list, or if the certified letter is returned from the post
office as undeliverable, then the board of police and fire commissioners will remove the name of
the unavailable candidate from the eligibility list. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Review Of Disciplinary Action:
1. Appeals Board: The board has no authority in disciplinary matters involving police officers and
firefighters other than to serve as an appeal board from any disciplinary action taken by the chief
of that department.
2. Criteria For Appeal: Any police officer or firefighter who has been suspended, demoted or
terminated by action of a chief may appeal that action to the board.
3. Decision: The board is hereby granted the authority to affirm, modify, or reverse the decision by
the chief. The chief may appeal any decision of the board to reverse his decision to the circuit
court pursuant to the administrative review law.
4. Application Of Disciplinary Action: The provisions of this subsection shall apply only to full time
firefighters and full time police officers who hold the rank of patrol officer or firefighter or above
and not to any other personnel of the city or the police or fire chief. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003)
2-3-9: ANNUAL REPORT:
The board shall provide to the mayor an annual report of its activities and of the rules in force and the
practical effect thereof. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003)
2-3-10: FACILITIES AND FUNDS:
The city shall allow reasonable use of public buildings for meetings and for the holding of
examinations and shall provide adequate funds in the annual appropriation for the operation of the
board. (Ord. 1925, 10-6-2003)
Chapter 4
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX BOARD
2-4-1: ESTABLISHED:
There shall be established in the city a board known as the foreign fire insurance tax board. (Ord.
2291, 11-23-2009)
2-4-2: COMPOSITION; ELECTION:
The seven (7) member foreign fire insurance tax board shall be elected in whole by the city fire
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 39/460
department and shall consist of the fire chief, who shall hold office by virtue of rank, and six (6)
members, who shall be elected at large by the sworn members of the department. (Ord. 2291, 11-23-
2009)
2-4-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The foreign fire insurance tax board shall make needful rules and regulations with respect to the
management and operation of the board. (Ord. 2291, 11-23-2009)
2-4-4: REVENUES:
A. Duties Of Board Treasurer: The treasurer of the foreign fire insurance tax board shall receive the
appropriated funds and shall administer the funds paid to him pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-10-1 et seq., for the maintenance, use and benefit of the city fire department, as
determined and authorized by a majority who are, as their principal occupation, directly engaged in
fire suppression, fire inspection or fire prevention.
B. Annual Audit: The funds of the foreign fire insurance tax board shall be annually audited as part of
the city's annual audit. (Ord. 2291, 11-23-2009)
2-4-5: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, company or association which violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2291, 11-23-2009)
Chapter 5
JOINT EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEMS BOARD
2-5-1: ESTABLISHED:
A. As authorized by 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750 et seq. (hereinafter the act), the county of
Williamson, state of Illinois, a unit of local government (hereinafter the county) and the city of
Herrin, state of Illinois, a municipal corporation (hereinafter Herrin), did on November 22, 1993,
enter into an intergovernmental agreement establishing a joint emergency telephone systems
board (hereinafter the board).
B. The city of Marion (hereinafter Marion), did on April 4, 1994, establish its own emergency telephone
system board.
C. The act has been amended from time to time by the Illinois legislature requiring changes in the
process and appointment of board members and other matters. Most recently, pursuant to public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 40/460
act 99-6, the legislature created a mandatory requirement of only one joint board for Williamson
County.
D. The county, Herrin, and Marion must comply with the law and join together to form only one
emergency telephone systems board for Williamson County.
E. The corporate authorities, being the county, Herrin, and Marion, shall provide pursuant to the act for
the manner and number of appointees to the board, as long as there are at least five (5) members
appointed to the board, and one member shall be a member of the county board of Williamson
County, one member shall be a public member who is a resident of the local exchange service
territory included in the 9-1-1 coverage area, and the other members shall be representatives of 9-
1-1 public safety agencies (as defined by the act) within the 9-1-1 coverage area and who
participate in emergency 9-1-1 services, including, but not limited to, police departments, fire
departments, emergency medical services providers, and emergency services and disaster
agencies, and appointed on the basis of their ability or experience.
F. The corporate authorities being the county, Herrin, and Marion, shall determine the powers and
duties of the board, pursuant to the act, and this joint agreement shall define such powers and
duties.
G. Illinois Statutes1 require auditing of governmental entities which expend public funds and the
concept of transparency of government being of extreme importance. (Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
2-5-2: COMPOSITION:
A. The board will be comprised of nine (9) members.
1. Three (3) members of the board shall be appointed by Herrin pursuant to its rules. Two (2)
members shall be from public safety agencies (as defined by the act) within Herrin who
participate in emergency 9-1-1 services and based on their ability and experience. One member
shall be a public member who is a resident of the local exchange service territory as required by
the act. If at any time one of Herrin's members resigns from the board during their term, Herrin
shall appoint a new representative, based on ability and experience, within Herrin, to complete
the remainder of that term. If the public member resigns, that member shall be replaced with a
public member, and if a representative from the public safety agency resigns, that member shall
be replaced by another representative from a public safety agency. Consideration shall first be
given to a member of the Herrin public safety answering point (PSAP) agency.
2. Three (3) members of the board shall be appointed by the county pursuant to its rules. Two (2)
members shall be from public safety agencies (as defined by the act) within Williamson County
who participate in emergency 9-1-1 services and based on their ability and experience, and the
remaining member shall be a county commissioner. If at any time one of the county members
resigns from the board during their term, the county shall appoint a new member based on ability
and experience to complete the remainder of the term. If a commissioner resigns, that member
shall be replaced with another commissioner, and if a representative from a public safety agency
resigns, that member shall be replaced by another representative from a public safety agency.
Consideration shall first be given to a member of the county public safety answering point
(PSAP) agency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 41/460
3. Three (3) members of the board shall be appointed by Marion pursuant to its rules. Two (2)
members shall be from public safety agencies (as defined by the act) within Marion who
participate in emergency 9-1-1 services and based on their ability and experience, and the
remaining member may be either a city commissioner or another member of a public safety
agency. If at any time one of Marion's members resigns from the board during their term, Marion
shall appoint a new representative, based on ability and experience, to complete the remainder
of the term. If a commissioner resigns, that member shall be replaced with another
commissioner, and if a representative from a public safety agency resigns, that member shall be
replaced by another representative from a public safety agency. Consideration shall first be
given to a member of the Marion public safety answering point (PSAP) agency.
B. In the event a member serving on the board, who was appointed from a public safety agency who
participates in emergency 9-1-1 services, terminates their employment with the public safety
agency, their appointment to the board will also be terminated effective the same date of
termination from employment with the public safety agency. The corporate authority who originally
appointed that member to the board shall appoint a new member from a public safety agency (as
defined by the act) within the 9-1-1 coverage area who participates in emergency 9-1-1 services to
serve the remainder of the term. If that member was appointed from a PSAP, then another person
from the PSAP shall be appointed to serve the remainder of the term. (Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
2-5-3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the board shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for their actual and
necessary expenses. (Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
2-5-4: TERMS OF OFFICE:
All members appointed to serve on the board shall serve three (3) year staggered terms pursuant to
the act, with one-third (1/3) of the members' terms set to expire January 1, 2016, one-third (1/3) set to
expire January 1, 2017, and remaining board members' terms to expire January 1, 2018. Members
may be reappointed at the expiration of their term. All reappointments or new appointments made
thereafter will be for three (3) years from the date of expiration of the previous term. The one-third (1/3)
shall be determined as one member from each corporate authority. (Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
2-5-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The powers and duties of the board shall be in accord with those set out in 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 750/15.4 as current and as amended in the future.
B. The board may create bylaws, which will become effective upon approval of a majority vote of the
board, and a copy of which shall be submitted to the Williamson County board of commissioners,
the Herrin city council, and the Marion city council.
C. The county, Herrin, and Marion being required by law to submit annual audits for any governmental
entity spending funds of those governments and being responsible for establishing the powers and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 42/460
duties of the board and in the interest of transparency in government, require that the board
conduct an annual audit as set forth in 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 310 et seq.
D. Any and all funds collected for the 9-1-1 system shall be kept in the 9-1-1 fund, which is overseen
by the county treasurer. The board treasurer shall work with the county treasurer and 9-1-1
coordinator on investment of JETSB funds and payments of all 9-1-1 bills. All 9-1-1 funds currently
in the possession of the city of Marion are to be combined into the fund with county and Herrin 9-1-
1 funds pursuant to the joining of two (2) former boards into one joint board.
E. The sheriff, the Herrin police chief, and the Marion police chief will continue to operate and staff
their 9-1-1 dispatch PSAP centers.
F. Pursuant to 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/40(b) and beginning October 1, 2016, and every
October 1 thereafter, the board shall report to the department of state police audited financial
statements showing total revenue and expenditures for the previous fiscal year. The statements
shall include a detailed summary of revenue from all sources, operating expenses, capital
expenditures, cash balances, and any other financial information deemed relevant by the
department of state police. (Ord. 3271, 8-10-2015)
Chapter 6
CULTURAL AND CIVIC CENTER BOARD
2-6-1: CREATED; PURPOSE:
There is created the Marion cultural and civic center board, hereinafter referred to as the "board",
which shall have the duty of administering the operation and maintenance of the building and facility
known and referenced as the "Marion Cultural And Civic Center". The primary purpose of the board is
to encourage and promote a continuing program for the development and propagation of the arts and
of cultural and civic activities that will inure to the benefit of all the citizens of the city. (1977 Code
§§ 2.44.010, 2.44.020; amd. 2013 Code)
2-6-2: COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS; REMOVALS:
The board shall consist of thirteen (13) members, twelve (12) to be appointed by the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the city council. The twelve (12) members first appointed to the board by the
mayor and council shall be appointed to serve terms as follows: four (4) for a term of three (3) years,
four (4) for a term of two (2) years and four (4) for a term of one year. All subsequent appointments by
the mayor and council shall be for a term of three (3) years, except in the event of a vacancy, in which
case, an appointment shall be for the time remaining in the unexpired term in which the vacancy
occurs. The thirteenth member shall be a senior at Marion High School appointed annually to a term
of one year by the high school faculty. Any member may be removed from the board upon threefourths
(3/4) of the city council voting for such removal. (1977 Code § 2.44.030)
2-6-3: ORGANIZATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 43/460
A. Bylaws And Rules; Quorum: The board shall adopt bylaws and such rules as may be deemed
necessary to conduct the affairs of the board and the operation of the center in an orderly manner;
provided, that a quorum shall not be less than a majority of the members appointed to the board.
(1977 Code § 2.44.080)
B. Officers: The officers of the board shall consist of a chair, vice chair, secretary and treasurer. Each
of the officers shall be elected annually by the members of the board except the chair, who shall be
appointed by the mayor annually, with the advice and consent of the city council. (1977 Code
§ 2.44.040)
C. Meetings: The board shall meet regularly on a designated day each month, and more often as the
occasion requires at the call of the chair. Such meetings shall be held in the civic center building.
(1977 Code § 2.44.050)
2-6-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board is empowered and authorized to manage and administer the center in keeping with and for
the purposes set forth in this chapter; to maintain the center building and equipment in a state of good
repair; to conduct the operation of the center on sound economic principles consistent with the primary
purpose for its establishment; and to employ such personnel as may be reasonably necessary to
accomplish those things the board is authorized and empowered to do. (1977 Code § 2.44.060)
2-6-5: BUDGET AND ANNUAL REPORT:
The board shall prepare and present to the city council an annual budget on or before the first Monday
in April and shall, at the same time, present to the city council a report of the activities and
presentations conducted at the center during the preceding year. (1977 Code § 2.44.070; amd. 2013
Code)
Chapter 7
SENIOR CITIZENS' COUNCIL
2-7-1: CREATED; PURPOSE:
There is created the Marion senior citizens' council, referred to in this chapter as the "council", the
primary purpose of which is to encourage and promote a continuing program for the development and
propagation of activities, programs and projects at the Marion Senior Citizens' Center that will inure to
the benefit of all the senior citizens of the city. (1977 Code §§ 2.54.010, 2.54.020)
2-7-2: COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS; REMOVALS:
The council shall consist of nine (9) members, to be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 44/460
consent of the city council. The nine (9) members first appointed to the council by the mayor and city
council shall be appointed to serve terms as follows: three (3) for a term of three (3) years, three (3)
for a term of two (2) years and three (3) for a term of one year. All subsequent appointments by the
mayor and city council shall be for a term of three (3) years, except in the event of a vacancy, in which
case, an appointment shall be for the time remaining on the unexpired term in which the vacancy
occurs. Any member may be removed from the council upon three-fourths (3/4) of the city council
voting for such removal. (1977 Code § 2.54.030)
2-7-3: ORGANIZATION:
A. Bylaws And Rules; Quorum: The council shall adopt bylaws and such rules as may be deemed
necessary to conduct the affairs of the council and the operation of the center in an orderly
manner; provided, that a quorum shall not be less than a majority of the members appointed to the
council. (1977 Code § 2.54.090)
B. Officers: The officers of the council shall consist of a chair, vice chair, secretary and treasurer. Each
of the officers shall be elected annually by the members of the council except the chair, who shall
be appointed by the mayor annually, with the advice and consent of the city council. (1977 Code
§ 2.54.040)
C. Meetings: The council shall meet regularly on a designated day each month, and more often as the
occasion requires at the call of the chair. Such meetings shall be held in the Marion Senior
Citizens' Center building. (1977 Code § 2.54.050)
2-7-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The council is empowered and authorized to manage and administer the center in keeping with and
for the purposes set forth in this chapter; to maintain the center building and equipment in a state of
good repair; to conduct the operation of the center on sound economic principles consistent with the
primary purpose for its establishment and the funds available; and to employ, as funds are available,
such personnel as may be reasonably necessary to accomplish those things the council is authorized
and empowered to do. The council shall not and is not empowered to make any commitment of the
city's credit. (1977 Code § 2.54.060)
2-7-5: BUDGET AND ANNUAL REPORT:
The council shall prepare and present to the city council an annual budget on or before the first
Monday in April and shall, at the same time, present to the city council a report of the activities and
programs conducted at the center during the preceding year. (1977 Code § 2.54.080; amd. 2013
Code)
2-7-6: FREE ADMISSION TO CENTER:
Admission to the senior citizens' center building and facilities shall be free to all senior citizens of the
city, although moderate and reasonable fees may be charged for meals provided through a nutrition
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 45/460
program, materials used in handicraft projects, and for other programs or projects of a special nature.
(1977 Code § 2.54.070)
Title 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
3-1-1: FISCAL AND MUNICIPAL YEARS:
The fiscal year and the municipal year for the city shall hereafter commence on May 1 of each year
and end on April 30 of each succeeding year. (1977 Code § 1.16.010)
3-1-2: SIGNATURES ON CHECKS:
All checks for payment of money by the city shall be signed by one of the authorized city
commissioners and either the city treasurer or the assistant city treasurer. (Ord. 3366, 2-3-2017)
3-1-3: ANNUAL AUDIT:
An annual audit of all city funds shall be conducted by an independent state licensed auditor as soon
as practicable after April 30. (2013 Code)
3-1-4: ACCEPTANCE OF OFFERED FUNDS:
In the unlikely event that any funds should be offered or made available to the city without affecting
the city's credit and without the city incurring any liability or obligation whatsoever, the mayor and no
less than two (2) of the city commissioners are hereby authorized to do those things and to perform
such lawful acts as may be necessary to accept and receive such funds on behalf of the city. (Ord.
1241, 7-11-1988)
3-1-5: CASH RESERVE BALANCE POLICY:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish a cash reserve balance policy tailored to the
needs of the city to ensure against unforeseen events that would adversely affect the financial
condition of the city and jeopardize the continuation of necessary public services. This section will
ensure the city maintains an adequate cash reserve balance in the city's general fund to provide
the ability to:
1. Provide sufficient cash flow for daily financial needs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 46/460
2. Support the highest possible bond rating.
3. Offset significant economic downturns or revenue shortfalls.
4. Provide funds for unforeseen emergency expenditures.
B. Definition: Cash reserve balance is the term that will be used to represent the general fund cash set
aside from operating funds to be used for the purposes as described in subsection A of this
section.
C. General Policy:
1. The cash reserve balance for the general fund shall be maintained at a minimum level equal to
or greater than twenty five percent (25%) of the general fund current year budgeted
expenditures including transfers from the general fund less capital outlays supported by specific
revenue sources.
2. The cash reserve balance shall be reviewed annually during the budget process.
3. If at any time during or after the budget process, the city council determines that a portion of the
twenty five percent (25%) reserve must be used, the city council will take all necessary actions
to increase the cash reserve balance to the twenty five percent (25%) threshold in future years.
(Ord. 3004, 10-10-2011)
Chapter 2
BUDGET OFFICER FINANCE SYSTEM
3-2-1: BUDGET OFFICER:
A. Position Created And Designated; Term: There is created hereby the position of budget officer in
the city, who shall be designated by the commissioner of accounts and finances, with a two-thirds
(2/3) vote of the city council. The budget officer shall serve at the pleasure of the city council.
B. Oath And Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the budget officer shall take oath and
post bond as provided by statute.
C. May Hold Another Office: The budget officer may hold another municipal office, either elected or
appointed.
D. Compensation: The budget officer shall not receive compensation for this office.
E. Powers And Duties: The budget officer shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To permit, encourage, and establish the efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting,
accounting, and other fiscal management procedures in all municipal departments,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 47/460
commissions, and boards.
2. To compile an annual budget in accord with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.3.
3. To examine all books and records of all city departments, commissions, and boards which relate
to monies received and paid out by the city, its departments, commissions, and boards, and
debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the city and its departments,
commissions, and boards.
4. To obtain such additional information from the city and its departments, commissions, and
boards as may be useful for purposes of compiling a municipal budget; such information to be
furnished by the city and its departments, commissions, and boards, in the form required by the
budget officer. Any department, commission, or board which refuses to make such information
as requested to the budget officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any
subsequent budget for the city until such department, commission, or board shall comply in full
with the request of the budget officer.
5. To establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by
the city or its departments, commissions, or boards except as authorized by the budget. (Ord.
2376, 10-24-2011)
3-2-2: COMPILATION AND CONTENTS OF BUDGET:
The budget officer shall compile a budget which contains estimates of revenues available to the city
for the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the city
and all of its departments, commissions, and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure
recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management
practices. The budget shall be itemized in a manner to conform with the chart of accounts utilized by
the city's accounting system. The budget shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures
for the two (2) years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. Each
budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made. (Ord.
2376, 10-24-2011)
3-2-3: PASSAGE OF ANNUAL BUDGET:
A. Passage of the annual budget by adoption of an appropriate ordinance by the corporate authorities
shall be in lieu of passage of the appropriation ordinance as required by statute.
B. The annual budget shall be published in the manner provided in section 3-2-7 of this chapter.
C. The annual budget shall be adopted by the corporate authorities before the beginning of the fiscal
year to which it applies. (Ord. 2376, 10-24-2011)
3-2-4: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FUND:
A. In the preparation of the budget by the budget officer, an amount not to exceed three percent (3%)
of the equalized assessed value of property subject to taxation by the city may be accumulated in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 48/460
a separate fund for the purpose or purposes of specific capital improvements, repairs, and/or
replacement of specific types of municipal equipment or other tangible property, both real and
personal, to be designated as the "capital improvement, repair or replacement fund".
B. Expenditures from the capital improvement, repair or replacement fund shall be budgeted in the
fiscal year in which the capital improvement, repair or replacement will occur.
C. Upon the completion or abandonment of any project, or in the event any surplus monies remain
after the completion or abandonment of any project for which the capital improvement, repair or
replacement fund was instituted, then such funds no longer necessary for capital improvement,
repair or replacement shall be transferred to the general corporate fund of the city on the first day
of the fiscal year following such abandonment or completion, or discovery of surplus funds. (Ord.
2376, 10-24-2011)
3-2-5: REVISIONS TO BUDGET:
Heads of city departments and boards may, with prior approval of the budget officer and the city
administrator, initiate transfers of funds between line items within departments and may delete, add or
change line items within departments. Nothing herein shall prohibit any commissioner to initiate
transfers of funds between line items within his or her department and may delete, add or change line
items within his or her department. All other revisions by transfer, deletion or adding or changing
budgeted items require approval by the city council by a two-thirds (2/3) vote. However, under no
circumstances shall a revision be made to the budget which increases the budget in the event funds
are not available to effectuate the purpose of the revision. Nothing in this section shall prohibit revision
in the event funds are available from any source including, but not limited to, loan proceeds, grant
funding, anticipated tax receipts or projected sales tax revenue. (Ord. 2376, 10-24-2011)
3-2-6: FUNDS FOR CONTINGENCY PURPOSES:
The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent
(10%) of the total budget, which may be expended for contingencies upon a majority vote of the city
council. (Ord. 2376, 10-24-2011)
3-2-7: PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE AND HEARING ON BUDGET:
A. The city council shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently available to public inspection
for at least ten (10) days prior to the passage of the annual budget by publication in the journal of
the proceedings of the corporate authorities or in such other form as the city council may prescribe.
B. Not less than one week after the publication of the tentative annual budget and prior to final action
on the budget, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual budget,
after which hearing or hearings the tentative annual budget may be further revised and passed
without any further inspection, notice or hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given by publication
in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least one week prior to the time of the
hearing. (Ord. 2376, 10-24-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 49/460
Chapter 3
DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY
3-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for the issuance of debt, including leases,
financing of capital projects, infrastructure and other projects deemed necessary by the city council.
This policy will assist the city council to:
A. Obtain financing only when necessary.
B. Reduce debt interest costs.
C. Take all practical precautions to avoid any financial decisions which will negatively impact current
credit ratings on future debt issues.
D. Secure and maintain the highest possible bond rating. (Ord. 3005, 10-10-2011)
3-3-2: ANNUAL REVIEW:
During the preparation of the city's annual budget, the city council shall perform the following tasks in
relation to its debt:
A. Assess the benefits for financing of projects budgeted in the next budget year.
B. Review outstanding debt for refunding (interest savings, eliminating restrictive covenants, etc.)
and/or consolidation.
C. Review compliance with applicable financing documents (including bond ordinances, credit
enhancement policies, continuing disclosure requirements, etc.). (Ord. 3005, 10-10-2011)
3-3-3: PERIODIC REVIEWS:
The city council or its designee, semiannually, shall review debt service accounts to ensure they are
maintained in accordance with their bond ordinances. As conditions merit, the city council or its
designee shall review or identify outstanding debt issues for refunding for interest savings. (Ord. 3005,
10-10-2011)
3-3-4: DEBT LIMITS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 50/460
As a home rule unit of government, the city is not subject to debt limits. It has the ability to issue
general obligation debt without limitation or referendum. However, it is the intent of the city council to
be prudent in its issuance of debt. Debt repaid solely from collection of property taxes should not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the city's most recent equalized assessed valuation. However, this does
not apply to general obligation bonds issued by the city that it intends to repay from sources other than
property taxes. If less than one hundred percent (100%) of the annual debt service associated with
any bond is to be paid from property taxes, the amount of property taxes extended shall be discounted
at the bond interest rate(s) to determine the bond par amount to be considered general obligation debt
for purposes of its self-imposed debt limit (this calculation is not required if the bond's principal
amounts are identified and the corresponding debt service is equal to the property tax levied). Debt
intended to be repaid from sources other than property taxes are excluded from this section, whether
or not it is issued as general obligation debt. On an annual basis, prior to abating the current property
tax levy associated with such general obligation bonds, the city council shall identify and designate the
funds to be used for the payment of such bonds. (Ord. 3005, 10-10-2011)
3-3-5: DEBT FEATURES AND STRUCTURES:
Debt may be issued on the basis of: a) fixed or variable rate; b) taxable or tax exempt; c) rated or
nonrated; d) bank qualified or nonbank qualified; e) credit enhanced or noncredit enhanced; f) term or
serial maturities, including balloon payments; g) callable and noncallable; h) private placements; and i)
restrictive covenants as required. Credit enhancement and ratings should be used where applicable
and there is cost benefit based on interest rate savings. Long term debt should be callable with the
earliest possible call feature that does not impact the overall interest rate. The recommended
maximum call feature is a ten (10) year par call. Variable rate debt should be considered when interest
rates are expected to decline or remain flat. When possible, debt should be issued as bank qualified.
This section is not all encompassing and is not intended to limit the city's debt structures. (Ord. 3005,
10-10-2011)
3-3-6: SHORT TERM DEBT:
For purposes of this policy, "short term debt" is defined as any debt incurred whose final maturity is
five (5) years or less. Short term debt may be used to purchase equipment and for other purposes
deemed necessary by the city council, including the refunding of debt, as long as the purpose is not
prohibited by state statute. Short term debt issued for operating/cash flow purposes should mature
within the time frame in which the proceeds will be spent, but no longer than one year after such time.
(Ord. 3005, 10-10-2011)
3-3-7: LONG TERM DEBT:
For purposes of this policy, "long term debt" is defined as any debt incurred whose final maturity is
greater than five (5) years. Long term debt may be used for the purchase of equipment, capital
projects and/or any other purpose deemed necessary by the city council (other than for operating
purposes), including refunding of debt, as long as the purpose is not prohibited by state statute.
Financing terms shall not exceed the useful life of the projects financed. Debt issues should not
exceed forty (40) years. When issuing long term debt, the city council should consider the following
debt types:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 51/460
A. Alternate revenue debt obligations or general obligations debt to be repaid from sources other than
property taxes. These obligations require the expected revenues to sufficiently meet debt service
requirements for the life of these obligations.
B. General revenue debt obligations to be repaid from property taxes. This obligation is payable from
a direct property tax levied and collected within the city.
C. Private activity obligations. These obligations may be issued by the city for the behalf of the issuer
that provide special financing benefits to qualified projects. These obligations are subject to
internal revenue service requirements and state volume caps to preserve tax exemption. The cost
of issuance of private activity obligations is usually higher than for governmental purpose
obligations. Typically, the city has no obligation to pay debt service for private activity obligations;
they are not a liability of the city and do not count as city debt. They should be used to promote
economic development within the city.
D. Special service area and special assessment obligations. These obligations may be issued by the
city for the designated taxpayers receiving the benefit. The taxpayers within the designated area
are responsible for the payment of debt service on such obligations and can be paid from property
taxes or a special assessment within the designated area. These obligations are typically issued in
response to property owners within the designated area requesting infrastructure/utilities
improvements. These obligations are not a liability of the city and are not considered city debt.
Alternate revenue debt obligations or general obligations debt are to be repaid from sources other
than property taxes. These obligations require the expected revenues to sufficiently meet debt
service requirements for the life of these obligations.
E. Tax increment financing obligations. These obligations are used to promote economic development
within a designated tax increment finance district. They are repaid from the incremental property
taxes generated within the district. Unless backed by the city, such obligations are not a liability of
the city and are not considered a city debt. (Ord. 3005, 10-10-2011)
3-3-8: FINANCIAL PROFESSIONAL:
When deemed necessary by the city council, it shall seek advice from a financial professional. The
financial professional to be used by the city should have experience with debt structuring (including
type and length) and working with bond rating services and other services deemed necessary by the
city council. (Ord. 3005, 10-10-2011)
3-3-9: CAPITAL LEASING:
Capital leasing, when offered, is an option to finance the acquisition of major depreciable assets. A
capital lease is a long term lease that transfers to the lessee most rights and obligations concerning
the asset leased, and usually transfers ownership at the end of the lease. The city council should
consider the advice of the city's finance professional or bond counsel when capital leasing
arrangements are used and when federal tax forms are prepared to ensure that all federal tax laws
are followed. (Ord. 3005, 10-10-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 52/460
3-3-10: INVESTMENT OF BOND PROCEEDS:
A. The investment of bond proceeds shall be dictated by the bond indenture, state statutes and the
city's investment policy. The city finance director-treasurer, with the advice of the city's financial
professional, shall prepare the drawdown requirements for the bond proceeds which shall be used
to create investment parameters for the bond proceeds. (Ord. 3005, 10-10-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Due consideration shall be given debt covenants and arbitrage requirements, the purpose of which
is to maintain compliance with both. Investment adjustments shall be made as required.
C. Debt service reserve funds shall be maintained and invested, as applicable, in compliance with the
above. (Ord. 3005, 10-10-2011)
3-3-11: MODIFICATIONS OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter is not meant as all encompassing but rather a guideline, subject to periodic (or at least
annual) review by the city council, at which time it may be modified and amended as the city council
deems appropriate. (Ord. 3005, 10-10-2011)
Chapter 4
PURCHASING REQUIREMENTS
3-4-1: PURCHASING PROCEDURES:
A. Purchase Orders: All purchases require the completion, submittal, and approval of a purchase
order. Purchase orders shall be completed in accordance with this chapter.
B. Departmental Purchasing Agent(s): Each department head and superintendent is hereby
designated as departmental purchasing agent. Each department head or superintendent may, at
his discretion, appoint supervisory employee(s) as departmental purchasing agent(s) who shall be
responsible for ensuring completion and submission of the required purchase order and supporting
documentation. The departmental purchasing agent shall be responsible for purchasing activities
in the absence of the department head/superintendent. The department head shall be responsible
for ensuring the proper purchasing procedures are followed, that sufficient funds are budgeted for
any and all purchases, and that required documentation is kept in the department's files.
C. Responsibilities Of City Administrator/City Council: The city administrator shall have the authority to
reject any purchase order that has not been completed according to the stated procedures, or
return to the department any purchase order that requires additional attention. The city
administrator shall provide guidance to departments on purchasing procedures and guidelines.
Any questions or instances not addressed by this procedure shall be referred to the city
administrator for determination on whether to refer to the city council for consideration or
amendment of the policy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 53/460
D. Application Of State Or Federal Law: Any state or federal law that is more restrictive than this
procedure shall supersede the affected portion of this procedure. (Ord. 2332, 10-11-2010)
3-4-2: PURCHASING GUIDELINES:
The following guidelines shall apply to purchases of items that have been approved, either generally
or specifically, in the budget:
A. Purchases of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); department head approval (all
departments): Purchases in this category may be made by the departmental purchasing agent.
Such purchases do not require competitive quotes. However, the departmental purchasing agent
should ensure, when possible, that such items are acquired at the lowest possible price,
considering all relevant factors.
B. Purchases between one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00);
commissioner/city administrator approval (nonmajor departments): Nonmajor departments are all
departments other than water, sewer, street, fire, police and library. The water office, however, is
considered a nonmajor department. Purchases in this category may be made by the department
purchasing agent and approved by the department commissioner or city administrator in
department commissioner's absence. It is recommended but not required that three (3) bids be
obtained. If bids are obtained, they should be documented on the purchase order or on a
document attached to the purchase order.
C. Purchases up to three thousand dollars ($3,000.00); department head approval (major departments
only): Purchases in this category may be made by the departmental purchasing agent. It is
recommended but not required that three (3) bids be obtained. If bids are obtained, they should be
documented on the purchase order or on a document attached to the purchase order.
D. Purchases between three thousand one dollars ($3,001.00) and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00);
commissioner/city administrator approval required (major departments only): Purchases in this
category may be made by the departmental purchasing agent and approved by the department
commissioner or city administrator in the commissioner's absence. It is recommended but not
required that three (3) bids be obtained. If bids are obtained, they should be documented on the
purchase order or on a document attached to the purchase order.
E. Purchases over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); city council approval: Purchases in this category
require approval of the city council. Unless required by state statute, the city council, at its
discretion, will decide if bids should be taken and by what method the bids should be obtained.
(Ord. 2332, 10-11-2010)
F. Cooperative or group purchasing is allowed so long as prequalified lists are current and include
qualified sources to ensure maximum open and free competition. No potential bidders will be
precluded from qualifying during the solicitation period, in order to conform to the applicable federal
procurement regulations. (Ord. 3270, 8-10-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 54/460
3-4-3: EXCEPTIONS AND DEVIATIONS:
The following situations may require deviation from the stated procedures:
A. Emergency situations allowing emergency purchases shall be defined as those in which the
operation of a department/division would be hampered, or when the protection and preservation of
public property or life would not be possible without action requiring an emergency purchase, and
required procedures are not possible. Such purchases, not exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), may be made by the departmental purchasing agent after department head approval.
The department head shall be responsible for determining the extent of the emergency and the
need for the commissioner, and in his/her absence the city administrator, approval for any
emergency purchases between three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) and five thousand dollars
($5,000.00). Any emergency purchase in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) must be
approved by the commissioner or city administrator in the commissioner's absence and shall have
the responsibility of requiring council action as necessary.
B. The following items may be approved by the departmental purchasing agent even if the amount is
over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00):
1. Utilities.
2. Payments on contracts previously approved by the city council.
3. Bulk fuel purchases.
C. The following items do not require a purchase order:
1. Disbursements made from petty cash funds.
2. Travel vouchers.
3. Gas card purchases. (Ord. 2332, 10-11-2010)
3-4-4: SUBDIVISION OF CONTRACTS PROHIBITED:
No purchase, agreement, or contract for services may be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this
policy. (Ord. 2332, 10-11-2010)
Chapter 5
TAXES
ARTICLE A. MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
3-5A-1: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 55/460
A. Tax Imposed; Rate; Exclusions: The Corporate Authorities of the Municipality shall and do hereby
impose a tax upon all persons engaged in the Municipality in the business of selling tangible
personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an
agency of the State of Illinois, at retail in the Municipality at the rate of 1.50 percent on and of the
gross receipts from those sales made in the course of such business. This tax shall only be
imposed at the rate of 1.50 percent as authorized by the Act, which is at the same rate that the
Municipality imposes a Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax under the Home Rule
Municipal Service Occupation Tax Act. Under the Act, this additional tax may not be imposed on
the sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold
(other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate
consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and
insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics and otherwise or hereafter
required by applicable law.
B. Collection And Enforcement: The tax imposed by the Municipality under this section and the Act
and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident of the tax shall be collected and
enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue.
C. Limitations: Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Municipality to impose a tax
upon the privilege of engaging in any business which under the Constitution of the United States
may not be made the subject of taxation by the State of Illinois. Notwithstanding anything herein to
the contrary, this section shall be given effect in such a manner as to comply with the Act as it shall
from time to time be in effect.
D. Effective Date: Pursuant to the Municipality's home rule authority, sections 1-2-4 and 4-5-13 of the
Illinois Municipal Code shall not apply to this section. This section shall become effective
immediately upon its adoption and approval and the tax under subsection A of this section shall be
given effect in the time and manner as provided in the Act. (Ord. 3674, 3-20-2017)
3-5A-2: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed; Rate; Exclusions: The Corporate Authorities of the Municipality shall and do hereby
impose a tax upon all persons engaged in the Municipality in the business of making sales of
service at the rate of 1.50 percent of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred
by such servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as
an incident to a sale of service. This tax shall only be imposed at the rate of 1.50 percent of the
selling price, as authorized by the Act which is at the same rate that the Municipality imposes a
Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax under the Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act. Under the Act this additional tax may not be imposed on the sales of food for
human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and
prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing
materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics and otherwise or hereafter required by
applicable law.
B. Collection And Enforcement: The tax imposed by the Municipality under this section and the Act
and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident of the tax shall be collected and
enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 56/460
C. Limitations: Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Municipality to impose a tax
upon the privilege of engaging in any business which under the Constitution of the United States
may not be made the subject of taxation by the State of Illinois. Notwithstanding anything herein to
the contrary, this section shall be given effect in such a manner as to comply with the Act as it shall
from time to time be in effect.
D. Effective Date: Pursuant to the Municipality's home rule authority, sections 1-2-4 and 4-5-13 of the
Illinois Municipal Code shall not apply to this section. This section shall become effective
immediately upon its adoption and approval and the tax under subsection A of this section shall be
given effect in the time and manner as provided in the Act. (Ord. 3675, 3-20-2017)
3-5A-3: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed; Rate: The Corporate Authorities of the City shall and do hereby impose a tax at the
rate of one percent (1.00%) upon the privilege of using, in the City, any item of tangible personal
property which is purchased at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered at a location
within the corporate limits of the City with an agency of the government of the State of Illinois. The
tax shall only be imposed at the rate of one percent (1.00%) and based on the selling price of such
tangible personal property, as "selling price" is defined in the Use Tax Act1, as authorized by the
Act. (Ord. 1815, 9-10-2001)
B. Collection And Enforcement:
1. The City's population is seventeen thousand one hundred twenty nine (17,129) under the most
recently adjusted figures of or supplementing the 2000 Federal census. Under the Act, in home
rule municipalities with less than two million (2,000,000) inhabitants, the tax shall be collected by
the City imposing the tax from persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes
is given as being in such City. (Ord. 1815, 9-10-2001; amd. 2013 Code)
2. The tax imposed by the City under this section and the Act and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident of the tax shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of
Revenue, to the extent authorized by applicable law, if at all, and otherwise shall be collected
and enforced by the City. The City acknowledges that under present law, the Illinois Department
of Revenue does not collect or enforce this tax.
C. Limitations: Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the City to impose a tax upon the
privilege of engaging in any business which, under the Constitution of the United States, may not
be made the subject of taxation by the State of Illinois. Notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, this section shall be given effect in such a manner as to comply with the Act as it shall,
from time to time, be in effect.
D. Effective Date: Pursuant to the City's home rule authority, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-4 and
5/4-5-13 shall not apply to this section. This section shall become effective immediately upon its
adoption and approval, and the tax under subsection A of this section shall be given effect in the
time and manner as provided in the Act. (Ord. 1815, 9-10-2001)
3-5A-4: HOTEL OPERATORS' OCCUPATION TAX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 57/460
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CITY: The City of Marion, Illinois.
CITY COUNCIL AND CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The City Council of the City of Marion, Illinois.
FINANCE DIRECTOR-TREASURER: The City Finance Director-Treasurer of the City of Marion,
Illinois.
HOTEL: Shall have the meaning in the hotel operator's occupation tax act and shall include,
without limitation, facilities referenced as motels.
OPERATOR: As applicable, the owner/operator of each hotel within the city of Marion and the
person(s) having a right of property operating such hotel under applicable law.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room or rooms
in a motel or hotel for at least seven (7) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate, association,
partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust, institution, agency, government
corporation, municipal corporation, district or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier,
vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees or other
representative, acting either for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. (Ord. 2356, 6-13-2011; amd. 2013 Code;
Ord. 3216, 9-8-2014)
B. Tax Imposed; Rate And Restrictions:
1. The corporate authorities of the city hereby impose a tax upon all persons engaged in the city in
the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel, as defined in the hotel operators'
occupation tax act, at a rate of three percent (3%) of the gross rental receipts from such renting,
leasing or letting, excluding, however, from the gross rental receipts, the proceeds of such
renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of that hotel. (Ord. 2356, 6-13-2011)
2. Persons subject to the tax imposed pursuant to this section may reimburse themselves for their
tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an additional charge, which charge may
be stated in combination, in a single amount, with state tax imposed under the hotel operators'
occupation tax act. However, the tax shall not be levied and imposed upon any permanent
resident or to a person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel. (Ord. 2356, 6-13-2011;
amd. Ord. 3216, 9-8-2014)
3. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the city to impose a tax upon the privilege
of engaging in any business which, under the constitution of the United States, may not be made
the subject of taxation by the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2356, 6-13-2011)
C. Registration Requirements:
1. Each hotel located within the boundaries of the city shall file a "certificate of registration" within
the office of the finance director-treasurer, whose office is located at Marion City Hall, 1102
Tower Square, Marion, Illinois. Registration forms shall be available to each hotel operator
through the office of the city finance director-treasurer. (Ord. 2356, 6-13-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 58/460
2. It is the duty of the hotel operator to update the "certificate of registration" form on an annual
basis. The final date for filing and updating this certificate of registration shall be December 15 of
each year, commencing December 15, 2011, following the effective date hereof. Any new
business coming under license to do business as a hotel within the city shall file a certificate of
registration no later than thirty (30) days following the first day of operation as a new hotel
business. (Ord. 2356, 6-13-2011)
D. Report Required: Each operator shall file an "occupancy tax report" each month following the
effective date hereof. The report shall contain the total dollar gross receipts received from room
occupancy rentals along with the total amount due and payable to the city as required by this
section. Occupancy tax reports shall be available to each hotel operator through the office of the
city finance director-treasurer. (Ord. 2356, 6-13-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
E. Due Date; Late Payment Penalty: All taxes due the city shall be due and payable to the city on or
before the last day of the month immediately following the month of collection. A one percent (1%)
late penalty will be due and payable to the city should any hotel operator fail to file an occupancy
tax report by the end of each given month, and an additional one percent (1%) each month
thereafter. (Ord. 2356, 6-13-2011)
F. Remittance Of Taxes; Disposition And Use Of Funds:
1. All taxes due and owing the city under this section shall be made payable by or on behalf of the
operator to the "finance director-treasurer of the city of Marion, Illinois", and shall be due and
payable monthly to the finance director-treasurer on or before the tenth day of each month after
the effective date hereof. The finance director-treasurer shall transfer such funds, by the fifteenth
of the month following collection, into a separate fund established for the city tourism fund. (Ord.
2356, 6-13-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
2. The amounts collected by the city pursuant to this section shall be expended by the city solely to
promote tourism and conventions within the city or otherwise to attract nonresident overnight
visitors to the city.
3. No funds received pursuant to this section shall be used to advertise for or otherwise promote
new competition in the hotel business.
G. Interpretation And Effective Date:
1. This section incorporates chapter 6 of this title concerning the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act.
2. This section shall be effective immediately upon its adoption, approval and publication in
pamphlet form; provided, that the hotel tax imposed by this section shall not become effective
until the later of: a) June 22, 2011; or b) the date that the Illinois finance authority's qualified
501(c)(3) not for profit revenue bonds (Williamson County events commission project), series
2003, are not outstanding. Pursuant to section 6 (powers of home rule units) of article VII (local
government) of the constitution of the state of Illinois, sections 1-2-4, 8-1-7 and 4-5-13 of the
Illinois municipal code shall not apply to this section. (Ord. 2356, 6-13-2011)
ARTICLE B. SIMPLIFIED TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 59/460
3-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the city regardless of where
such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the city and for all services and equipment provided in connection therewith by
a retailer, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor, or service costs or any other
expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
termination point within the city and charges for the portion of the interoffice channels provided within
the city. Charges for that portion of the interoffice channel connecting two (2) or more channel
termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of the city, shall
be determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the interoffice
channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points that are
located within the jurisdictional boundary of the city, and the denominator of which is the total number
of channel termination points connected by the interoffice channel. However, "gross charge" shall not
include any of the following:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 1) the tax
imposed by this article; 2) the tax imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act; 3) the tax
imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code; 4) 911 surcharges; or 5) charges added
to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act,
as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to
rate regulation by the Illinois commerce commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax
liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the city;
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for
subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or
content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a timesharing agreement;
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the
customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified
from other charges;
E. Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities
act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the department of
commerce and community affairs;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 60/460
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly
owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this article has already been paid to a retailer
and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
G. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which
gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or
uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the
debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications devices;
I. Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee act;
J. Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those charges are aggregated with
other charges for telecommunications that are taxable; 2) those charges are not separately
stated on the customer bill or invoice; and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable
charges on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the
nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the sale of both
taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a combined basis shall be
attributed to the taxable services or telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable
charges shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate
outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within
this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint
venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative
appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale
at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this section. The department may, in it discretion, upon application, authorize the collection
of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to
the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized,
it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a
retailer maintaining a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
department at its discretion.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 61/460
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Means and
includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office,
distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any
agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located
here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in
this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services
and equipment provided in connection therewith, for a consideration, to persons other than the federal
and state governments, and state universities created by statute, and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or
consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications
services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the
event this term may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and
maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the
mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground systems and the like, "service
address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who, individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees,
engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the city and who
incurs a tax liability as authorized by this article.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed thereto,
includes, without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide
area telephone service, private line service, channel service, telegraph service, teletypewriter,
computer exchange service, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio,
stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or twoway
communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave radio, satellite, or
similar facilities. As used in this article, "private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for
a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel
or group of channels from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the
taxable end to end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use
of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a
component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales
for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this article. For purposes of this chapter, "prepaid telephone calling
arrangements" means that term as defined in section 2-27 of the retailers' occupation tax act. (Ord.
2039, 9-19-2005, eff. 1-1-2006)
3-5B-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 62/460
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
A. Intrastate Telecommunications: The act or privilege of originating in the city or receiving in the city
intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross charge for
such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multimunicipal
taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another city on that event, shall be allowed a credit
against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of the
tax properly due and paid in the city that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
municipal tax.
B. Interstate Telecommunications: The act or privilege of originating in the city or receiving in the city
interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross charge for
such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate or
multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any
taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or city in this state, on such
event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to
the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly
due and paid in a city in this state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
state or local tax in this state. (Ord. 2039, 9-19-2005, eff. 1-1-2006)
3-5B-3: EXCLUSIONS:
The tax imposed by this article is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or
privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of
taxation by the city. (Ord. 2039, 9-19-2005, eff. 1-1-2006)
3-5B-4: COLLECTION BY RETAILERS:
A. The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a
place of business in this state and shall be remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax
required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this article and any such tax collected by
such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt owed by the
retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross
charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in
the manner prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this article shall constitute a debt
of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable by law in the same manner as
the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer,
then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided
by the department.
B. Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct
item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 2039, 9-19-2005, eff.
1-1-2006)
3-5B-5: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 63/460
Commencing on February 1, 2006, the tax imposed under this article on telecommunications retailers
shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required by the department pursuant to
the Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement this article. (Ord. 2039,
9-19-2005, eff. 1-1-2006)
3-5B-6: RESALES:
A. If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such
telecommunications, such person shall apply to the department for a resale number. Such
applicant shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for the
tax authorized by this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
B. Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and
shall certify such number to the applicant. The department may cancel any number which is
obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunications
tax free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
C. Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax free on the ground of being a sale for resale
unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number to
the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable
because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2039, 9-19-2005, eff. 1-1-2006)
ARTICLE C. MOTOR FUEL TAX
3-5C-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words or terms are used herein, they
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BULK USER: Any person who purchases motor fuel for storage in bulk storage facilities located within
the city of Marion, which facilities are owned, leased or controlled by said person, for subsequent
dispensing into the supply tanks of internal combustion engines operated by said person.
GASOHOL: A fuel used chiefly in internal combustion engines which is comprised chiefly of gasoline
and ethyl alcohols in variable quantities.
GASOLINE OR DIESEL FUEL: A volatile, highly flammable or combustible liquid mixture of
hydrocarbons produced by the fractional distillation of petroleum and used chiefly as a fuel in internal
combustion engines, but shall not include mixtures commonly known as kerosene and aviation fuel or
mixtures used in the heating of buildings.
MOTOR FUEL: "Gasohol" and "gasoline or diesel fuel" as defined in this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 64/460
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate, association,
partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business, trust, institution, agency, contractor, supplier,
vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees, or other representatives,
acting either for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
RETAIL GASOLINE DEALER: Any person who engages in the business of selling motor fuel in the
city of Marion to a purchaser for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE, RESALE, SELLING: Any transfer of ownership or possession, or both, exchange or barter,
conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for valuable consideration. (Ord.
1954, 5-24-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-5C-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
A. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the purchase of each gallon of motor fuel, or fraction
thereof, sold at retail within the corporate limits of the city a tax at the rate of two cents ($0.02) per
gallon.
B. In the event motor fuel is dispensed in a unit of measure other than the gallon, the tax shall be
imposed at the same ratio of two cents ($0.02) as the unit is to the gallon. (Ord. 1954, 5-24-2004,
eff. 7-1-2004)
3-5C-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
A retail gasoline dealer may make tax free sales, only when the sale is made to the federal
government, the state of Illinois, any municipality or unit of local government as those terms are
defined by section 1 of article VII of the constitution of the state of Illinois or any school district. (Ord.
1954, 5-24-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-5C-4: TAX IS ADDITIONAL:
The tax shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. (Ord. 1954, 5-24-2004, eff. 7-
1-2004)
3-5C-5: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF TAX; NOT APPLICABLE TO OCCUPATIONS:
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is to be borne by the retail purchase of
motor fuel. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon the occupations of persons
engaged in the retail sale of motor fuel. (Ord. 1954, 5-24-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-5C-6: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 65/460
It shall be the duty of every retail gasoline dealer to secure the tax from the purchaser at the time the
dealer collects the purchase price for the motor fuel and to pay over the tax to the city clerk as
provided in this article. (Ord. 1954, 5-24-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-5C-7: REPORTS AND RETURNS REQUIRED:
A. Every retail gasoline dealer shall transmit to the city clerk on or before the last day of each calendar
month the sum of money equal to the amount of motor fuel tax collected for the preceding calendar
month, accompanied by a report upon forms supplied by the city, which indicates the gross gallons
of motor fuel sold for the preceding calendar month and such other information as the city clerk
may require for the enforcement of this article.
B. Every bulk user shall transmit to the city clerk on or before the last day of each calendar month a
sum of money equal to the amount of motor fuel tax owing for the preceding calendar month,
accompanied by a report upon forms supplied by the city, which indicates the gross gallons of
motor fuel purchased for the preceding calendar month and such other information as the city clerk
may require for the enforcement of this article.
C. All reports and returns submitted by any person or dealer in compliance with this article shall be
kept confidential; provided, that aggregate totals of motor fuel sold and tax received for the entire
city may be periodically released.
D. The first motor fuel tax return report will be due August 31, 2004, for the July 2004 tax liability. (Ord.
1954, 5-24-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-5C-8: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
A. Every retail gasoline dealer shall keep complete and accurate books and records including, but not
limited to, records showing all purchases, receipts, sales and losses through any cause.
B. Every bulk user shall keep complete and accurate records of purchases of motor fuel including the
dates of purchases, the gross gallons purchases on each of the dates and the names and
addresses of the gasoline dealers from which each of the purchases were made.
C. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this article, the city clerk or the clerk's designee
shall have the right to inspect all books, records, and reports of retail gasoline dealers and bulk
users during their normal business hours. (Ord. 1954, 5-24-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-5C-9: DISPOSITION AND USE OF REVENUES:
A. Disposition: The proceeds resulting from the imposition of the two cent ($0.02) tax, including
penalties, shall be credited to and deposited in a separate city improvement account.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 66/460
B. Use: The revenues generated from the motor fuel tax hereby imposed may be expended for
improvements of city streets, sidewalks and other related improvements, including stormwater
drainage, but may be otherwise expended as the city council directs. (Ord. 3035, 2-13-2012)
3-5C-10: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day during which the violation continues shall be regarded as a
separate punishable offense.
B. Any individual who violates subsection 3-5C-7C of this article shall be punishable by a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1954, 5-24-2004, eff. 7-1-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
C. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per
month on the amount of tax that remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever any
person shall fail to pay the tax as provided herein, an action to enforce the payment shall be
brought on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this article and collect
any delinquent tax, interest and penalties. (Ord. 1954, 5-24-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
ARTICLE D. HOTEL AND MOTEL USE TAX
3-5D-1: DEFINITIONS:
HOTEL ROOM OR MOTEL ROOM: A room within a structure kept, used or maintained as or
advertised or held out to the public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, or place
where sleeping, rooming, office, conference or exhibition accommodations are furnished for lease or
rent, whether with or without meals. One room offered for rental with or without an adjoining bath shall
be considered as a single hotel or motel room.
OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel or motel.
OWNER: Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest in conducting the operation of
a hotel or motel room or receiving the consideration for the rental of such hotel or motel room so as to
entitle such person or persons to all or a portion of the net receipts thereof.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupies or has the right to occupy any room or rooms in
a motel or hotel for at least seven (7) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate, association,
partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust, institution, agency, government,
corporation, municipal corporation, district or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor,
vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees or other representative, acting
either for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties. (Ord. 3046, 4-9-2012)
3-5D-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE; EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 67/460
There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting a hotel or motel room within
the city of Marion a tax of six percent (6%) of the rental or leasing charge for each such hotel or motel
room or rooms rented for each twenty four (24) hour period, or any portion thereof; provided, however,
that the tax shall not be levied and imposed upon any permanent resident or to a person who works
and lives in the same hotel or motel. (Ord. 3171, 4-14-2014)
3-5D-3: TAX IS ADDITIONAL:
The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the
duty of the owner, manager or operator of every hotel or motel to act as trustee for and on account of
the city and to secure said tax from the renter of the hotel or motel room and pay over to the city
finance director-treasurer said tax under procedures prescribed by the city finance director-treasurer
or as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 3046, 4-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
3-5D-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
A. It is the responsibility of the owner, manager or operator of any hotel or motel in the city to collect
said tax from any person who seeks the privilege of occupying any such hotel or motel room. The
person so occupying a room shall be hereinafter referred to as "renter".
B. Every person required to collect the tax levied by this article shall secure said tax from the renter at
the time he collects payment for the rental of the hotel or motel room or rooms. Upon the invoice
receipt or other statement or memorandum of the payment given to the renter at the time of
payment, the amount due under the tax provided in this article shall be stated separately on said
documents, or combined with the amount of the Illinois hotel operators' occupation tax. (Ord. 3046,
4-9-2012)
3-5D-5: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The city finance director-treasurer or any person certified as his delegate may, during regular business
hours, enter the premises of the hotel or motel for inspection and examination of books and records in
order to effectuate the proper administration of this article and to assure the enforcement of the
collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the
city finance director-treasurer or his duly authorized delegate in the discharge of his duties and the
performance of this article. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete books
and records to which the city finance director-treasurer or his delegate shall at all times have full
access, which records shall include: a) the amount of taxable receipts collected within the twenty four
(24) hour period; and b) the actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the dates or period in
question. (Ord. 3046, 4-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
3-5D-6: TAX RETURNS; PAYMENT OF TAX; LATE PAYMENT PENALTY:
A. The owner or owners of each hotel and motel within the city shall file tax returns showing tax
receipts received during each monthly period on forms prescribed by the city finance director6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 68/460
treasurer. The returns shall be due on or before the last calendar day of the calendar month
succeeding the end of the monthly filing period.
B. The first taxing period, for the purpose of this article, shall commence on May 1, 2012, and the tax
return and payment for such period shall be due on or before June 30, 2012. Thereafter, reporting
periods and tax payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. At the time of
filing said tax return, the owner shall pay to the city finance director-treasurer all taxes due for the
period to which the tax return applies. (Ord. 3046, 4-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
C. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of one and one-half percent
(1.5%) per monthly filing period, or portion thereof, from the day of delinquency shall be added and
collected. (Ord. 3046, 4-9-2012)
3-5D-7: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article including fines and penalties
may be used to pay for general corporate and municipal purposes, supporting tourism in the city, and
paying the administrative expenses of collecting the tax. (Ord. 3046, 4-9-2012)
3-5D-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city finance director-treasurer may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article concerning the enforcement and application of this article. The term "rules
and regulations" includes, but is not limited to, a case by case determination whether or not the tax
imposed by this article applies. (Ord. 3046, 4-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
3-5D-9: PENALTIES:
A. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: If the city council determines that any owner, manager or
operator of a hotel or motel in the city that holds a license issued by the city has failed to comply
with the terms of this article, the council may have such license suspended or revoked. If such
suspension or revocation is imposed, the holder of such license may request a hearing before the
city council for review of such suspension or revocation within ten (10) days. (Ord. 3046, 4-9-2012)
B. Fine; Civil Action: Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing
to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this article, or
the rules and regulations authorized by this article, shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code per occurrence and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 3046,
4-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
ARTICLE E. ELECTRICITY TAX
3-5E-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 69/460
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or
consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility directly in
the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity, and does not include the city of
Marion and its facilities, or federal agencies or its facilities.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the municipality,
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail. (Ord. 3093, 4-8-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
3-5E-2: TAX IMPOSED:
Pursuant to the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-221 a tax is imposed on all persons
engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
A. The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the city of Marion at rates calculated on a monthly basis for
each purchaser:
1. For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; $0.00305 per kilowatt hour;
2. For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; $0.0020 per kilowatt hour;
3. For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; $0.0018 per kilowatt hour;
4. For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; $0.00175 per kilowatt hour;
5. For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; $0.00170 per kilowatt hour;
6. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; $0.00160 per kilowatt hour;
7. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; $0.00158 per kilowatt hour;
8. For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; $0.00155 per kilowatt hour;
9. For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; $0.00153 per kilowatt
hour; and
10. For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt hours in a month;
$0.00150 per kilowatt hour. (Ord. 3093, 4-8-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
3-5E-3: COLLECTION:
A. The tax imposed herein shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of
business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers, i.e., tax collector. This tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is
recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity.
B. Any tax required to be collected, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the
city of Marion by the tax collector; provided, that the tax collector shall be allowed credit for such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 70/460
tax related to supplies of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and
provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be
obligated to remit such tax.
C. A tax collector shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for
supplying the electricity. A tax collector shall also be authorized to retain from the tax collector an
amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse the tax collector for costs of
accounting. (Ord. 3093, 4-8-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
3-5E-4: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUES:
A. The tax collector shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received during each month period on
forms prescribed by the city finance director-treasurer. The returns shall be due on or before the
last calendar day of the calendar month succeeding the end of the monthly filing period. On or
before the last day of each month each tax collector shall make a return to the city finance directortreasurer
for the preceding month stating:
1. Their name;
2. Their principle place of business;
3. Their gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Such other reasonable and related information that the city may require.
The tax collector making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return,
pay to the city finance director-treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in
connection with any return the tax collector may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based
upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is
made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments
based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
B. The first taxing period for the purpose of this article shall commence on June 1, 2013, and the tax
return and payment for such period shall be due on or before July 31, 2013. Thereafter, reporting
periods and tax payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. At the time of
filing said tax returns, the owner shall pay to the city finance director-treasurer all taxes due for the
period to which the tax return applied. (Ord. 3093, 4-8-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
3-5E-5: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or
resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article or the rules and
regulations authorized by this article, shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), per occurrence and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
Each day any violations of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 3093, 4-
8-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 71/460
ARTICLE F. GAS TAX
3-5F-1: DEFINITIONS:
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of gas by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption,
and not for resale, but shall not include the use of gas by a public utility directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of gas, and does not include the city of Marion and its
facilities, or federal agencies or its facilities.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the municipality, gas
acquired in a purchase at retail. (Ord. 3094, 4-8-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
3-5F-2: TAX IMPOSED:
Pursuant to the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-222 a tax is imposed on all persons
engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
The privilege of using or consuming gas acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within
the corporate limits of the city of Marion at a rate calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser of
five percent (5%) of gross receipts. (Ord. 3094, 4-8-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
3-5F-3: COLLECTION:
A. The tax imposed herein shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of
business in this state who delivers gas to such purchasers, i.e., tax collector. This tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the gas to the purchaser and is
recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the gas.
B. Any tax required to be collected, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the
city of Marion by the tax collector; provided, that the tax collector shall be allowed credit for such
tax related to supplies of gas the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided
further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to
remit such tax.
C. A tax collector shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for
supplying the gas. A tax collector shall also be authorized to retain from the tax collected an
amount equal to three percent (3%) to reimburse the tax collected for costs of accounting. (Ord.
3094, 4-8-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
3-5F-4: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUES:
A. The tax collector shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received during each month period on
forms prescribed by the city finance director-treasurer. The returns shall be due on or before the
last calendar day of the calendar month succeeding the end of the monthly filing period. On or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 72/460
before the last day of each month each tax collector shall make a return to the city finance directortreasurer
for the preceding month stating:
1. Their name;
2. Their principle place of business;
3. Their gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Such other reasonable and related information that the city may require.
The tax collector making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return,
pay to the city finance director-treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in
connection with any return the tax collector may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based
upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is
made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments
based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
B. The first taxing period for the purpose of this article shall commence on June 1, 2013, and the tax
return and payment for such period shall be due on or before July 31, 2013. Thereafter, reporting
periods and tax payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. At the time of
filing said tax returns, the owner shall pay to the city finance director-treasurer all taxes due for the
period to which the tax return applied. (Ord. 3094, 4-8-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
3-5F-5: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or
resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article or the rules and
regulations authorized by this article, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), per occurrence and in addition shall be liable in a civil
action for the amount of tax due. Each day any violations of this article shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 3094, 4-8-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
Chapter 6
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
3-6-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001)
3-6-2: SCOPE; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 73/460
A. Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city procedures in connection with all of the
city's locally imposed and administered taxes.
B. Application Of Provisions; Conflicting Provisions: This chapter shall be liberally construed and
administered to supplement all of the city tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-
2001)
3-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act.
CITY: The city of Marion, Illinois.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The city council.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The city finance director-treasurer is charged with the administration
and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to
the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's
stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to
give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be
inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the city that is
collected or administered by the city not an agency or department of the state. The term does not
include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the city.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection
with each of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally imposed and
administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally
includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and, with respect to
consumer taxes, includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the city. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001; amd. 2013 Code)
3-6-4: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing
mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or
other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
A. First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons'
last known address; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 74/460
B. Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001)
3-6-5: DELINQUENT NOTICES, PAYMENTS, REMITTANCES OR OTHER FILINGS:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city pursuant to any tax
ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a) physically received by the city on or before the due
date; or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 1816,
9-10-2001)
3-6-6: APPLICATION OF TAX PAYMENTS:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: first, to the
tax due for the applicable period; second, to the interest due for the applicable period; and third, to the
penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001)
3-6-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. Written Protest Required: The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is
declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a
taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of
the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
B. Statute Of Limitations: The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) or
less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The city shall
not grant credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a
person who has not paid the amounts directly to the city.
C. Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered
taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund,
together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the
payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in
connection with the claim; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 75/460
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the
amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid and, as applicable, related interest on the
amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in
the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the city.
2. Within seven (7) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or
credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or
the partial grant and denial. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001)
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the
amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per
annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001; amd. 2013 Code)
3-6-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall comply with the notice
requirements of this chapter.
A. Information Required: Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Time For Conducting Audit:
1. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by
the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be
requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during
normal business hours.
2. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be
conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is
given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time.
In the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer
may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in writing, that is convenient to
the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
C. Taxpayer's Books And Records:
1. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities,
including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 76/460
given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be
kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
2. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for
inspection by the city. If the taxpayer or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for
audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's
tax liability.
D. Overpayments: If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and
administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be
given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the city's determination of the amount of
overpayment.
E. Payment To Improper Entity: In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing
such tax. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001)
3-6-9: APPEALS:
A. Contents Of Notice Regarding Taxes Due: The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a
claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following
information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
B. Request For Hearing: A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a
determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest
and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45)
days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
C. Hearing Scheduled; Notice: If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax
administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer.
The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest
and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. Time Limit For Filing Hearing Request: If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within
the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill
due and owing without further notice.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 77/460
E. Reopening, Extension Of Hearing Request: Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer
and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of
the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and
petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be
reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day
period.
F. Conduct Of Hearing; Decision:
1. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing
under this section, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
2. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary
to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance.
Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
3. At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any
evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
4. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination
on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be
provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001)
3-6-10: PAYMENT REQUIRED; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
A. Time For Payment: In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise
indicated.
B. Interest: The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment,
underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be nine percent (9.0%) per annum, based on a year of
three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
C. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and in the manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of
tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed, and a late payment penalty of five
percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax delinquency or
notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent
(25%) of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the
controlling ordinance.
D. Abatement Of Penalties: The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall
determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 78/460
3-6-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the
controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so
entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local
tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14)
working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen
(14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local
administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord.
1816, 9-10-2001)
3-6-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
A. The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely
manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five
(45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or
provide any tax still due and owing.
B. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years maximum after the
end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar
year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later. (Ord. 1816, 9-
10-2001)
C. If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax
determination or assessment may be issued by the city, the tax paid was less than seventy five
percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end
of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year
in which the return for the applicable period was filed, whichever occurs later.
D. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 1816,
9-10-2001; amd. 2013 Code)
3-6-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of
an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an
application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one
percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4)
years before the date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due under this
section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional
tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the
taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the
result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case, the application shall be deemed invalid and
void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of
the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 79/460
longer. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest
previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001; amd. 2013 Code)
3-6-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES; COPIES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing
requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet shall satisfy the publication requirements.
Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the city clerk's
office. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001)
3-6-15: REVIEW OF LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed
against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the
lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the
local tax administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the city's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 1816, 9-10-2001)
Chapter 7
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY AND RULES FOR TAX
INCREMENT FINANCING
3-7-1: RULES ADOPTED; AMENDMENTS:
In accordance with section 5/11-74.4-4.2 of the tax increment allocation redevelopment act (TIF act),
the city hereby adopts the registration rules as found in section 3-7-2 of this chapter as registration
rules for each interested parties registry. The city clerk, with the consent of the city attorney as to form
and legality, shall have the authority to amend such registration rules from time to time as may be
necessary or desirable to comply with and carry out the purposes intended by the TIF act. (Ord. 1877,
11-18-2002; amd. 2013 Code)
3-7-2: REGISTRATION RULES:
3-7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 80/460
As used in these registration rules, the following terms shall have the definitions set forth below:
ACT: The tax increment allocation redevelopment act, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
CITY: The city of Marion, an Illinois municipal corporation.
CLERK: The city clerk.
INTERESTED PARTY(IES): A. Any organization(s) active within the city;
B. Any resident(s) of the city; and
C. Any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the act to register in the interested parties
registry who has registered in such registry and whose registration has not been terminated in
accordance with these registration rules.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA: A redevelopment project area that:
A. Is intended to qualify or that has previously or subsequently qualified as a "redevelopment
project area" under the act; and
B. Is subject to the "interested parties registry" requirements of the act.
REGISTRATION FORM: The form appended to ordinance 1877 or such revised form as may be
approved by the city administrator consistent with the requirements of the act.
REGISTRY OR REGISTRIES: Each interested parties registry, and all such registries, collectively,
established by the city pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-4.2 for a redevelopment
project area. (Ord. 1877, 11-18-2002; amd. 2013 Code)
3-7-2-2: REGISTRY ESTABLISHED:
The city shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each redevelopment project area,
whether existing as of the effective date hereof or hereafter established. (Ord. 1877, 11-18-2002)
3-7-2-3: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The registries shall be maintained by the clerk, which has a principal business office located at 1102
Tower Square, City Hall, Marion, Illinois. The city may transfer the responsibility for maintaining the
registries to another city official; provided, that the city: (Ord. 1877, 11-18-2002; amd. 2013 Code)
A. Gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less than thirty (30) days prior to such transfer;
and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 81/460
B. Publishes notice of such transfer in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (Ord. 1877, 11-
18-2002)
3-7-2-4: SUBMISSION OF REGISTRATION:
A. Individuals: An individual seeking to register as an interested party with respect to a redevelopment
project area must complete and submit a registration form to the clerk. Such individual must also
submit a copy of a current driver's license, lease, utility bill, or such other evidence as may be
acceptable to the clerk to establish the individual's current residency.
B. Organizations: An organization seeking to register as an interested party with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the clerk. Such
organization must also submit a copy of a one page statement describing the organization's
current operations in the city. (Ord. 1877, 11-18-2002)
3-7-2-5: ELIGIBILITY DETERMINED:
All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting documentation comply with
these registration rules shall be registered in the applicable registry within ten (10) business days of
the clerk's receipt of all such documents. The clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant
confirming such registration. Upon registration, interested parties shall be entitled to receive all notices
and documents required to be delivered under these rules or as otherwise required under the act with
respect to the applicable redevelopment project area. If the clerk determines that a registrant's
registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with these rules,
the clerk shall give written notice to the registrant specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be
entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting documentation.
(Ord. 1877, 11-18-2002)
3-7-2-6: RENEWALS AND TERMINATION:
An interested party's registration shall remain effective for a period of three (3) years. At any time after
such three (3) year period, the clerk may provide written notice by regular mail to the interested party
stating that such registration shall terminate unless the interested party renews such registration within
thirty (30) days of the clerk's mailing of written notice. To renew such registration, the interested party
shall, within such thirty (30) day period, complete and submit the same registration form and
supporting documentation then required of initial registrants in order to permit the clerk to confirm such
person's residency or such organization's operations in the city. The registration of all individuals and
organizations whose registration form and supporting documentation is submitted in a timely manner
and complies with these registration rules shall be reviewed for an additional, consecutive three (3)
year period. If the clerk determines that a registrant's renewal registration form and/or supporting
documentation is incomplete or does not comply with these registration rules, the clerk shall give
written notice to the registrant at the address specified in the renewal registration form submitted by
such registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and
resubmit a new registration form and supporting documentation within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
clerk's notice. If all defects are not corrected within thirty (30) days of the interested party's receipt of
the clerk's notice, the interested party's registration shall be terminated. Any interested party whose
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 82/460
registration is terminated shall be entitled to register again as if a first time registrant. (Ord. 1877, 11-
18-2002)
3-7-2-7: AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION:
An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice to the clerk by certified mail of
any of the following: a) a change in address for notice purposes; b) in the case of organizations, a
change in the name of the contact person; and c) a termination of registration. Upon receipt of such
notice, the clerk shall revise the applicable registry accordingly. (Ord. 1877, 11-18-2002)
3-7-2-8: PUBLIC INSPECTION OF REGISTRIES:
Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal city business hours. The registry
shall include the name, address and telephone number of each interested person and, for
organizations, the name and phone number of a designated contact person. (Ord. 1877, 11-18-2002)
3-7-2-9: NOTICES TO INTERESTED PARTIES:
Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices required under the act with
respect to the applicable redevelopment project area:
A. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-5(a), notice of the availability of a proposed
redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including how to obtain this information. Such notice shall
be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the
public hearing for the proposed redevelopment plan;
B. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-5(a), notice of changes to proposed
redevelopment plans that do not: 1) add additional parcels of property to the proposed
redevelopment project area; 2) substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the
redevelopment plan; 3) substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the redevelopment
project; or 4) increase the number of low or very low income households to be displaced from the
redevelopment project area; provided, that measured from the time of creation of the
redevelopment project area, the total displacement of the households will exceed ten (10). Such
notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten (10) days following the city's adoption by ordinance
of such changes;
C. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-5(c), notice of amendments to previously
approved redevelopment plans that do not: 1) add additional parcels of property to the
redevelopment project area; 2) substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment
plan; 3) substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project; 4) increase the total
estimated redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan by more than five percent
(5%) after adjustment for inflation from the date the plan was adopted; 5) add additional
redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of redevelopment project costs set out in the
redevelopment plan; or 6) increase the number of low or very low income households to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area; provided, that measured from the time of creation
of the redevelopment project area, the total displacement of households will exceed ten (10). Such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 83/460
notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten (10) days following the city's adoption by ordinance
of any such amendment;
D. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9) for redevelopment plans or projects that
would result in the displacement of residents from ten (10) or more inhabited residential units or
that contain seventy five (75) or more inhabited residential units, notice of the availability of
certified audit report described in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9), including how to
obtain the certified audit report. Such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of
time after completion of the certified audit report;
E. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-6(e), notice of the preliminary public meeting
required under the act for a proposed redevelopment project area that will result in the
displacement of ten (10) or more inhabited residential units or which will contain seventy five (75)
or more inhabited residential units. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than fifteen
(15) days before the date of such preliminary public meeting. (Ord. 1877, 11-18-2002)
3-7-2-10: NONINTERFERENCE:
These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise interfere with the ability of eligible
organizations and individuals to register for receipt of information to which they are entitled under the
act. (Ord. 1877, 11-18-2002)
3-7-2-11: AMENDMENT OF RULES:
These registration rules may be amended by the city subject to and consistent with the requirements
of the act. (Ord. 1877, 11-18-2002)
Chapter 8
REIMBURSEMENT OF LOAN INTEREST TO
BUSINESSES
3-8-1: PROGRAM ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE:
To encourage the revitalization of the downtown business district, there is hereby established a
program whereby a portion of the interest paid on money borrowed from a lending institution by an
eligible business shall be reimbursed by the city. (Ord. 1899, 2-3-2003)
3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT: That area bounded on the south by College Street, the east by
Buchanan Street, the north by White Street and the west by Court Street. The district will include both
sides of the streets, constituting the boundary of the district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 84/460
ELIGIBLE BUSINESS: A business that maintains membership in the Marion Main Street organization
and is a new business or existing business in the downtown business district. (Ord. 1899, 2-3-2003)
3-8-3: EXISTING PARTICIPANTS OUTSIDE DISTRICT:
Any business that has been heretofore a participant in the program but is outside the boundaries
designated in "downtown business district", defined in section 3-8-2 of this chapter shall continue in
the program. (Ord. 1899, 2-3-2003)
3-8-4: REIMBURSEMENT REGULATIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
A. An eligible business, upon prior approval of the city council, shall be reimbursed a portion of the
interest paid on a loan from a lending institution, the proceeds of which are used in the creation of
a new business or the expansion of an existing business.
B. Regardless of the amount of the individual loan, reimbursement of a portion of the interest paid
thereon shall be limited to that paid on the maximum amount of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) amortized not to exceed a term of seven (7) years, the length of the term of the loan
notwithstanding.
C. The city will reimburse the eligible business interest paid on such loan at the rate of two and onehalf
percent (21/2%) of the amount of the loan amortized.
D. Late fees, penalties or additional interest due on such loan shall not qualify for reimbursement.
E. In the event the loan to an eligible business participating in the interest reimbursement program is
refinanced, the balance of the loan for which interest is to be reimbursed shall not be increased nor
shall the term for which reimbursement is to be paid be increased. A loan by the city revolving loan
fund shall not qualify as a loan eligible for interest reimbursement.
F. Total outstanding eligible loans for which reimbursement of interest is available shall not exceed one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00). In no event shall the city be obligated to pay more than twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) annually in reimbursement of interest. The original amount of an
eligible loan for which reimbursement of interest is available shall not be increased for the purpose
of this program during the term for which the city is committed to pay interest on such loan.
G. The reimbursement of interest provided herein shall be on a quarterly calendar year basis. The
eligible business to receive such reimbursement shall submit to the city finance director-treasurer
all required information by the thirtieth day of the month following the close of the quarter. For such
interest to be reimbursed, the following information shall be provided:
1. A signed copy of the loan agreement and loan amortization schedule at the time of acceptance
into the program.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 85/460
2. Proof of payment from the lending institution showing the amount of interest paid and dates paid
for the quarter. (Ord. 1899, 2-3-2003)
3-8-5: EFFECT OF PROGRAM:
This program shall remain in effect until such time as the city council shall end the program. In the
event the program is ended, the city will continue its commitment to active participants in the program
for the remaining life of the outstanding loans. (Ord. 1899, 2-3-2003)
Chapter 9
RECOVERY IN MEDICAL MALPRACTICE SUITS
3-9-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
The city council finds that the subject matter of this chapter pertains to the government and affairs of
the city and is passed pursuant to authority granted by state statutes and the home rule powers of the
city pursuant to the provisions of article VII, section 6(a) of the Illinois constitution. (Ord. 1967, 6-28-
2004)
3-9-2: SUITS HELD IN COUNTY COURT:
Every healing art malpractice action at law which is instituted as a result of treatment which occurred
in the city shall be commenced in the circuit court of Williamson County. (Ord. 1967, 6-28-2004)
3-9-3: AWARD OF DAMAGES:
A. Tangible Losses: In the event the litigant bringing such action at law is successful and damages are
awarded for economic loss, such damages shall be specifically based on tangible loss for cost of
past and future medical and hospital expenses, loss of income and other property loss, if any.
B. Intangible Losses: In the event damages are awarded for intangible loss including, but not limited
to, damages for pain and suffering, disability, disfigurement, loss of consortium and loss of society,
being noneconomic damages, said damages shall be limited to no more than three (3) times the
damages awarded for economic loss. (Ord. 1967, 6-28-2004)
3-9-4: EXEMPTIONS:
Any healthcare professional who gives aid, assistance, succor or care to anyone injured or suffering
from an emergency or acute incident in the city shall be exempt from liability for a subsequent loss
inadvertently inflicted, provided the aid, assistance, succor or care was given in a usual and
customary manner under the circumstance at the time. (Ord. 1967, 6-28-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 86/460
3-9-5: UNSUCCESSFUL PROSECUTIONS:
Any person who unsuccessfully prosecutes an action at law against a provider of medical care or
healthcare for malpractice shall pay and be responsible for all costs incurred by the successful party
including, but not limited to, court costs and attorney fees. (Ord. 1967, 6-28-2004)
3-9-6: APPLICATION OF LAWS AND THIS CHAPTER:
A. Application Of Other Laws: Nothing in this chapter is intended to exempt healing arts malpractice
suits from all other provisions and requirements of law including, but not limited to, minimum filing
and complaint requirements for plaintiffs in healing arts malpractice cases.
B. Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any healing arts malpractice
suit filed on or after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 1967, 6-28-2004)
Chapter 10
ESCROW OF FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
FINAL SETTLEMENT: A determination of the amount due and owing to the insured for a loss to
insured real property under the Illinois standard policy by any of the following means:
A. Acceptance of a proof of loss by the insurer;
B. Execution of a release by the insured;
C. Acceptance of an arbitration award by both the insured and the insurer;
D. Judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
The term "final settlement" shall not include the payment of policy proceeds for personal
property or contents damage.
REASONABLE PROOF: Any of the following:
A. Originals or copies of pertinent contracts, invoices, receipts and other similar papers evidencing
both the work performed or to be performed and the materials used or to be used by all
contractors performing repair, replacement or removal services with respect to the property,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 87/460
other than a contractor who is subject to the following subsection of this definition;
B. An affidavit executed by the contractor which performed the greatest amount of repair or
replacement work on the structure, or which has done most of the clearing and removal work if
repair or replacement is not performed. The contractor shall attach to the affidavit all pertinent
contracts, invoices and receipts and shall swear that the attached papers correctly indicate the
nature and extent of the work performed by the contractor and the materials used;
C. An inspection of the insured real property to verify that the repair, replacement or clearing has
been completed in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 3360, 11-28-2016)
3-10-2: INSURER TO WITHHOLD PERCENTAGE OF SETTLEMENT PROCEEDS;
NOTICE:
A. When a claim is filed for a loss to insured real property located within the city of Marion due to fire,
explosion, or natural disaster and a final settlement is reached on the loss to the property, an
insurer shall withhold from payment ten percent (10%) of the actual cash value of the insured real
property at the time of loss or ten percent (10%) of the final settlement, whichever is less. The
insurer shall immediately give notice of the withholding to the city treasurer, the insured and any
mortgagee having an existing lien against the insured property, if the mortgagee is named on the
policy. In the case of a judgment, notice shall also be provided to the court in which judgment was
entered. The notice shall include all of the following:
1. The identity and address of the insurer.
2. The name and address of each policy holder, including any mortgagee.
3. Location of the insured property.
4. The date of loss, policy number and claim number.
5. The amount of money withheld.
6. A statement that the city may have the withheld amount paid into a trust or escrow account
established for the purposes set forth in this chapter, if it shows cause within fifteen (15) days
that the money should be withheld to protect the public health and safety. Otherwise, the amount
withheld shall be paid to the insured at the expiration of fifteen (15) days. (Ord. 3360, 11-28-
2016)
3-10-3: ESCROW ACCOUNT PROCEDURE:
The amount withheld by the insurer shall be placed in the city's escrow account and retained in
accordance with the following procedure:
A. An affidavit prepared by the chief of the fire department or such other person authorized by the city
council, stating that the damaged insured structure violates existing named health and safety
standards requiring the escrow of the amount withheld as surety for the repair, replacement or
removal of the damaged structure, shall constitute cause for escrowing the amount withheld.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 88/460
B. In the case of a settlement, the affidavit shall be sent to the insurer, the insured and any
mortgagees. Upon receipt, the insurer shall forward the amount withheld to the finance office of the
city and shall provide notice of the forwarding to the insured and any mortgagees named in the
policy.
C. In the case of a judgment, the affidavit shall be sent to the insurer, the insured, any mortgagees
named in the policy and the court in which judgment was entered. Upon motion of the city, the
court shall order the withheld amount to be transmitted to the finance office of the city.
D. Within ninety (90) days after deposit of the withheld amount into escrow, the city may apply to the
circuit court for declaratory relief as provided in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-701. If the city
fails to apply for declaratory relief or if such relief is denied, the city shall immediately return to the
insured the proceeds held in escrow. (Ord. 3360, 11-28-2016)
3-10-4: RECEIPT OF AMOUNT WITHHELD; INTEREST; COMMINGLING OF FUNDS;
RELEASE OF FUNDS TO SATISFY MORTGAGES:
Upon receipt of the amount withheld and information from an insurer, the city finance office shall
record the information and the date of receipt and shall immediately deposit the money into a trust or
escrow account established for the purposes of this chapter. The account may be interest bearing,
and in such event, any interest earned on the amount placed in escrow or trust shall be retained by
the city to defray expenses incurred under this chapter. The funds shall not be commingled with city
funds. If a mortgage on the insured property is in default, the finance report shall release such portions
of the amount placed in escrow necessary to satisfy any outstanding lien of the mortgagee within ten
(10) days after receipt of a written request from the first mortgagee if the funds are not held by the city
as costs of demolition to the property. The city must initiate demolition proceedings in a court of law
within one hundred twenty (120) days of the receipt of the funds if no declaratory relief is filed as
stated in subsection 3-10-3D of this chapter. (Ord. 3360, 11-28-2016)
3-10-5: RELEASE OF FUNDS TO INSURED:
A. The amount held in escrow shall be immediately forwarded to the insured when the chief of the fire
department, his duly authorized agent or another authorized representative receives or is shown
reasonable proof of either of the following:
1. That the damaged or destroyed portions of the structure have been repaired or replaced, except
to the extent that the amount withheld is needed to complete repair or replacement.
2. That the damaged or destroyed structure and all remnants of the structure have been removed
from the land on which the structure or the remnants of the structure were situated in compliance
with this chapter and other city ordinances.
B. If the insured enters into a contract to perform the repair, replacement or removal of the structure
and consents to payments of funds held in escrow directly to the contractor performing such
services, the funds shall be released only to such contractor. (Ord. 3360, 11-28-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 89/460
3-10-6: USE OF RETAINED PROCEEDS UPON FAILURE TO SHOW REASONABLE
PROOF:
If, with respect to a loss, reasonable proof is not received or shown to the chief of the fire department,
his duly authorized agent or another authorized representative of the city within one hundred twenty
(120) days after the policy proceeds were received by the finance office, the city shall use the retained
proceeds to secure repair or demolish the damaged or destroyed structure and clear the property in
question, so that the structure and property are in compliance with code requirements and applicable
ordinances of the city. Funds not used for such purpose shall be returned to the insured and
mortgagees named in the policy. Prior to the city of Marion using any funds under this section, the city
of Marion shall institute demolition proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 3360, 11-28-
2016)
3-10-7: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to final settlements which exceed fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00). (Ord. 3360, 11-28-2016)
3-10-8: SEVERABILITY; SAVING CLAUSE; VIOLATION:
A. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be declared
invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end, the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared severable.
B. This chapter shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or regulation of the city and any
such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law
under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time the violation
was committed.
C. A violation of this chapter shall incur a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
plus attorney fees incurred in any action under this chapter. (Ord. 3360, 11-28-2016)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT PROVISIONS
4-1-1: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be made in writing to the city clerk
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 90/460
in the absence of provisions to the contrary. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the
permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid; and
each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance
of the city officials in the issuing of the permit or license for which applied. Forms for all licenses and
permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the city clerk. (1977 Code
§§ 5.04.010, 5.04.030)
4-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business
or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person, firm or
corporation shall be subject to the requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee or partner,
he holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation, or attempts to perform any part
of such business or occupation in the city. (1977 Code § 5.04.020)
4-1-3: INSPECTION OR INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
A. Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where ordinances of the city necessitate
an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permit or license, the city clerk shall
refer such application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48)
hours of the time of such receipt, except when such time period ends on a holiday or nonbusiness
day, then such period shall be extended to include the next business day. The officer charged with
the duty of making an investigation or inspection shall make a report thereof, favorable or
otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. (1977 Code
§ 5.04.050)
B. The code enforcement officer shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the
construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations, except where otherwise
provided, shall be made by the chief of police or by some other officer designated by the mayor.
(1977 Code § 5.04.050; amd. 2013 Code)
4-1-4: FEES AND CHARGES:
In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid
in advance at the time application therefor is made to the city clerk. When an applicant has not
engaged in the business until after the expiration of part of the current license year, the license fee
shall be prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof during which the
business has been or will be constructed. Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall become
a part of the general corporate fund. (1977 Code § 5.04.060)
4-1-5: SIGNATURES REQUIRED:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the mayor or city clerk in the absence of any
provision to the contrary. (1977 Code § 5.04.040; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 91/460
4-1-6: TERMINATION OF LICENSE; RENEWALS:
A. All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal year of the city, where no provision to
the contrary is made.
B. The city clerk shall mail to all licensees of the city a statement of the time of the expiration of the
license held by the licensee, if an annual license, two (2) weeks prior to the date of expiration;
provided, that a failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it, shall not
excuse the licensee from failure to secure a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a
defense in an action for operation without a license. (1977 Code § 5.04.070)
4-1-7: PREMISES AND LOCATION:
A. Premises And Building Requirements: No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business,
and no permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose and the intended purpose itself do not fully comply with the regulations of the city. (1977
Code § 5.04.080)
B. Change Of Location: The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act,
may be changed, provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk, in the absence of
any provision to the contrary; provided, that there is compliance with all ordinances and regulations
affecting the new location. (1977 Code § 5.04.090)
4-1-8: NUISANCE BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact.
(1977 Code § 5.04.100)
4-1-9: INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSES:
A. Right Of Entry For Inspections: Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection
with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided or required by ordinance, or
are reasonably necessary thereto to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of any licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be
inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the
city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is
requested. (1977 Code § 5.04.110)
B. Samples For Analyses: Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the licensee to give to any authorized officer or employee of the city requesting
the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request. (1977
Code § 5.04.120)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 92/460
4-1-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; HEARING:
A. Authority: Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the mayor at any time during
the life of such license or permit for any violation by the licensee or permittee of the ordinance
provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the
premises occupied; and such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.
B. Grounds For Revocation: Licenses or permits issued under the ordinances of the city, unless
otherwise provided, may be revoked by the mayor and city council after notice and hearing as
provided in subsection C of this section for any of the following causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license or
permit.
2. Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions or state law relating to the
license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or the premises occupied.
3. Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude.
4. Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the city.
5. Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference with a duly authorized city
officer or employee while in the performance of his duties in making such inspections, as
provided in this code.
C. Hearing Procedures:
1. Within ten (10) days after the city officials have so acted, the mayor shall call a hearing for the
purpose of determining whether or not the license or permit should be revoked.
2. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing setting forth
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall
be sent to the licensee or permittee by certified mail at his last known address or personally
served at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
3. At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to
submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The mayor shall preside and shall render the
decision and recommendation. (2013 Code)
4-1-11: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the city to issue a license or permit or by
the revocation of a license or permit shall have the right to appeal the city decision to the city
council. Such appeal shall be requested by submitting a written request to the mayor within five (5)
days of the action of the city which is appealed.
B. City Council Consideration: The city council shall consider the appeal at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, at which time, the applicant shall be entitled to present his appeal orally or in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 93/460
writing. The city council shall act on the appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either
uphold the action of the city or shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which the city has
denied or the reissuance of a license or permit which the city had revoked. (2013 Code)
Chapter 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms, as used in this chapter, shall be construed
according to the definitions given in this section:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever
may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term does not include denatured
or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every liquid or solid, patented or
not, containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, and intended to be
consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or
other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer,
porter and the like.
DELIVERY: The act of transferring or giving in any manner or by any means alcoholic liquor to another
by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
HOTEL AND MOTEL: Includes every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay
to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which six (6) or more rooms
are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests.
LICENSED PREMISES: The area as described in the application where alcoholic liquor is allowed to
be served, stored or sold and areas internally or externally connected thereto by doorways, which
areas are integrally related to the operation of the licensed establishment.
LICENSEE: Any person, corporation, limited liability company, or partnership holding a license under
the terms and provisions of this chapter.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: A bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, or any other receptacle or container,
used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and
convey any alcoholic liquor.
PACKAGE LIQUOR: Alcoholic liquor in the original package for consumption off the premises where it
is sold.
PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE: A place of business in which the premises is used primarily or
exclusively for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the original package for consumption off the
premises where it is sold. The term may also include a business that engages in the sale of beer and
wine by the drink for consumption on the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 94/460
PERSON: Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, limited liability company,
or any other group acting as a unit, as well as individuals. The term shall also include an executor,
administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word
"person" appears in any section of this chapter prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or
associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations or limited
liability companies, shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any
violation of this chapter.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a
place where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations; such space
being provided with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve
suitable food for guests, and obtaining at least fifty percent (50%) of the annual gross revenue from
the sale of nonalcoholic beverages and food.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
SALE: Any transfer or exchange in any manner or by any means whatsoever for consideration, and
includes and means sales made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or
employee.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other
substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such
liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or
vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of "alcohol" or
"spirits", as said terms are defined in this section. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-2: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; PENALTY:
A. It is unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the city any alcoholic liquor without having a retail
liquor dealer's license or in violation of the terms of such license. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
B. It is unlawful for anyone not having a license to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises where sold, or to permit the same to be consumed on the premises
where sold. Any such person who fails to comply with this subsection shall be subject to a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation, and each day such violation occurs shall
be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
4-2-3: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license shall be issued to:
A. A person who is not a resident of the city.
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 95/460
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois.
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame.
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency
and morality.
G. A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
H. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be
eligible for such license upon a first application.
I. A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license.
J. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning
in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible
to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residency within the city.
K. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or
agent possess the same qualifications required by the licensee.
L. A person who was convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture,
possession or sale of alcoholic liquor prior to the effective date hereof, or shall have forfeited his
bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
M. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease
thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued.
N. Any law enforcement official, the mayor, or any member of the city council, and no such official
shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquor in the city.
O. Any person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by state law.
P. Any person, association, or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license. (Ord.
3042, 4-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
4-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 96/460
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the mayor, in writing, signed by the applicant and
verified by oath or affidavit. The application shall be accompanied by a check in the amount of the
yearly fee for the license being applied for except as provided in subsection 4-2-8A of this chapter.
The application for license shall require the following information and statements:
A. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in case of partnership, the
persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit, or a club,
the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, names and addresses of the
officers and directors, and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one
person or his nominee, the names and addresses of such persons.
B. The citizenship of the applicant, his birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his
naturalization.
C. The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a corporation, the objects for which it was
formed.
D. The length of time that the applicant has been in business of that character; or in the case of a
corporation, the date on which its charter was issued.
E. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to operate under the
license.
F. A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other license on premises
other than described in the application, and the disposition of such application.
G. A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to
receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in the laws of this state or the
ordinances of the city.
H. Whether a previous license by any state, or unit of government thereof, or by the federal
government has been revoked, and the reason therefor.
I. A statement acknowledging that the license and applicant(s) are subject to all of the applicable laws
of the state of Illinois, the United States, and/or any ordinance of the city in the conduct of his/her
place of business. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-5: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES:
There shall be the following classes of licenses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 97/460
A. Class I: Class I licenses may be issued to any qualifying person, entity, organization, and/or retail
establishment as long as all qualifications for such license are met and there is compliance
therewith. Class I licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer only, the fee for which shall be five
hundred dollars ($500.00), payable annually in advance.
B. Class II: Class II licenses may be issued to any qualifying person, entity, organization, and/or retail
establishment as long as all qualifications for such license are met and there is compliance
therewith. Class II licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only, the fee for which
shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable annually in advance.
C. Class III:
1. Class III(a): Class III(a) licenses may be issued to any qualifying person, entity, organization,
and/or retail establishment as long as all qualifications for such license are met and there is
compliance therewith. Class III(a) licenses shall authorize the retail sale, use, and consumption
of alcoholic liquor of any kind on the premises, including a restaurant, tavern, or bar, the fee for
which shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), payable annually in advance.
2. Class III(b): Class III(b) licenses shall only be issued to charitable organizations, or other
similarly determined organization which are created and operated for charitable purposes,
employ all their resources to those charitable activities that are under their direct control, and do
not distribute any part of the income generated for the benefit of any trustee, trustor, member, or
other private individual. Class III(b) licenses shall authorize the retail sale and consumption of
any alcoholic liquor on the premises, the fee for which shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
payable annually in advance.
D. Class IV: Class IV licenses shall only be issued to motels, hotels, and/or any other business or
premises used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are offered for pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or
residential, in which six (6) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such
guests, the fee for which shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), payable annually
in advance.
E. Class V:
1. Class V(a): Class V(a) licenses shall only be issued to package liquor stores in which the
premises are used exclusively for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the original package for
consumption off the premises where it is sold, the fee for which shall be one thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00), payable annually in advance.
2. Class V(b): Class V(b) licenses shall be issued to package liquor stores for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor in the original package for consumption off the premises where it is sold, and
also includes the sale of beer and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises, the fee for
which shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), payable annually in advance. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-
2012)
F. Class VI:
1. One class VI license may be issued for operation of a microbrewery to brew no more than ten
thousand (10,000) gallons of beer per year and to sell beer to be consumed on site or through
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 98/460
carryout.
2. The exterior appearance of the structure housing a microbrewery shall be compatible with that
of other structures in proximity to the microbrewery.
3. The fee for such license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) payable
annually in advance. (Ord. 3157, 1-13-2014)
4-2-6: PAYMENT AND DISPOSITION OF FEES; REFUNDS:
All fees shall be paid to the city clerk prior to a license being issued, and shall be forthwith deposited
to the city clerk's account. In the event that a license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to
the applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund.
(Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-7: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The number of licenses for the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail which may be issued by the local liquor
control commissioner (mayor) shall be limited to ten (10) class I licenses, ten (10) class II licenses,
forty (40) class III(a) licenses, five (5) class III(b) licenses, ten (10) class IV licenses, ten (10) class V
licenses and one class VI license, all of which are described in section 4-2-5 of this chapter, within the
city limits; provided, however, that: (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3157, 1-13-2014)
A. This restriction shall not limit the right to issue a license to any established licensed business which
may come within the limits of the city by reason of the incorporation of the territory wherein said
business is located in the city.
B. This restriction shall not limit the right to the renewal of any existing licenses nor the issuance of a
license to the purchaser of or the lessor of an established licensed business as a going concern,
nor to the issuance of a license to the purchaser of or the lessor of a business where the license
has been revoked and not restored. However, if a license is revoked and not restored within thirty
(30) days, or the business not transferred by lease or sale within thirty (30) days, then the total
number of licenses shall be reduced until the total of all licenses shall not exceed the number
authorized. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-8: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; PRORATION OF FEE; RENEWALS:
A. Expiration Date; Proration Of Fee: Each license shall terminate on January 31 of the next year
following its issuance. The fee to be paid by the holder of a valid license shall be reduced by onehalf
(1/2) if such license is issued after July 31. The holder of a liquor license who applies for a
higher classification license shall pay a fee amounting to the difference between the fee for the
license then held and the fee for the higher classification license.
B. Renewals: Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is then
qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought is suitable
for such purposes; and provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided shall not be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 99/460
construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the mayor from decreasing the number
of licenses to be issued within his jurisdiction. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-9: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
A. A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance,
unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not
descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the
deceased licensee, and the trustee of any solvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists
in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of
the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt
licensee, but no longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such
licensee.
B. A license shall be nonassignable and/or nontransferable and, upon the sale of any business
holding such license, shall terminate immediately, and the new owners, if desirous of obtaining a
liquor license, shall apply for said license in due course as provided in this chapter. The mere
purchase of a business operating under a license duly issued under this chapter does not in any
way guarantee the issuance of a new liquor license, and in any case, the old license must be
terminated prior to issuance of a new license for the same business premises. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-
2012)
4-2-10: DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND WARNINGS:
A. Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in plain view in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
B. Every holder of a retail license, whether the licensee sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquors for use
or consumption on or off the retail licensed premises, shall cause a sign with the following
message to be framed and hung in plain view:
GOVERNMENT WARNING: ACCORDING TO THE SURGEON GENERAL, WOMEN SHOULD
NOT DRINK ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF
BIRTH DEFECTS. IF YOU NEED ASSISTANCE FOR SUBSTANCE ABUSE, PLEASE CALL THE
OFFICE OF ALCOHOLISM AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE (OASA) AT 1-800-843-6154.
(2013 Code)
4-2-11: DAYS AND HOURS OF SALES:
A. It is unlawful to dispense, sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the city between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. through six o'clock (6:00) A.M. during the week and from one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. Sunday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following Monday, except for licenses
subject to the provisions of subsections B, C, and D of this section. All alcoholic liquor sold for
consumption on the premises shall be removed from bars, tables, counters, and otherwise
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 100/460
disposed of within fifteen (15) minutes after the closing of alcoholic liquor sales established in this
subsection.
B. It is lawful for a restaurant licensed to sell alcoholic liquors that derives more than fifty percent
(50%) of its gross annual revenue from the sale of prepared food to sell alcoholic liquors to be
consumed on the licensed premises on Sundays between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) P.M. and
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
C. It is lawful for a nonrestaurant business that has as an adjunct the sale of prepared food and has a
license to sell alcoholic liquors, provided the sale of such food generates seventy percent (70%) of
gross revenues on weekdays. Such business shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages to be
consumed on the licensed premises on Sunday between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) P.M. and
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
D. It is lawful for a retail establishment determined to be a "package liquor store" that holds the proper
license to sell package liquor in its original package to the general public on Sundays between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-12: LOCATION:
A. Prohibited Locations:
1. It is unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor and no license shall be issued
for any premises, the location of which is along the frontage of any street or streets, seventy five
percent (75%) of the frontage feet of which, for a distance of one hundred feet (100') in each
direction of such premises, is used strictly for residential purposes unless written consent of
such owner or owners of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the total frontage feet used for residential
purposes within such distance shall first have been obtained by the applicant, and such consent
shall be filed with the application for a license. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
2. No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet
(100') of any church, school, hospital, nursing home or home for the aged or indigent persons;
provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly
organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquor
is not the principal business carried on in the place of business.
B. Change Of Location: A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on
the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only upon
the written permit to make such change issued by the mayor. No change in location shall be
permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
under the laws of this state and the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-13: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Sanitary Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such
liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 101/460
compliance with the ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for storage of or sale of
food for human consumption.
B. Lighting: All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously
lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial light so that all parts of the interior of the
premises shall be clearly visible. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-14: MINORS:
A. Providing Alcohol To Minors: It is unlawful for an employee to attend any bar and draw, pour, mix, or
serve any alcoholic liquors to any person less than twenty one (21) years of age in any licensed
premises.
B. Purchase, Acceptance, Possession Or Consumption By Minors:
1. Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age
shall not purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his possession.
2. Alcoholic liquor shall not be consumed by any person less than twenty one (21) years of age.
C. Identification:
1. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall, for the purpose of buying, accepting or
receiving alcoholic liquor, represent that he is twenty one (21) years of age or over.
2. If a licensee or his agents and/or employees believe or have reason to believe that the sale or
delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the nonage of the prospective recipient,
they shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive
identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official
duties. No delivery shall be made unless it is placed in the hands of a person of an age to legally
purchase the delivered alcoholic liquor.
3. No person shall transfer, alter or deface any such identification card; use the identification card
of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by
means of false information.
D. Employment:
1. It is unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to draw, pour, mix or serve any
alcoholic liquor as an employee. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
2. No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall sell, serve or otherwise purvey any alcoholic
liquors in or upon any premises for which a license to sell alcoholic liquors is issued by the city.
Any such person who fails to comply with this subsection D2 shall be subject to a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation, and each day such violation occurs shall
be considered a separate violation.
3. Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity found to be in violation of employing or
otherwise allowing any person under the age of twenty one (21) to sell, serve or otherwise
purvey any alcoholic liquors in or upon the premises within the city shall be subject to a fine as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 102/460
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code and, in addition, may have the city license to sell alcoholic
liquors suspended for a period of ten (10) days; for a second or subsequent violation of this
subsection D3, the city license to sell alcoholic liquor may be revoked. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012;
amd. 2013 Code)
E. Violation: No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor in
violation of this section.
F. Exemptions: The possession and dispensing or consumption of alcoholic liquor by anyone less than
twenty one (21) years of age in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the
consumption by such person under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent of
such person in the privacy of a home is not prohibited by this section. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-15: SALES, PROVIDING TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
A. No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such
licensee, shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years or to any intoxicated person, except as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16.1.
(Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
B. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such
alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty one (21) years except in the
performance of religious ceremony or service. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-16: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
No person licensed to keep a place where alcoholic liquors are sold or given away shall suffer any
disorder, drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful games or riotous or disorderly conduct
whatsoever in any premises by him kept or occupied for such purposes. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-17: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses issued by him. (Ord. 3042,
4-9-2012)
4-2-18: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF
LICENSE:
The local liquor control commissioner may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of
the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided. He may revoke or suspend any retail
liquor dealer's license for any violation of any provision of this chapter, or for any violation of any state
law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 103/460
4-2-19: EXISTING LICENSES:
All alcoholic liquor licenses heretofore issued shall continue in effect for the term for which issued,
provided the holders of such licenses comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3042, 4-9-2012)
4-2-20: PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIAL PROHIBITED:
A. The use of signage, advertising, photographs, print materials or electronic transmissions containing
reference directly or indirectly to pornographic or sexual connotations including, but not limited to,
use of common vernacular by the holder of a liquor license issued by the city is prohibited.
B. Violations of this section shall be cause for revocation of the liquor license of the licensee engaged
in such prohibited activity. (Ord. 3078, 1-28-2013)
Chapter 3
AMUSEMENTS; GAMBLING
ARTICLE A. AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
4-3A-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other
amusements in the city, whether otherwise dealt with or not. (1977 Code § 5.12.010)
4-3A-2: CARNIVALS AND SHOWS:
A. License Required: It is unlawful to conduct any carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement to be
given on any public street or sidewalk or in any public place or in any other place where the main
accommodation for the public or the audience will necessarily be in a public place without having
first secured a license therefor. (1977 Code § 5.12.020)
B. Application For License; Issuance: Applications for such licenses shall be made to the city clerk and
shall comply with the general provisions of chapter 1 of this title. However, no such license shall be
granted except on order of the mayor and upon payment of a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(1977 Code § 5.12.020; amd. 2013 Code)
4-3A-3: OBSCENE, LEWD PERFORMANCES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to participate as a performer, stagehand, producer, director, agent or ticket
seller in any show, production or performance within the city when, in such show, production or
performance, lewdness, lascivity or obscenity is an integral part thereof. For the purposes of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 104/460
section, "lewdness, lascivity and obscenity" shall be defined as that conduct, whether by word or
deed, that is vulgar in nature, immoral in purpose, or arouses, stimulates or gratifies the sexual
appetite. (1977 Code § 5.12.040)
ARTICLE B. COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT AND
GAMBLING DEVICES
4-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug,
token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment, or
amusement, whether or not registering a score. The term includes such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, electronic games, skill ball, mechanical grab-em machines, and all games,
operations, or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be known.
GAMBLING DEVICE: Every clock, tape machine, slot machine, or other machine or device for the
reception of money, or token of value, on chance or upon the action of which money or other valuable
thing is staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost, or upon the result of the action and operation of which, or a
combination of the action of the player and such machine, money or other valuable thing is staked,
hazarded, bet, won or lost; or any machine or device which is set into play or operation by the
payment of money or other valuable thing to the keeper of such machine or device, or by the insertion
into such machine or device of money or other valuable thing, and upon the result of the operation of
such machine, or the result of the combination of the action of such machine and the action of the
person playing the same, prizes or rewards consisting of money, merchandise or other valuable
things, are awarded to the person playing such machine, or held out to be awarded to such person,
depending upon the result of such operation. The fact that in the operation of any such machine or
device, amusement in the form of games or otherwise, shall be afforded to the person playing such
machine or device, or that any article or merchandise is vended by such machine or device, shall not
take such machine or device out of the class of a "gambling device" if the character and operation of
such machine or device otherwise places it within the foregoing definition of "gambling device". (1977
Code § 9.10.010; amd. 2013 Code)
4-3B-2: AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: No person, firm or corporation shall set up for operation, operate or distribute for
the purpose of operation, within the corporate limits of the city, or shall keep or maintain, or permit
to be kept and maintained, for play or operation, within any room in any tavern, shed, booth,
building or enclosure, or any part thereof, occupied or tenanted by such person, firm, or
corporation, within the corporate limits of the city, any coin operated amusement device without
having a license in full force and effect to do so as provided in this section. (1977 Code § 9.10.030;
amd. 2013 Code)
B. Application For License: Any person, firm or corporation desiring a license to operate, or exhibit for
operation or play, a coin operated amusement device within the corporate limits of the city shall
make application in writing therefor to the city clerk, which application shall contain the name or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 105/460
names and address or addresses of the applicant or applicants, the number of the devices and the
type or types thereof for which the license is desired. The applicant or applicants shall deposit with
the application, in cash, the license fee provided in subsection C of this section. (1977 Code
§ 9.10.040; amd. 2013 Code)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for said coin operated amusement devices shall be in the
amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each device. (1977 Code § 9.10.050; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Issuance Or Denial Of License: If the application is in conformity with the provisions of this section
and if it appears from such application that the device or devices for which said application is made
are coin operated amusement devices, as defined in section 4-3B-1 of this article, the mayor shall
grant such application, and thereupon, the mayor and the city clerk shall issue to such applicant or
applicants a license for the public operation of each of such devices, which license shall describe
the coin operated amusement device for which, if is granted, shall contain the name of the licensee
or licensees, and shall specify the expiration date of such license. In the event that no license or
licenses are granted by the mayor upon such application, the deposit of the license fee
accompanying said application shall forthwith be returned to the applicant or applicants. (1977
Code § 9.10.040; amd. 2013 Code)
E. Attachment Of License To Device: The license issued for each coin operated amusement device
shall be, at all times, affixed to the device for which it was issued in a plainly visible and exposed
place thereon, and failure of the licensee or keeper of such device to so affix and keep affixed such
license, at any time, shall constitute a violation of this section. (1977 Code § 9.10.060; amd. 2013
Code)
F. Expiration Of License: All such licenses shall expire on December 31 next following the date of
issuance thereof. No license other than an annual license shall be issued. (1977 Code § 9.10.050)
G. Revocation Of License: Any license issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the mayor
for good cause. (1977 Code § 9.10.070; amd. 2013 Code)
4-3B-3: GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
A. Gambling Devices: Except for devices licensed by the state in the video gaming act and those used
in the administration of the Illinois lottery system, no gambling device shall be kept, maintained or
operated within the corporate limits of the city. (1977 Code § 9.10.020; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Gambling: No keeper or keepers of any coin operated amusement device in any room, business or
other place occupied or tenanted by such keeper or keepers within the corporate limits of the city
shall permit or suffer any person or persons to wager, bet or hazard any money or other valuable
thing upon the result of the action of such coin operated amusement device or the result of the
combination of the action of such device and the player or players, within such room, business or
other place. (1977 Code § 9.10.080; amd. 2013 Code)
4-3B-4: INSPECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 106/460
The police officers of the city are directed to inspect, periodically, each licensed coin operated
amusement device for the purpose of determining if said device is operated and used in violation of
the provisions of this article. (1977 Code § 9.10.090; amd. 2013 Code)
ARTICLE C. GAMBLING AND VIDEO GAMING
4-3C-1: GAMBLING ACTS PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Gambling: No person shall play for money, or other valuable thing or things, at any game with
cards, dice, checks, billiards, or any other article, instrument or machine whatsoever, which may be
used for the purpose of playing a game of chance, betting or winning or losing money or any other
thing or article of value or shall bet on any other game of any type involving gambling unless such
gambling is allowed pursuant to the laws or the statutes of Illinois and any and all licenses required
are obtained for such game of chance.
B. Possession Of Unlawful Gaming Device: No person shall possess any gambling device or
paraphernalia, as defined under and prohibited under the laws or the statutes of Illinois, with the
intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose, and any such device or paraphernalia kept with
such intent may be confiscated by the city police department.
C. Gambling Establishment: No person shall keep a common gaming house; or in any building, yard,
garden or booth, by him or his agent used and occupied, procure or permit any person or persons
to frequent or come together to play for money or other valuable thing at any game; or keep or
suffer to be kept any tables or other apparatus for the purpose or intent of playing at any game or
sport for money or any other valuable thing; or knowingly rent any such place for such purposes or
any such purposes, except those establishments or acts which are authorized as legal under the
laws and statutes of Illinois.
D. Gambling Advertisements: It is unlawful to advertise any illegal gambling house or illegal gambling
resort, as defined under and prohibited under the laws or the statutes of Illinois, in any street, alley
or public place within the city.
E. Authorized Gambling: Nothing in this section shall prohibit authorized, legal wagering, or any acts
that are allowed by the laws or the statutes of Illinois. (Ord. 3051, 6-11-2012)
4-3C-2: LICENSING REGULATIONS:
A. General Licensing: Gambling of any type may be allowed within the city so long as the same is
legal within the state of Illinois and as long as the operator of said gambling or games of chance or
any machinery associated therewith has obtained any and all licenses or permits as issued by the
state of Illinois. (Ord. 3051, 6-11-2012)
B. Video Gaming Licensing: Each terminal operator as defined by the video gaming act shall obtain a
license for each gaming terminal through the city of Marion. The licensing requirements shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 107/460
the same as through the state of Illinois video gaming act. The holder of each terminal license shall
pay an initial licensing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per gaming terminal to the city of
Marion and shall be renewed annually at a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per terminal to the
city of Marion. Each such license shall terminate as of January 31 of the next year following its
issuance. (Ord. 3146, 12-23-2013)
4-3C-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 3051, 6-11-2012; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 4
RAFFLES
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined in this section have the meanings given them:
ENABLING ACT: Illinois public act 81-1365, entitled "an act to provide for licensing and regulating
certain games of chance and amending certain acts herein named", 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes
15/0.01 et seq.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for
prizes, license fees as provided herein, and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result
of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT, CHARITABLE, EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, FRATERNAL, VETERANS AND LABOR
(All Referring To Organizations And/Or Institutions Established For Such Purposes): Shall have the
same meanings as are given to such terms pursuant to section 2(b) of the enabling act.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2, conducted by an
organization licensed under the terms of this chapter, in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and
differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or
more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance.
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on
an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected
with the lottery; except, that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a
publicly exhibited sporting contest. (Ord. 1497, 3-21-1994, eff. 4-15-1994)
4-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; QUALIFICATIONS:
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances within the city without first having
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 108/460
obtained a license therefor as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that such a license
hereunder may be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, business, labor, fraternal, educational
or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in
existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a
license and which have had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in
carrying out their objectives. (Ord. 1497, 3-21-1994, eff. 4-15-1994; amd. 2013 Code)
4-4-3: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
Notwithstanding any contrary provision herein contained, the following are ineligible for any license
under this chapter:
A. Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
B. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter.
C. Any person who is not of good moral character.
D. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this section has a
proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed.
E. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this section is an officer,
director, or employee, whether compensated or not.
F. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this section is to participate
in the management or operation of a "raffle" as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1497, 3-21-1994, eff.
4-15-1994)
4-4-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FILING FEE:
A. Any organization applying for a raffle license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall file a
written application therefor in the office of the city clerk. Such application shall be in writing and
shall contain the following information:
1. The area or areas within the licensing authority in which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
2. The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued shall not exceed one year
from the date the license is issued; and
3. The time of determination of winning chances; and
4. The location or locations at which winning chances will be determined; and
5. A sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the prospective licensed
organization signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 109/460
B. Each application for a raffle license filed pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a filing
fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) to be paid at the time of filing. (Ord. 1497, 3-21-1994, eff.
4-15-1994)
C. Any such application for a raffle license filed pursuant hereto shall be acted upon by the mayor
within thirty (30) days from the date on which it is filed. (Ord. 1497, 3-21-1994, eff. 4-15-1994; amd.
2013 Code)
4-4-5: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The following limitations shall apply in respect to the conduct of raffles within the city:
A. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the
organization permitted to conduct that game.
B. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the
management or operation of the raffle.
C. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation
of the raffle.
D. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle
only from an organization which is also licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 1497, 3-21-1994, eff. 4-
15-1994)
E. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or
chances only with the permission of a parent or guardian. A person under the age of eighteen (18)
years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian.
F. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license, and winning
chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license. (Ord. 1497, 3-21-
1994, eff. 4-15-1994; amd. 2013 Code)
4-4-6: RAFFLES MANAGER:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles by a licensed organization within the city shall be under the
supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a
fidelity bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in favor of the organization conditioned
upon the honesty of such manager in the performance of his duties. The terms of the bond shall
provide that notice shall be given in writing to the city by filing the same with the office of the city clerk
not less than thirty (30) days prior to the cancellation of such bond. The mayor may waive this bond;
provided, that a waiver provision as to such bond shall be contained in the license issued to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 110/460
applicant organization pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, and notwithstanding any contrary
provision contained in this section, a license containing such bond waiver provisions shall be granted
only by the unanimous vote of the officers of the licensed organization. (Ord. 1497, 3-21-1994, eff. 4-
15-1994; amd. 2013 Code)
4-4-7: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. Records Kept:
1. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning
chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or
occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description
of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and the recipient. The
distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of
payment.
2. Each organization conducting raffles pursuant to this chapter shall have separate records of
each raffle conducted pursuant hereto. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses
and net proceeds from the operation of raffles on behalf of such organization shall not be the
same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
3. Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of
the organization, including bingo gross receipts if bingo games are also conducted by the same
nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the
state of Illinois, and placed in a separate account.
B. Report Required: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly after the
conclusion of each raffle to its membership and to the city its gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
C. Preservation Of Records: Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3) years,
and organizations shall make available their records relating to the operation of raffles for public
inspection at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 1497, 3-21-1994, eff. 4-15-1994)
4-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 1497, 3-21-1994, eff. 4-15-1994; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 5
CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
4-5-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 111/460
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor, calling at
residences in the city, without the previous consent of the occupant when that canvasser or solicitor is
engaging in any commercial enterprise such as soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions, or business of
any kind, without having first registered in the office of the city clerk. Pursuant to section 4-5-9 of this
chapter, religious, charitable, political, and other noncommercial canvassers and solicitors shall not be
subject to this requirement when undertaking noncommercial canvassing or solicitation. (2013 Code)
4-5-2: REGISTRATION FEE:
Each registrant shall pay to the city clerk a registration fee of three dollars ($3.00) for each twenty four
(24) hour period such registrant will be selling or soliciting, subject to its acceptance or rejection as
provided in this chapter; provided, that such registration fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for each
registrant who intends to sell or solicit for thirty (30) days rather than three dollars ($3.00) per day as
provided in this section; and provided further, that no farmer selling produce grown by him shall be
required to pay such registration fee. (1977 Code § 5.24.020)
4-5-3: CONTENTS OF REGISTRATION:
The registrant shall give his complete identification, his signature, the name of his or her employer, the
nature of the products or services in which he or she is interested, the names of the manufacturers of
such products or of the organization which he or she is representing, and the proposed method of
operation in the city. The form of registration shall be supplied by the office of the city clerk. (2013
Code)
4-5-4: APPROVAL OF REGISTRATION; DURATION:
Upon submittal of a completed application, the city clerk shall issue a certificate of registration which
shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days. (2013 Code)
4-5-5: POSSESSION OF CERTIFICATE; FORM:
Each person shall at all times, while engaged in the business of soliciting or canvassing in the city,
carry and display (so as to be easily seen by any person) upon his or her person the registration
certificate, and the same shall further be presented for additional review, by such registrant whenever
he or she is required to do so by any city officer or employee, police officer or by any person solicited.
The solicitor identification certificate shall be in substantially the following form:
(Front)
CITY OF MARION, ILLINOIS
SOLICITOR IDENTIFICATION
Name
Company
Expires
This is not an enforcement of Product.
No.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 112/460
City of Marion
(Back)
This registration is valid for 30 days from issuance. Card must be displayed (so as to be easily seen
by any person) and presented to any property owner, city officer or employee, or police officer. Card
may be revoked upon violation of any city ordinance or state law or regulation. Hours of solicitation
limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Canvassing or soliciting on Sundays and
local, state and national holidays is prohibited.
(2013 Code)
4-5-6: REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION:
Any registration may be revoked by the city clerk, mayor or city police department because of any
violation by the registrant of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the city, or of state or federal law,
or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications or character required by this
chapter for the original registration. (2013 Code)
4-5-7: DAYS AND HOURS:
No one shall act as a canvasser or solicitor or shall sell at residences without the previous consent of
the occupant for the purpose of soliciting or canvassing except between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. Canvassing or soliciting on
Sundays and local, state and national holidays is prohibited. (2013 Code)
4-5-8: SIGNS REGULATING SOLICITING; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. Residents and other persons within the city sha1l be entitled to post a "No Solicitors", "No
Solicitation", or other similar sign on the property which they own or occupy, where it is reasonably
visible to individuals who may approach the house, apartment, building or other edifice near or on
which the sign is posted, in order to notify any such individual that no solicitation, canvassing or
peddling of any type is desired by the occupant without the occupant's prior approval.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether engaging in commercial or noncommercial canvassing,
solicitation or other similar enterprise, to, when entering upon a premises which has a reasonably
visible "No Solicitors" or other such similar sign, continue with the attempted canvassing or
solicitation. Upon sight of such sign, the canvasser or solicitor must leave the premises. If such
sign is reasonably visible, the canvasser or solicitor shall be presumed to have seen the sign and
shall be in violation of this chapter if he or she attempts his or her canvassing or solicitation. (2013
Code)
4-5-9: LEAVING MATERIALS; ACCESS TO PROPERTY:
A. No person shall leave or deposit materials upon private property without the consent of the property
owner in such a fashion so as to permit the materials to become waste, debris or refuse.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 113/460
B. In the case of a single-family dwelling, canvassers, solicitors and peddlers shall only enter any
property from the front yard and, unless invited by the resident of the premises, shall only knock,
ring or otherwise attempt to contact the residents in the building at the front or main door to the
dwelling.
C. For purposes of soliciting at multiple-family dwelling units, canvassers, solicitors and peddlers shall
only enter any property from the front entrance to the dwelling unit complex and, unless invited by
the specific resident of a specific unit, shall only knock, ring or otherwise attempt to contact the
residents in the building at the front or main door of each such unit. (2013 Code)
4-5-10: EXEMPTIONS AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Sections 4-5-1 through 4-5-6 of this chapter shall not apply to charitable, religious or political
canvassers or solicitors, or any other noncommercial canvassers or solicitors. Sections 4-5-7, 4-5-8
and 4-5-9 of this chapter shall apply to all individuals undertaking any commercial or noncommercial
canvassing or solicitation; with the exception, that no part of this chapter shall apply to officers or
employees of the city, county, state or federal governments, or any subdivision thereof, when on
official business. (2013 Code)
4-5-11: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (2013 Code)
Chapter 6
JUNKYARDS
4-6-1: DEFINITION:
A "junkyard", within the meaning of this chapter, is any place or places within the corporate limits of
the city where are bought, sold or exchanged, or bartered or stored, in the exercise of the business of
a junk dealer, the following articles and materials, or either or any of them: used iron, used brass, used
copper, used wire, old machinery, old tools, old stoves, old sheet material, used engines, used engine
parts, used motors, used motor parts, old pumps, old pump parts, old rubber, old rubber goods, used
tires, used tubes, rags, reclaimed paper, old rope, used tin, old slush, used lead, empty bottles, broken
glass, dismantled or partially dismantled used automotive vehicles, or other junk. (1977 Code
§ 5.20.010)
4-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall exercise, carry on, or engage in the business of keeping a junkyard within the city
without having first obtained a license from the city so to do. (1977 Code § 5.20.020)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 114/460
4-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person or persons desiring such license shall file with the city clerk an application therefor in
writing, setting forth the location of the building or buildings and premises to be occupied by such
junkyard and the length of time during which said license is desired. (1977 Code § 5.20.040)
4-6-4: LICENSE FEE; TERM OF LICENSE:
To obtain a license as required by this chapter, the person or persons, firm or corporation applying
therefor shall pay to the city clerk the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00) per year, and no license shall be
issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter for any period less than three (3) months at that rate.
(1977 Code § 5.20.030)
4-6-5: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Any and all licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall state that such license is solely
for the purpose of conducting and maintaining a junkyard, the time for which it is granted, the house or
houses or premises intended to be occupied, that such license shall be used and the privileges
granted thereunder exercised at such place only and that such license shall not be transferable or
assignable without the consent of the city council. Such license shall further provide that it is issued
subject to all provisions of this chapter and that the holder or holders thereof, by the acceptance of
such license, expressly agree to all the terms and conditions thereof, and to the terms and provisions
of this chapter and all amendments hereto. (1977 Code § 5.20.050)
4-6-6: PURCHASES FROM MINORS:
No person or persons, firm or corporation conducting and maintaining a junkyard, pursuant to the
terms of this chapter, shall purchase or receive from any person sixteen (16) years of age or younger
any article whatsoever, without the written consent of the parents or guardian of such minor. (1977
Code § 5.20.060; amd. 2013 Code)
4-6-7: RESALE TIME LIMIT:
No keeper of a junkyard within the corporate limits of the city and under this chapter shall expose for
sale or sell any article or articles within five (5) days of the time the same have been purchased, or
until the same have been upon the premises where the same are offered or exposed for sale, or sold,
at least five (5) days. (1977 Code § 5.20.070)
4-6-8: RECORDS REQUIRED:
The keeper or keepers of a junkyard under the provisions of this chapter shall provide and keep a
book in which shall be clearly written the time of every purchase and a description of the article
purchased, the name and residence of the person from whom the article was purchased, and the day
and hour of such purchase. (1977 Code § 5.20.080)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 115/460
4-6-9: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to regularly inspect all junkyards within the city and
all articles and things kept therein and to report to the owner or keeper of the same and to the city
council any and all violations therein of the ordinances of the city and of the laws of the state of Illinois,
and to also report any unsanitary or unhealthful or dangerous condition therein. (1977 Code
§ 5.20.090; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 7
OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS
4-7-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in or carry on the business of street
advertising by means of billboards, signboards, and signs, or to place, erect, or maintain any billboard,
signboard, or sign, upon any vacant property or upon any building within the corporate limits of the city
without first having obtained a license so to do. (1977 Code § 5.16.010)
4-7-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE, TERM AND ISSUANCE:
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in such business or occupation within the city shall
make application to the city clerk stating therein his or its name; or if a firm, the name of the partners
thereof, the location of their place of business, the nature of the license desired, and the name of his
or its agent, if any, residing in the city. Such person, firm, or corporation making such application shall
pay the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) per year in advance to the city clerk as a license fee, and no
such license shall be granted for a less time than one year. Upon such application being made and the
payment of the license fee as aforesaid, the mayor shall issue the license to the applicant therefor.
(1977 Code § 5.16.020)
4-7-3: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
Any person, firm or corporation owning, maintaining or having in his or her control any billboard or sign
upon any vacant lot or building within the city shall keep the same and the immediate premises
surrounding the same free of loose paper or other combustible refuse, and shall keep such billboard
or sign in a stable and safe condition so as not to endanger any person or property upon any public
sidewalk, street or alley within the city. (1977 Code § 5.16.030)
4-7-4: ADVERTISING IN PUBLIC WAYS RESTRICTED:
No person, firm or corporation, excepting such as has first obtained a license under the provisions of
this chapter, shall post or paste within the city any bill, sign or placard advertising any circus, tent
show, vaudeville tent show, medicine show, carnival or other itinerant tent or open air show when, in
doing such posting or pasting, the person doing the same or any materials or implements used by him
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 116/460
in such posting or pasting shall stand in, remain on or occupy any part of any public street, alley or
sidewalk within the city. (1977 Code § 5.16.040)
4-7-5: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (2013 Code)
Chapter 8
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
4-8-1: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
No individual, partnership or firm, for monetary compensation, shall, within the city, engage in the
practice of body massage, manipulation or rubdown for purposes other than therapeutic without first
having obtained a license from the state of Illinois department of professional regulation as a physical
therapist, without having filed satisfactory evidence thereof with the city clerk and in compliance with
the state massage licensing act of 20031. (1977 Code § 9.16.010; amd. 2013 Code)
4-8-2: PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
No individual, partnership or firm, for monetary compensation, shall, within the city, engage in the
practice of body massage, manipulation or rubdown for purposes of sexual gratification of another.
(1977 Code § 9.16.020)
4-8-3: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (2013 Code)
Chapter 9
TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
4-9-1: SCOPE:
This chapter shall apply to all territory embraced within the limits of the city. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 117/460
BODY PIERCER: One who punctures the skin and inserts a ring, hoop, stud or other object.
CITY: The city of Marion, Illinois.
CONSUMER: Any member of the public who is provided access to a tattoo or body piercing facility in
exchange for a fee or other compensation, or any individual who, in exchange for a fee or other
compensation, is afforded use of a tattoo or body piercing facility as a condition or benefit of
membership or access.
FEE: The amount charged to any individual for tattooing or body piercing.
INSPECTORS: All authorized agents of the city of Marion who have the authority to enter and make
reasonable inspections of any tattoo or body piercing parlor during their regular hours of business for
the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter. Inspectors may include not only employees
of city, but such other individuals and personnel of either public or private agencies which may, from
time to time, be engaged by the city for the purpose of this chapter.
OTHER COMPENSATION: The payment or exchange of goods, services, or anything of value for use
of the tattoo or body piercing parlor.
PIERCE: To make a hole in order to insert or allow the insertion of any ring, hoop, stud or other object
for ornamentation of the body.
TATTOO: A permanent design on the skin made by puncturing the skin and inserting indelible colors.
TATTOO FACILITY OR BODY PIERCING FACILITY: Any place where the act of tattooing or body
piercing is performed regardless of whether a fee is involved.
TATTOOER: One who punctures the skin and inserts indelible colors to form a tattoo.
TATTOOING: The act of puncturing the skin and inserting indelible colors to form a permanent design.
(Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002; amd. 2013 Code)
4-9-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit And Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo or body pierce
persons within the city who does not possess a valid permit issued by the city. Only a person who
complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit.
B. Application For Permit: Any person desiring to tattoo or body pierce shall make written application
for a permit on the form provided by the city clerk at least one week prior to the proposed date of
opening, or in the event of persons currently engaged in such activities, within one week from the
effective date hereof, on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be completed and
signed by the owner or his or her representative.
C. Permit Fee: The annual fee for a tattoo or body piercing permit shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00). Such fee shall be payable upon receipt of an invoice issued by the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 118/460
D. Inspections; Issuance Of Permit: Upon receipt of such application, the city shall inspect the
establishment named in the application prior to the date of opening, and the city shall determine if
the establishment is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. When an inspection reveals
that the provisions of this chapter have been met, a permit shall be issued.
E. Term Of Permit: The permit is valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of issuance.
F. Posting Permit: The permit shall be prominently posted in public view.
G. Suspension Of Permit:
1. Grounds: Permits may be suspended temporarily by the city for failure of the holder to comply
with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002)
2. Notice Of Suspension; Appeal: Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed to comply with
any notice issued under the provision of subsection 4-9-12E of this chapter, the permit holder or
operator shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, suspended and
that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if, within seventy two (72) hours, a written
request for a hearing is filed with the city by the permit holder. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002; amd. Ord.
2127, 2-12-2007)
3. Summary Suspension; Appeal: Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, whenever
the city finds unsanitary or other conditions in the tattoo operation which, in its judgment,
constitute a substantial immediate hazard to the public health, it may, without warning, notice or
hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such condition, specifying
the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time period within which such action shall be
taken; and if deemed necessary, such other shall state that the permit is suspended at the time
of inspection. Tattoo service operations are to be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom
such an order is issued shall comply therewith but, upon written petition, filed not more than
seventy two (72) hours after the discontinuance order, may request a hearing for abatement of
the order. The city shall provide a hearing not later than five (5) days from the filing of said
petition.
4. Reinstatement Of Suspended Permit: Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at
any time, make application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the permit.
Within five (5) days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the
applicant that, in his opinion, the conditions causing suspension of the permit have been
corrected, the city shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, the permit shall be reinstated.
H. Revocation Of Permit; Appeal: For serious and/or repeated violations of any of the requirements of
this chapter, or for the interference with the city or its designees in the performance of its duties,
the permit may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided. Prior
to such hearing, the city shall notify the permit holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the
permit is subject to revocation, and advising that the permit shall be permanently revoked at the
end of five (5) days following service of such notice unless, within such five (5) day period, a
written petition for a hearing is filed with the city. A hearing shall be provided no later than five (5)
days from the filing of said petition. A permit may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or
a hearing relative thereto. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 119/460
4-9-4: SANITARY FACILITIES:
A. Potable Water: The potable water supply must be constructed and operated in accordance with the
law.
B. Sewage Disposal: All water carried waste shall be disposed of by discharging into a sewerage
system operated and maintained under permit of the Illinois environmental protection agency
(IEPA) or a private sewage system constructed in accordance with the Illinois private sewage
disposal licensing act and code.
C. Solid Waste Disposal:
1. Containers:
a. All solid waste shall be kept in durable containers that do not leak or absorb liquids. Infectious
waste biohazard bags shall be used to line containers used for materials that have come into
contact with body fluids.
b. Containers shall be stored inside the establishment and shall be provided with tightfitting lids
and kept covered when not in use.
2. Disposal: All garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of at least once a week to an IEPA
regulated landfill or incinerator.
D. Sharps: Used needles, lancets and other sharp items must be placed in puncture resistant
containers located in the use area. The puncture resistant containers shall be disposed of by a
licensed IEPA medical waste disposal company. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002)
4-9-5: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. All parts of the premises of a tattoo or body piercing facility shall be kept in a clean, sanitary and
orderly condition at all times.
B. There shall be a hand washing facility located within the tattooing or body piercing area. This hand
washing facility shall be provided with hot and cold running water and be separate from any public
restroom. A supply of bactericidal hand cleansing soap or detergent must be available. A supply of
disposable sanitary towels or a heated air hand drying device must be provided at the hand wash
sink. If disposable towels are used, easily cleanable waste receptacles must be conveniently
located near the hand washing facility. Hand wash sinks shall be accessible to employees at all
times. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002)
4-9-6: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Needles, lancets, other sharp objects, pens, stencils, ink caps and their contents shall be disposed
of after puncturing the skin and/or contact with body fluids and prior to the tattooer's or body
piercer's removal of gloves.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 120/460
B. All other equipment used in the application of the tattoo shall be washed, rinsed, sterilized and air
dried after each use. The method of sterilization shall be in a manner described as follows: (Ord.
1840, 3-25-2002)
1. a. Autoclave at two hundred seventy degrees Fahrenheit (270°F) under twenty (20) pounds of
pressure for thirty (30) minutes.
b. Needles, tubes and bars shall remain in their sterilization packages until used.
c. The above mentioned method is approved by the city for proper sterilization of tattooing or
body piercing equipment.
2. Autoclave shall be spore tested once a month and a written record maintained of the date of
such testing. (Ord. 1845, 4-15-2002)
C. Solder used as a part of the equipment must be lead free.
D. All equipment and preparation materials used in the application of the tattoo or body piercing shall
be stored in such a manner as to prevent accidental contaminations.
E. All tables or counters shall be constructed of a nonabsorbent, smooth, easily cleanable, durable
material which is capable of being sanitized.
F. Clean, dry and disposable sanitary toweling shall be provided and used for no other purpose than
with the tattooing process. Towels and sheets shall be discarded or cleaned after each use. (No
repeat use between clients.)
G. Floors, walls and ceilings shall be constructed of a smooth, easily cleanable, durable material.
Concrete or pumice blocks used for interior wall construction shall be finished and sealed to
provide an easily cleanable surface.
H. Kneeling pads, other pads, and contact surfaces such as, but not limited to, machine heads and
clipboards, shall be cleaned and sanitized after each use. Such contact surfaces shall be sanitized
by rinsing, spraying, or swabbing with a chemical sanitizing solution that will provide the equivalent
bactericidal effect of a solution containing at least one hundred (100) parts per million of available
chlorine as a hypochlorite and having a temperature of at least seventy five degrees Fahrenheit
(75°F).
I. A test kit or other device that accurately measures the parts per million concentration of the
sanitizing solution shall be available and used after each mixing of a new batch. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-
2002)
4-9-7: BODY FLUID PRECAUTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 121/460
A. Hands shall be properly washed before and after contact with clients. Hands must be washed
before and after gloves are used. If hands come in contact with blood, body fluids or human tissue,
they must be immediately washed with bactericidal soap and water.
B. Surgical gloves must be worn when contact with blood, body fluids, tissue or contaminated surfaces
is anticipated.
C. Gowns and/or aprons must be worn when providing services for clients if clothing is likely to be
soiled with blood or body fluids.
D. Protective eyewear should be worn when services are being provided for the customer. Employees
of the tattooer or body piercer are required to wear protective eyewear while tattooing or body
piercing. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002)
4-9-8: PREPARATION OF SKIN AND AFTER CARE:
A. All materials used in the application of the tattoo are to be provided in sufficient quantities as to
preclude the need for replenishment during the actual tattooing. In the event that supplies do run
out during the tattooing, the tattooer is to either have an assistant, after proper hand washing,
deliver the needed items, or the tattooer must remove his gloves, properly wash his hands,
replenish supplies, properly wash his hands and put on new, unused surgical grade gloves.
B. The skin surface to be tattooed shall be shaved clean by a razor.
C. The skin surface to be tattooed shall be thoroughly washed for at least one minute with a
bactericidal soap.
D. During the tattooing, any oils, creams, gels, stencils, etc., used must be dispensed in a sanitary
manner. These items must be discarded after each tattoo.
E. Following the application of the tattoo, the area of the skin having the tattoo shall be properly
covered.
F. Before leaving the tattoo parlor or facility, each client shall receive printed tattoo care instructions
approved by the city. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002)
4-9-9: DISEASES REPORTED:
All communicable diseases resulting from a tattoo or body piercing shall be reported to the city by the
facility operator and the person having received the tattoo or body piercing. This shall be done
immediately upon detection of a disease or complication. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 122/460
4-9-10: MINORS:
A. The tattooing of any person under the age of twenty one (21) by any person, other than a person
licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches, is prohibited.
B. No person shall pierce the body of a person under eighteen (18) years of age without the presence
of a parent or legal guardian, whose relation to the person under eighteen (18) years of age shall
be documented, and who gives written consent.
C. The information in subsections A and B of this section is to be posted next to the facility permits.
Failure to do so may result in suspension of the permit. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002)
4-9-11: RECORDS KEPT:
A file with the date of the procedure, tattooer's or body piercer's name, type of tattoo or body piercing,
and client's name, age, address and phone number shall be kept for a minimum of three (3) years and
made available for the city upon inspection of the facility. The client's age is to be documented by a
picture ID, which includes the client's date of birth. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002)
4-9-12: INSPECTIONS:
A. Inspections: Each establishment or facility in which tattooing or body piercing is conducted within
the city shall be inspected at least quarterly. As many additional inspections or reinspections as are
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter shall be made.
B. Report Required: The inspector shall prepare a written report of said inspection. Such report shall
be signed by the inspector and by the tattoo or body piercing facility owner or other designated
representative. A copy of such inspection report shall be left with the owner or manager.
C. Right Of Entry: The city, or its designee after proper identification, shall be permitted to inspect, at
any reasonable time, any tattooing or body piercing facility within the city, or its police jurisdiction,
for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter. They shall be permitted to examine
records of the tattooer or body piercer to obtain information pertaining to supplies purchased,
received or used in the act of tattooing or body piercing and persons employed by the tattooer or
body piercer.
D. Record And Copy Of Inspections: Whenever an inspection of a tattooing or body piercing facility is
made, a record of findings will be made.
E. Notice Of Violation: Whenever it is discovered by an inspection of a tattooing or body piercing
facility that any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated, the permit holder or operator
will be notified of such violations by means of an inspection report form or written notice. In such
notifications, a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation found will
be noted. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 123/460
4-9-13: EXCLUSIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter may not be construed in any way to prohibit any injection, incision,
acupuncture or similar medical or dental procedure performed by a licensed healthcare professional or
other person authorized to perform that procedure, nor is anyone engaged solely in ear piercing
subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1840, 3-25-2002; amd. Ord. 1845, 4-15-2002)
4-9-14: PENALTIES:
A. Any person engaged in tattooing or body piercing without a permit as provided herein shall be
subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
B. Any person who has been issued a permit as provided in this chapter whose conduct warrants
suspension or revocation of the permit by the provisions of this chapter shall be, in addition to such
suspension or revocation, subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1840, 3-
25-2002; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 10
TAXICABS
4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
PERSON: When referring to the owner or operator of any taxicab, means and includes any person,
firm, association or corporation.
TAXICAB: Includes all motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire for which public patronage is
solicited, provided motor buses or other vehicles operating under the authority of the Illinois commerce
commission or the interstate commerce commission shall not be considered taxicabs within the
meaning hereof. (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011)
4-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated any taxicab in the city unless a
license has been issued by the city clerk for the operation of said taxicab and the license is in full
force and effect during the entire time the taxicab is in operation.
B. No license to operate a taxicab shall be issued except for a specific motor vehicle to be used for the
transportation of passengers for hire. (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011)
4-10-3: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 124/460
No license to operate a taxicab in the city shall be issued unless a certificate of insurance for liability
insurance on the specific vehicle in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) is in
full force and effect and has been filed with the city clerk; such insurance to be in force during the time
such vehicle is operated as a taxicab. (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011; amd. Ord. 2381, 9-26-2011)
4-10-4: LICENSE FEE:
An annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), payable to the city clerk, shall be charged at the time of
the application for a license for each taxicab. (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011; amd. Ord. 2381, 9-26-2011)
4-10-5: CLASSIFICATION OF AND REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSES:
A. Taxicab licenses issued prior to the effective date hereof are designated hereby as class I licenses.
Taxicab licenses issued after the effective date hereof are hereby designated class II licenses.
B. All class I taxicab licenses shall expire June 30, 2012. No class I license will be renewed.
C. The number of class II licenses authorized to be issued annually shall be sixteen (16), commencing
with the effective date hereof. No class II license shall be issued except for a specific motor vehicle
to be in service. (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011)
4-10-6: EXPIRATION AND TERM OF LICENSES:
Taxicab licenses issued after the effective date hereof shall expire June 30, 2012. Thereafter, class II
licenses shall be issued effective July 1 and expire the following June 30. (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011)
4-10-7: OPERATORS:
No person licensed to operate a taxicab in the city shall employ or allow anyone to operate such
taxicab who has been convicted of a felony or has been convicted of one or more violations of city
ordinances or laws of the state of Illinois relating to the operation of motor vehicles. (Ord. 2374, 10-24-
2011)
4-10-8: NUMBER OF PASSENGERS:
The number of passengers, exclusive of the driver, carried or conveyed in a taxicab licensed
hereunder shall not at any time exceed five (5). (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011)
4-10-9: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
The motor vehicles for which taxicab licenses are issued shall be maintained in a safe, clean,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 125/460
operable condition at all times. Noncompliance with this section may result in revocation of the taxicab
license. (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011)
4-10-10: REGISTER KEPT:
The city clerk shall keep a register showing the name and address of each person to whom a license
for a taxicab has been issued under this chapter, together with the license number, the description and
make of the taxicab, and the name and address of the insurance company provided in section 4-10-3
of this chapter. Such register shall be a matter of public record and open to inspection by the public at
reasonable times. (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011)
4-10-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The mayor may revoke the license or licenses to operate a taxicab issued pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter whenever it shall appear to his satisfaction:
A. That the facts stated in any application for license filed by a licensee are false in any material
averment.
B. That the licensee has violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
C. That the licensee permitted the operation of any motor vehicle licensed hereunder while such motor
vehicle was not in proper mechanical condition for safe and convenient operation, or while such
vehicle was not equipped and functioning as required by state statutes.
D. That the licensee permitted the operation of any motor vehicle licensed hereunder by any individual
prohibited by this chapter from engaging in such operation. (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011)
4-10-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2374, 8-22-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 11
CONTRACTORS
ARTICLE A. ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
4-11A-1: DEFINITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 126/460
The term "electrical contractor", as used in this article, means and is construed to include any person,
firm or corporation engaged in the business of installing or altering, by contract, equipment and
electrical appliances for the utilization of electricity supplied by light, heat or power, not including radio
apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and not including apparatus,
conductors and other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers, which
are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission for use in their operation as public
utilities; but "electrical contractor" does not include employees employed by such contractor to do or
supervise such work. (1977 Code § 15.16.030)
4-11A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. No person shall hereafter engage in the business of electrical installation or wiring in the city
without having obtained an electrical contractor's license, as provided in this article. Provided, that
the provisions of this article shall not apply to work done by any public service corporation
furnishing and supplying an electrician upon its own lines, apparatus and equipment. (1977 Code
§ 15.16.050)
B. Any electrical contractor who is registered as such licensed contractor in any other city or village in
this state shall not be required to pay a fee for being licensed in this city; but every person, firm or
corporation doing business in the city as an electrical contractor shall secure a license. Such
license shall be issued without charge to electrical contractors licensed as such under the
ordinances of another city or village in this state. (1977 Code § 15.16.060)
4-11A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every applicant desiring a license shall file with the city clerk a written application for such purpose
giving his name and place of business, and furnish any evidence required of him relative to the
responsibility, skill and ability of the applicant to carry on his business or trade under such license in
accordance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. (1977 Code § 15.16.070; amd. 2013
Code)
4-11A-4: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Every application for an electrical contractor license shall be accompanied by a bond of the applicant
with an approved surety company, to be approved by the city clerk, in the penal sum of three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00), conditioned that such license will protect and hold harmless the city against any
and all liability on account of any claims resulting from accident or damage occurring during the
execution of any wiring or work connected therewith, either by licensee or any person acting under his
direction; further conditioned upon said licensee conforming to all ordinances, conditions, and
requirements of the city relative to work to be done under such license; further conditioned upon the
proper restoration of streets, alleys, sidewalks, pavements, or subsurface improvements disturbed by
the licensee. (1977 Code § 15.16.080; amd. 2013 Code)
4-11A-5: LICENSE FEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 127/460
The annual fee for registering as an electrical contractor shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00);
provided, that for an application made after the expiration of the first six (6) months of the register
year, a certificate shall be issued upon the payment of one-half (1/2) the fee. The register year shall
correspond to the license year. (1977 Code § 15.16.090)
4-11A-6: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT:
It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to examine all applicants desiring to engage in the
business of electrical installation or wiring in the city who shall file with the city clerk an application for
a license and pay the necessary fee therefor. (1977 Code § 15.16.040; amd. 2013 Code)
4-11A-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Upon the recommendation of the code enforcement officer of the applicant for a license, and
payment of the fee and furnishing bond as aforesaid, the license shall be issued by the mayor and
countersigned by the city clerk. (1977 Code § 15.16.100; amd. 2013 Code)
B. When two (2) or more persons, copartners, or a corporation is an applicant for a license, the same
shall be issued in the name of the firm or copartnership. (1977 Code § 15.16.110)
4-11A-8: NONTRANSFERABILITY, EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
No license shall be transferable, and every license shall expire on April 30 next succeeding its
issuance. (1977 Code § 15.16.120)
4-11A-9: CHANGE OF NAME OR LOCATION; POSTING LICENSE:
Any change of firm name or location of place of business shall be promptly reported to the city, and
every license shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place in his place of business. (1977
Code § 15.16.130)
4-11A-10: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (2013 Code)
ARTICLE B. ROOFERS
4-11B-1: DEFINITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 128/460
When used in this article, the word "roofing" means to apply to any roof deck waterproofing materials
including all roofing, damp and waterproofing materials and/or systems such as shingles, tile, slate,
built up roofing, single ply and spray on roofing. (Ord. 1861, 8-5-2002)
4-11B-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No individual, partnership or corporation shall engage in the city in roofing for compensation without
first obtaining a permit from the city clerk. Such permit shall not be issued until the submission of
satisfactory evidence that:
A. The applicant has in force public liability and property damage insurance in the amount of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
B. The applicant has in force workers' compensation insurance covering the applicant's employees.
C. The applicant has submitted a bond in force in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) as
surety for satisfactory completion of any contracted undertaking. (2013 Code)
4-11B-3: STATE CERTIFICATION REQUIRED:
A. Any individual, partnership or corporation registering with the city clerk as required in section 4-11B-
2 of this article shall show proof of a valid current certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of
the Illinois roofing industry licensing act by the Illinois department of professional regulation.
B. No individual, partnership or corporation shall engage in roofing in the city without proof of
certification from the Illinois department of professional regulation and registering with the city clerk
as required in section 4-11B-2 of this article. (Ord. 1861, 8-5-2002)
4-11B-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall subject the violator to a fine as provided in section 1-
4-1 of this code. Each day a violation is committed by a violator shall be a separate offense. (Ord.
1861, 8-5-2002; amd. 2013 Code)
ARTICLE C. TRASH HAULERS
4-11C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
A. Licensing Fee: Any person, corporation, or other legal entity that offers to remove trash from any
business or person within the city of Marion must pay an initial licensing fee of twenty five dollars
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 129/460
($25.00) to the city clerk which shall be renewed annually. The licensing fee will be in effect as of
May 1, 2016.
B. License Required: No person, corporation or other legal entity may haul waste from any person or
business within the city of Marion without first obtaining a license to do so. (Ord. 3288, 2-22-2016)
4-11C-2: VEHICLE WEIGHTS:
A. All trash trucks over fifteen (15) tons' gross weight are prohibited from the cul-de-sacs on the
following streets, however the over fifteen (15) ton gross weight trucks are allowed to back up the
streets to the cul-de-sac but not enter the cul-de-sac:
Abbey Lane
Belinda Drive
Cambridge Court
Clifton Court
Forrest Court
Gingham Court
Hawthorne Court
Hickory Lane
Julianne Drive west of Carbon Street
Kiowa Drive and Gateway Road
Lake Court
Oak Court
Pleasant Court
Rae Allen Lane
Reichert Drive
Remington Court
Sunset Terrace
Suzanne Drive
Valmar Drive
Warren Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 130/460
West Josephine Lane
Winchester Court
B. However all trash trucks picking up trash on Gateway Road are restricted to pick up times after nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. but before two thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M.
C. The over fifteen (15) ton gross weight trucks are allowed to back up to the end of the following
streets:
Darren Drive
Jennifer Drive
D. No trash hauling trucks over ten (10) tons' gross weight are allowed on any alleyway within the city
of Marion.
E. All vehicles with a gross weight over ten (10) tons are prohibited from traveling on South Market
Street from East Marion Street to East Allen Street.
F. No vehicle shall exceed the weight limit posted on any street within the city of Marion. (Ord. 3288,
2-22-2016)
4-11C-3: EXCEPTIONS:
There shall be excepted from the provisions of this article any vehicle subject to or owned by a utility
company while necessarily in use in construction, installation, or repair of any utility; also any
commercial vehicle coming from an unrestricted street having ingress or egress by direct route to and
from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pick ups or deliveries of goods,
wares and merchandise from any building or structure located on any restricted street, or for the
purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or
construction of any building, driveway, or structure upon such streets identified in section 4-11C-2 of
this article and for which a building permit has been previously obtained. (Ord. 3288, 2-22-2016)
4-11C-4: PENALTY:
Any person, business, or other legal entity who violates any provision of this article may subject the
violator to a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense. The failure to pay any imposed fine within fifteen (15) days of
its issuance will result in the forfeiture of any license to operate trash removal service in the city of
Marion. In the event that the city brings legal action to collect the fines, the costs of legal proceedings
including attorney fees shall be recoverable. (Ord. 3288, 2-22-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 131/460
Chapter 12
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
4-12-1: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply only to a holder of a cable service or video service authorization issued by the
commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801, and shall not apply to any person or
entity that provides cable television services under a cable television franchise issued by the city of
Marion pursuant to section 11-42-11 of the Illinois municipal code1. (Ord. 3312, 4-22-2016)
4-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash,
credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video
system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area
within the city of Marion's jurisdiction.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable service or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per
view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not
limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but
not limited to, service order and service termination charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed
to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to
compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or
services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video
service within the city of Marion's jurisdiction. The allocation shall be based on the number of
subscribers in the city of Marion divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the
relevant regional or national compensation arrangement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 132/460
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's
network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are
received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection
A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with
other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to
the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and
records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by section 4-12-3 of this chapter.
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to subsection A6 of
this definition.
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues
received by the holder of the state issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit,
or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with
cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable
service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunications services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing, or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo
service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular
course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to
collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser
certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the city of Marion and pay the fee
permitted by section 4-12-3 of this chapter with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by the
city of Marion, state, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of
the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 133/460
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold
through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the
extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the
effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by section 4-12-3 of this chapter which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR: A person or entity that provided cable services or video services in
a particular area under a franchise agreement with the city of Marion pursuant to section 11-42-11 of
the Illinois municipal code2. (Ord. 3312, 4-22-2016)
4-12-3: FEE:
A. The fee authorized by this chapter shall be five percent (5%) of gross revenues or the same as the
fee paid to the local unit of government by any incumbent cable operator providing cable service.
The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after
the close of the calendar quarter. Interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum shall be
assessed on any late payments.
B. In any local unit of government in which a holder offers cable service or video service on a
commercial basis, the holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the local unit of
government. The local unit of government shall adopt an ordinance imposing such a fee. The
holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month that is at least
thirty (30) days after the holder receives such ordinance. For any such ordinance adopted on or
after the effective date of this amendatory act of the 99th general assembly, the holder's liability
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month that is at least thirty (30) days after the
adoption of such ordinance. The ordinance shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address
listed on the holder's application provided to the local unit of government pursuant to item (6) of
subsection (b) of section 21-401 of this act. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is
postmarked. Except as provided in this chapter, the local unit of government may not demand any
additional fees or charges from the holder and may not demand the use of any other calculation
method other than allowed under this chapter. (Ord. 3312, 4-22-2016)
4-12-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. In
addition, all collection costs including reasonable attorney fees incurred shall be imposed for each
violation. (Ord. 3312, 4-22-2016)
Chapter 13
VACATION RENTALS
4-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 134/460
FAMILY: A. Type (A) family: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
B. Type (B) family: Two (2) unrelated persons and their children living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
C. Type (C) family: A group of not more than three (3) unrelated persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
D. Type (D) family: A group of two (2) or more persons containing within it one or more families, as
defined in subsections A and B of this definition, including a husband and wife married to one
another and their children, as well as adults, living together in a dwelling unit as a single
housekeeping unit and management, in premises in which the adult occupants are affiliated with
a bona fide not for profit corporation organized for religious or charitable purposes chartered by
the State of Illinois.
"Family" shall not be construed to mean a club, a lodge or a fraternity/sorority house.
VACATION RENTAL: Either a dwelling unit or an allocated space, or a portion thereof offered for rent
for a period shorter than thirty (30) consecutive days to any person other than a member of the
owner's family, as those terms are defined in this chapter. The term "vacation rental" shall not include
hotels or motels, licensed pursuant to title 3, chapter 5, article D of this Code. (Ord. 3386, 6-11-2017)
4-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE TERM; EXEMPTIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful to operate a vacation rental within the City of Marion without a current, valid
license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
B. Each license issued shall be valid for one year, and subject to renewal.
C. Subsection A of this section notwithstanding, no license shall be required to:
1. A rental agreement executed pursuant to or in conjunction with a contract to sell the dwelling
unit containing the vacation rental;
2. Vacation rental guest(s) who is/are displaced from his/her/their own dwelling unit so that it may
be renovated and/or repaired;
3. An operator who will suffer demonstrable hardship. (Ord. 3386, 6-11-2017)
4-13-3: APPLICATION; NOTICE; STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES; RENEWAL;
FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 135/460
A. Applications: A property owner who seeks a vacation rental license pursuant to this chapter shall
submit a written application that contains all information required for a registration statement
pursuant to this chapter.
B. Notice: Each application shall be accompanied by proof the applicant mailed notice thereof to all
owners, whose addresses appear on the current tax assessment list, of real property located within
a radius of two hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject property, inclusive of public streets, alleys
and other public ways. The notice shall contain the applicant's name, the address of the subject
property, and that the applicant intends to seek a vacation rental license from the City of Marion.
C. Standards And Procedures For License Approval: The Code Enforcement Office of the City of
Marion will review all applications for vacation rentals and will report to the City Council upon each
application with respect to the standards set forth below. The City Council after receiving said
report, may refer the application back to that body for additional review, or, by motion, may
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove, an application for a vacation rental license, upon
findings of fact with respect to each of the standards set forth below:
1. The proposed vacation rental will not cause a negative cumulative effect when its effect is
considered in conjunction with the effect of other vacation rentals in the immediate
neighborhood.
2. The vacation rental will not have a substantial adverse impact on the use, enjoyment, or
property values of adjoining properties.
3. The proposed vacation rental will comply with all the rules and regulations contained herein.
4. The proposed vacation rental is not likely to have an adverse effect upon the public health,
welfare, or safety.
Regardless of its finding on any or all of the foregoing standards, the City Council may deny a
vacation rental license upon a finding that such denial is in the public interest.
D. Renewal: If a vacation rental license was issued for the prior year, the approval for a renewal
license shall be obtained from the City Clerk or his/her designee, provided the previously issued
license was not revoked or suspended, and the vacation rental did not receive citation(s) from any
City inspector or police officer during said prior calendar year. Every renewal application shall
satisfy all requirements set forth in this section and section 4-13-4 of this chapter.
E. License Fee: The annual fee for a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). (Ord. 3386, 6-11-2017)
4-13-4: REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS:
A. No vacation rental operator shall:
1. Rent or lease any vacation rental for any period of time shorter than twenty four (24)
consecutive hours;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 136/460
2. Rent or lease any vacation rental more than once within any consecutive twenty four (24) hour
period measured from the commencement of one rental to the commencement of the next;
3. Advertise an hourly rate or any other rate for a vacation rental based on a rental period of fewer
than twenty four (24) consecutive hours; and/or
4. Serve or otherwise provide any food or beverage to any guest.
5. Cause or permit, by action or failure to act, the vacation rental or its use to suffer from and/or
create any violation of the following portions of this Code: titles 6, "Police And Public Safety", 10,
"Building And Development", 11, "Zoning Regulations", and 12, "Subdivision Regulations".
B. Every vacation rental shall be subject to inspection by staff members of the City's Fire and Code
Enforcement Departments.
C. Every vacation rental operator shall keep a register in which shall be entered the name of every
guest and his/her arrival and departure dates. The operator shall make said register freely
accessible to any officer of the City's Police, Fire, and/or Code Enforcement Departments.
D. Every vacation rental operator shall post, in a conspicuous place within the vacation rental, the
name and telephone number of the operator's authorized agent.
E. Any kitchen in a vacation rental shall be cleaned and sanitized between guests and all food and
beverages shall be discarded. All dishes, utensils, pots, pans and other cooking utensils shall be
cleaned and sanitized between guests.
F. The operator of every vacation rental shall change supplied bed linens and towels therein at least
once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to any new guest. The operator shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. (Ord.
3386, 6-11-2017)
4-13-5: PENALTY:
A. Any owner, tenant or other person who shall be found to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable as follows:
1. The fine for a first violation is two hundred dollars ($200.00).
2. The fine for a second violation is five hundred dollars ($500.00).
3. The fine for a third or subsequent violation is seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
B. Each day a provision of this chapter is found to have been violated constitutes a separate violation
subject to the fine schedule set forth herein.
C. Any fines shall be debts due and owing to the City that the City may collect by any means allowed
by law, including, but not limited to, filing a lien against the vacation rental or the premises
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 137/460
containing the vacation rental.
D. The fines provided for herein shall not be construed as limiting the power of a court of competent
jurisdiction or an Administrative Hearing Officer to impose other penalties and/or remedies as
provided for by applicable legislation. In addition, a licensee found to have violated any provision of
this chapter may be subject to license revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal. (Ord. 3386, 6-11-
2017)
4-13-6: REVOCATION; SUSPENSION; PROCEDURES:
A. The City Administrator may revoke or suspend a license issued pursuant to the terms of this
chapter for any of the following reasons:
1. If the owner of the relevant vacation rental or his/her agent violates any of the terms of this
chapter.
2. If the owner of the vacation rental or his/her agent is deemed to have maintained a nuisance
premises therein, in violation of this Code;
3. If City Administrator deems the vacation rental, or the premises wherein it is located, to be a
vacant building, as defined therein; and/or
4. If the City or other governmental agency condemns the vacation rental or the premises wherein
it is located.
B. Not less than fourteen (14) business days prior to a revocation hearing for a license issued
pursuant to the terms of this chapter, the City Administrator shall send, via first class U.S. mail, a
notice of revocation hearing to the owner or his/her authorized agent at the address provided on
the most recent license application. Notice shall be sufficient if sent to the address of the
authorized agent indicated on the license application. Said notice shall include the following:
1. Description of the vacation rental, sufficient for identification;
2. A statement that the license is subject to revocation;
3. A statement of the reasons for the revocation;
4. The date and time upon which a revocation hearing shall occur; and
5. The location for said revocation hearing.
C. If the City Administrator has reason to believe that immediate suspension of the license is
necessary to prevent the threat of immediate harm to the City or the neighborhood, the City
Administrator may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and
without notice or hearing, order the license suspended for not more than seven (7) days. The City
Administrator may extend the suspension during the pendency of a hearing upon a written
determination that doing so is necessary to prevent the aforesaid harm to the City or
neighborhood.
D. Hearings shall be conducted by the Mayor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 138/460
E. Within ten (10) business days after the close of the hearing, the Mayor shall issue a written decision
that shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review pursuant to the Illinois
Administrative Review Law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., as amended. In
reaching a decision, the Mayor may consider any of the following:
1. The nature of the violation;
2. The nature and extent of the harm caused by the licensee's action or failure to act;
3. The factual situation and circumstances surrounding the violation;
4. Whether or not the action or failure to act was willful;
5. The record of the licensee with respect to violations.
F. A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to reapply for a new license for one
year. (Ord. 3386, 6-11-2017)
4-13-7: OCCUPANCY OF DWELLING UNITS:
A. No dwelling unit shall be occupied by more than one type (A), type (B), or type (C) family, as
defined in "definitions", of this chapter except as hereinafter provided:
B. Upon written application to the Zoning Administrator, certification of approval shall be issued or
occupancy for a dwelling unit by a type (D) family in all districts where dwelling units are allowed,
except the R-1 and R-2 Districts, provided that the application establishes that the occupancy
conforms with the definition of a type (D) family. The members of a type (D) family household shall
not keep or store more than one motor vehicle for each such dwelling unit or for each off-street
parking space lawfully existing in connection with such dwelling unit, whichever is greater.
Certification would be revoked at any time the occupancy or off-street parking no longer conforms
to the definition of a type (D) family, or if a request for current records is not answered so as to
establish that the type of ownership complies with the definition of a type (D) family.
C. No dwelling unit which contains less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area shall be
used to provide living quarters for roomers, servants or permanent guests. Where the floor area of
a dwelling unit exceeds one thousand (1,000) square feet and the family occupying the dwelling
unit is a type (A) or type (B) family then the dwelling unit may also be used for living quarters for
not more than two (2) employees, roomers, or permanent guests, provided that the living quarters
are located within the dwelling unit as a physically integral part. (Ord. 3386, 6-11-2017)
Title 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
Chapter 1
GENERAL HEALTH AND SANITATION PROVISIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 139/460
5-1-1: PROHIBITED SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, place or maintain any privy or water closet within the
corporate limits of the city. (1977 Code § 8.20.010; amd. 2013 Code)
5-1-2: COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS NEAR BUILDINGS:
No person, firm or corporation shall strew or leave any shavings, straw, papers, excelsior or other like
combustible material in and around or near any building or other structure within the corporate limits of
the city so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the same in case of fire. (1977 Code § 8.24.010)
Chapter 2
NUISANCES
5-2-1: DEFINITION:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
NUISANCE: Any condition or use of premises or building exteriors which constitutes a blighting factor,
which is detrimental to the property of others, which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in
the value of other property in the neighborhood in which the premises are located, which causes a
condition that taints the air, causes an offensive smell or renders the air unwholesome or disagreeable
to others, or which causes a condition that may harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents, nuisance
birds or other animal pests that are offensive, injurious or dangerous to the health of individuals or the
public. Nuisance includes, but is not limited to, the keeping, the depositing on, or scattering over the
premises of any of the following:
A. Lumber, junk, yard waste, obnoxious growths, trash or debris;
B. Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as furniture, stoves, refrigerators,
freezers, cans or containers. (Ord. 3350, 9-12-2016)
5-2-2: SPECIFIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED; NONEXCLUSIVE:
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be against the health, peace, and comfort of the city, for
any person, firm or corporation within the limits of the city to permit the following; but the enumeration
of the following nuisances shall not be deemed to be exclusive or a limitation on the nuisances defined
above or as determined under other provisions of this code:
A. Filth: To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or noisome substance to be
collected, deposited or to remain in any place, to the prejudice of others.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 140/460
B. Deposit Of Offensive Materials: To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or common sewer, street
or public highway.
C. Corruption Of Water: To corrupt or render unwholesome, or impure, the water of any spring, river,
stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others.
D. Highway Encroachment: To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, and ways to burying places.
E. Noxious Odors: To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise of any trade,
employment, or manufacture which, by occasioning noxious exaltations, offensive smells or
otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals, or of the public.
F. Litter On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow trash, paper, cardboard, wire, dirt, rock,
stone, glass, brick, lumber, wood or litter of material objects of any size or description to fall upon
city streets from any moving vehicle, or to be thrown from a moving vehicle, and to remain thereon.
G. Accumulations Of Junk And Trash: To deposit, or pile up any rags, old rope, paper, iron, brass,
copper, tin, aluminum, ashes, garbage, refuse, plastic, brush, litter, weeds, building material,
appliances, slush, lead, glass bottles or broken glass upon any lot, piece or parcel of land, or upon
any public alley, street or public way within the city.
H. Rodents: To cause or permit any condition or situation to exist that shall attract, harbor or
encourage the infestation of rodents.
I. Offensive Liquids: To keep any nauseous, foul or putrid liquid or substance or any liquid or
substance likely to become nauseous, foul, offensive or putrid, nor permit any such liquid to be
discharged, placed, thrown or to flow from or out of any premises into or upon any adjacent
premises or any public street or alley, nor permit the same to be done by any person connected
with the premises.
J. Grass And/Or Leaf Blowing Regulated: No person, landscape or mowing service shall blow or
cause to blow leaves and/or grass clippings into the streets, sidewalks, curb lines or ditches of the
city of Marion.
K. Junk Storage Prohibited:
1. Definitions:
ABANDONED AUTOMOBILE: A motor vehicle, whether on public or private property, with no
current valid state registration, a motor vehicle left unattended on a highway or public property
for a period in excess of seventy two (72) hours, a motor vehicle not removed after its
involvement in a collision, an unattended motor vehicle located on a highway or public property
which has sustained acts of vandalism, a motor vehicle, wherever located, from which, for a
period of at least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 141/460
which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated
that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. This shall not include
registered historic vehicles or a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in
ordinary service, storage or repair operations for a reasonable period of time.
JUNK, TRASH AND REFUSE: Includes any and all waste matter, whether reusable or not,
which is offensive to the public health, safety or to the aesthetics of the neighborhood, which is
not within a closed building and/or a privacy fence, and is specifically intended to include, but not
be limited to, wrecked, disabled and/or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, machinery
and/or motor vehicles of any kind, any parts thereof, old refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers
and/or other appliances.
2. Storing Of Junk Declared A Nuisance: The storing of junk, trash and refuse on private property
within the city which is not within a closed building and/or a privacy fence, where such storage is
not authorized is declared a nuisance.
3. Automobile On Private Property: The city may apply to the court having jurisdiction for an order
giving it the authority to have any automobile parked on private property in violation of this
chapter removed from such property.
L. Generally: To commit any offense which is a nuisance according to the common law of the land or
made such by statute of the state. (Ord. 3350, 9-12-2016)
5-2-3: NOTICE TO ABATE:
Whenever the code enforcement department or any other person so designated by the mayor or city
council finds that a nuisance exists, a written notice shall be served on the party responsible for the
nuisance and on the owner, occupant or lessee on whose property the nuisance exists ordering that
the nuisance be abated within seven (7) days after such notice has been duly served. The notice to
abate shall contain:
A. A description of the nuisance;
B. The location of the nuisance;
C. A statement of what condition or state of affairs must be achieved in order for the nuisances to be
deemed abated;
D. The date by which abatement must be completed;
E. A statement indicating that if the nuisance is not abated by the date prescribed, the city will abate
the nuisance and assess the costs of abatement and/or impose a fine; and
F. Service of the notice provided for herein may be effected by any of the following methods:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 142/460
1. Directed to the owner of record of the property on which said nuisance occurs, as shown in the
records of the recorder of deeds of Williamson County, or to the occupant of said property, or to
both.
2. By handing the same to the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises or to any member of his
or her household of the age of fifteen (15) years or older found on the premises;
3. By mailing such notice to the last known residence address of the owner, occupant or lessee; or
4. By posting the notice upon the premises. (Ord. 3350, 9-12-2016)
5-2-4: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
If the person ordered to abate a nuisance fails to do so, or if the nuisance poses an emergency, the
city may perform the required action to abate. Any city official who is authorized to abate any
"nuisance" as defined in this chapter shall have authority to engage the necessary assistance and to
incur the necessary expenses therefor. The official who abates a nuisance shall keep an accurate
account of the expenses incurred. (Ord. 3350, 9-12-2016)
5-2-5: COMPLAINT BY CITIZEN:
Any citizen of the city who observes a violation of this chapter may report to the code enforcement
department the location and the name of the owner or occupant of the property on which such
nuisance is alleged, and the code enforcement department shall make an investigation of such
charge, and if such nuisance exists, shall issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the property as
provided in this section.
Any person who by reason of another's violation of any provision of this chapter suffers special
damage to himself or herself different from the suffered by other property owners throughout the city
generally may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing violation. (Ord. 3350, 9-12-
2016)
5-2-6: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE:
If the person notified to abate a nuisance shall neglect or refuse to comply with the requirements of
such notice by abating such nuisance within the time specified, such person shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter. The city authorities shall not be required to issue another notice where the
condition or violation is at first abated, but later resumed and/or repeated.
Failure to abate a nuisance under provisions of this chapter after notice shall be punished by a fine of
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that the nuisance
continues unabated after notice shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the fine assessed
hereunder, the violator will be liable for the cost and expense incurred by the city for abating the
nuisance including reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 3350, 9-12-2016)
5-2-7: LIEN FOR UNPAID EXPENSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 143/460
Expenses for the abatement of said nuisance under this chapter shall be a lien upon the premises.
Whenever a bill for such expenses remains unpaid for more than sixty (60) days, after it has been
rendered, the code enforcement department may file with the recorder of deeds of Williamson County
a statement of lien claims. The statement shall obtain a legal description of the premises, the
expenses and costs incurred and the date the nuisance was abated, and the notice that the city claims
a lien for such account. Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his
address is known; provided, however that failure of the city to record such lien claim or to mail such
notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien
for such charges as provided in the following section. (Ord. 3350, 9-12-2016)
5-2-8: FORECLOSURE OF LIENS:
Property subject to a lien for unpaid expenses for the abatement of a nuisance shall be sold for
nonpayment of same and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after
deducting costs, as in the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be
maintained in the name of the city. The city attorney is authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the city and any court having jurisdiction over such matter, against any
property for which such bill has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been incurred. (Ord. 3350,
9-12-2016)
Chapter 3
WEEDS, GRASS AND VEGETATION
5-3-1: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS; UNHEALTHY, NOXIOUS VEGETATION
PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in section 5-3-2 of this chapter, no owner and no person in control of any lot, place
or area within the city, and no agent of such owner or person in control, shall permit on such lot, place
or area or upon any abutting area between the right of way line/property line and street surface or
pavement, any weeds or grass over six inches (6") in height, or deleterious, unhealthy growths or
other noxious matter that may be growing, lying, or located thereon. (Ord. 2206, 6-30-2008)
5-3-2: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are generally exempted from the provisions of this chapter: Lands zoned agriculture as
designated and shown on the official zoning map of the city unless used for nonagricultural purposes.
For purpose of this section, "agricultural use" shall be construed to mean vacant land or the
production of products such as field crops, livestock, fowl and other conventional agricultural pursuits.
Provided, however, that the portions of those lands exempted by this section which are within forty
feet (40') of the right of way of a public street or alley maintained for traffic or within forty feet (40') of
the property line of adjacent lands used for nonagricultural or nonforestry purposes (for example,
church, school, store, factory, house, apartment building, offices, etc.) shall not be exempted from the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2206, 6-30-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
5-3-3: NOTICES TO ABATE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 144/460
A. Annual Public Notice: The city clerk, or his designee, annually, at or near the commencement of the
growth season, shall notify, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, all
owners or persons in control of real estate to cut, destroy, or remove any such weeds, grass, other
vegetation, or matter found growing, lying or located on such properties and areas regulated by
section 5-3-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 2206, 6-30-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Individual Notice: The city code enforcement officer, after determining that a particular lot or parcel
of real estate is in violation of section 5-3-1 of this chapter, shall post a notice on such lot or parcel
of real estate in substantially the following form: (Ord. 2206, 6-30-2008)
NOTICE
To the owner or person in control of the real estate located at in the City of Marion, Illinois
Weeds, grass or other vegetation of a height of six inches (6") or more exist on such real estate
in violation of Section 5-3-1 of the City Code.
Unless such weeds, grass, or other vegetation is cut to permissible height, or less, or is
otherwise removed within seven (7) days after the posting of this notice the owner or person in
control may be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such violation
exists will constitute a separate offense.
Posted:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
CITY OF MARION, ILLINOIS
TELEPHONE: 993-2422
(Ord. 2206, 6-30-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
5-3-4: ISSUANCE OF CITATION:
If there is a violation of section 5-3-1 of this chapter regarding weeds, grass or other vegetation, the
code enforcement officer may issue to the owner or person in control of the real estate upon which
there is such a violation a ticket and file said ticket for prosecution in the office of the circuit court of
the county. (Ord. 2206, 6-30-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
5-3-5: ABATEMENT BY CITY; CHARGES:
A. Upon the failure of the owner or person in control of a lot or parcel of real estate in violation of
section 5-3-1 of this chapter, the code enforcement officer or his designee, after publication of
notice as provided in subsection 5-3-3A of this chapter and posting of notice as provided in
subsection 5-3-3B of this chapter, may enter upon such real estate to cut and remove such weeds,
grass or other vegetation.
B. The charge for cutting and removing weeds, grass or other vegetation shall be as follows and
presented by the code enforcement officer:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 145/460
$ 90.00 for lots up to 1 acre.
$180.00 for lots of 1 acre or larger.
(Ord. 2206, 6-30-2008)
5-3-6: FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES:
A. Suit: Should the person so charged fail to pay the amount charged within fourteen (14) days, the
code enforcement officer is authorized to file suit against such person for collection of the same in
the circuit court of the county.
B. Lien: The code enforcement officer is authorized to file a lien against the real estate from which the
city cut or removed weeds, grass or other vegetation, the amount of the lien to include, but is not
limited to, administrative and legal fees, filing and service of process fees and the appropriate
charges designated in subsection 5-3-5B of this chapter. (Ord. 2206, 6-30-2008)
Chapter 4
GARBAGE AND DEBRIS
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
DEBRIS: Any material of whatsoever nature considered to be junk, refuse or without any reasonable
expectation of beneficial use in the usual course of human endeavor including, but not limited to,
dilapidated or nonoperable fixtures or appliances, cans, paper, bottles, tools, lawn maintenance
equipment, children's toys and recreation appliances, offal or any material that may pose a threat of
fire.
GARBAGE: Refuse produced from organic material including, but not limited to, fruits and vegetables.
(Ord. 2043, 10-3-2005)
5-4-2: ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND DEBRIS PROHIBITED:
In order to promote health and suppress disease, it is determined to be necessary and expedient to
prohibit the accumulation and maintenance of garbage, other material that may be offensive to the
senses of a reasonable person, and debris upon any real estate in the city, and such accumulation
and maintenance is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 2043, 10-3-2005)
5-4-3: DETERMINATION OF OFFENSIVE CONDITION:
The city code enforcement officer, the police chief or the fire chief may determine that a condition
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 146/460
exists in violation of this chapter. A written report of such determination shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. 2043, 10-3-2005; amd. Ord. 2207, 6-30-2008; 2013 Code)
5-4-4: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; TIME FOR ABATEMENT:
A. Issuance Of Notice; Contents: The city clerk shall prepare a written notice in substantially the
following form to be served on the owner or person in control of such real estate by personal
service or certified mail:
TO:
As the owner or person in control of the real estate located at in the City of Marion, Illinois.
You are notified it has been determined there is an accumulation of garbage or debris or both
upon the above specified real estate in violation of Title 5, Chapter 4 of the City Code.
Such garbage or debris must be removed within seven (7) days after receipt of this notice.
Violation of the provisions of Title 5, Chapter 4 of the City Code may subject you to a fine not to
exceed Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues is a separate
offense.
(Ord. 2207, 6-30-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Time For Compliance: The owner or occupant of the real estate determined to have an existing
condition in violation of this chapter shall be advised to terminate such condition seven (7) days
after receipt of notice to do so. (Ord. 2043, 10-3-2005)
5-4-5: LIEN FOR CITY ABATEMENT COSTS:
A. Filing Lien: If, within sixty (60) days after the cost and expense of removal of garbage and debris is
incurred, the city or the person performing the service by the city's authority, in his or its own name,
files a notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds, such costs and expense shall be
a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances, except tax
liens.
B. Notice Of Lien: The notice of lien provided in this section shall consist of a sworn statement setting
out a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money
representing the costs and expenses incurred, and the date when such costs and expenses were
incurred. (Ord. 2043, 10-3-2005)
5-4-6: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter that continues more than seven (7) days after service of the aforementioned
notice may subject the owner or occupant of the real estate to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code, and each day the violation continues is a separate offense. (Ord. 2043, 10-3-2005; amd.
2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 147/460
Chapter 5
LITTER CONTROL
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
LITTER: Any discarded, used or unconsumed substances or waste. "Litter" may include, but is not
limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings, newspaper, magazines, glass,
metal, plastic or paper containers, motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, and nauseous or offensive matter
of any kind, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been discarded,
abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation or other legal entity. (Ord. 1844, 4-
15-2002)
5-5-2: LITTERING PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, or leave, or cause or permit the dumping,
depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of litter upon any city street or street right of
way in the city.
B. No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise dispose of litter from any motor
vehicle upon any city street or street right of way in the city. (Ord. 1844, 4-15-2002)
5-5-3: PENALTY:
Persons who violate any provision of section 5-5-2 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1844, 4-15-2002; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 6
BURNING RESTRICTIONS
5-6-1: DEFINITION:
The word "person", for the purposes of this chapter, includes, but is not limited to, any individual,
group, firm or company as well as any agent of any individual, group, firm or company. (1977 Code
§ 8.12.010)
5-6-2: BURNING PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Natural yard waste (leaves, lawn clippings, small limbs) may be burned within the corporate limits
of the city during daylight hours between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M.:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 148/460
1. Only upon the premises on which such yard waste is generated or has fallen.
2. When atmospheric conditions will readily dissipate contaminants.
3. If such burning does not create a visibility hazard on roadways, railroads, or airfields.
B. No burning shall be left unattended.
C. No burning shall occur in or upon a city street.
D. No burning shall occur within twenty feet (20') of a residence or building. (Ord. 2250, 5-11-2009)
E. No domicile waste garbage, trash or refuse, or agricultural waste shall be burned. (Ord. 2250, 5-11-
2009; amd. 2013 Code)
F. No building materials shall be burned at any time including sawed lumber.
G. No one shall burn at any time the wind velocity, to a prudent person, is such as to cause the
burning to be a hazard to life or property. A violation of this subsection shall be presumed if, but not
limited to, burning leaves are blown from the immediate area in which they are being burned or
atmospheric conditions allow contaminants to be blown onto the property of another causing both
damage to real property and creating a nuisance to another person(s). (Ord. 2250, 5-11-2009)
5-6-3: RECREATIONAL FIRES:
A. Recreational fires shall consist of the burning of fuels for a legitimate campfire, recreational and
cooking purposes, or in a domestic fireplace in areas where such burning is consistent with other
laws; provided, that no garbage, trash or refuse shall be burned in such case. (Ord. 2250, 5-11-
2009; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Fires shall occur in a cleared, open area, and the area shall be no less than a twenty foot (20')
radius.
C. Fires shall be in an appliance designed for such burning, a burn pit, or an area surrounded by
noncombustible material.
D. No fires shall be allowed when winds are such as to cause a hazard to life or property. (Ord. 2250,
5-11-2009)
5-6-4: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. (2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 149/460
Chapter 7
UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS
5-7-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, the word "person" includes, but is not limited to, an individual, group of
individuals, partnership, firm or corporation as well as any agent thereof. (Ord. 1072, 5-13-1985)
5-7-2: REGULATIONS:
No person shall bury, place or maintain any underground storage tanks or piping within the corporate
limits of the city other than as follows:
A. Hydrotesting Tanks:
1. Existing Tanks: All existing underground storage tanks and piping which have been buried for
more than five (5) years at the effective date hereof shall be hydrotested within one year from
said effective date. All underground storage tanks and piping shall be hydrotested thereafter
once every three (3) years.
2. New Tanks: All new underground storage tanks and piping shall be hydrotested before being
covered and placed in service.
3. Results: Results of hydrotesting shall be sent to the city fire department.
4. Certified Tester: Persons testing shall be certified within last two (2) years.
B. Emptying Tanks: No underground storage tanks or piping shall be emptied unless the fill line, gauge
opening, and pump connection are secured against tampering. All vent lines shall remain open,
and the tanks and piping shall be pumped completely dry and filled completely with water.
C. Abandoned Tanks: All underground storage tanks and piping out of service for more than ninety
(90) days shall be removed with all vent lines, piping, valves, and fittings dismantled and purged
and all contaminated ground soil removed. The tank and all connecting lines shall be completely
cleaned of all material including any "heel" removed. No burning of surface contamination shall be
permitted. In lieu of removal, upon ten (10) days' notice to the city fire department, the entire tank
shall be exposed and examined for contamination, split end to end, and filled completely with sand.
The city fire department may request the addition of "no flash". All remaining underground piping
shall be capped. Suction, inlet, gauge and vent lines shall be disconnected and removed. (Ord.
1072, 5-13-1985; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 8
VEHICLES ON PUBLIC WAYS AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 150/460
ARTICLE A. ABANDONED, DERELICT VEHICLES
5-8A-1: PUBLIC POLICY:
The city council finds that abandoned and derelict vehicles constitute a safety hazard and a public
nuisance; are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the general public by harboring disease,
providing breeding places for vermin, inviting plundering, creating fire hazards, and presenting
physical dangers to children and others; produce scenic blights which degrade the environment and
adversely affect land values and the proper maintenance and continuing development of the city;
represent a resource out of place and an energy loss to the economy; and require local governmental
attention in order to assure the expeditious removal of these abandoned and derelict vehicles. The city
council declares, therefore, that it is the policy of the city to prohibit the abandonment of vehicles and
the retention of derelicts and to enforce such prohibition by law. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000)
5-8A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed, except as
the context may otherwise require:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle, boat, trailer, or mobile home which is in a
state of disrepair, partially dismantled, wrecked, or otherwise inoperable so as to render the vehicle
incapable of being driven or used in its condition; or any motor vehicle or other vehicle, boat, trailer, or
mobile home which has not been moved or used for ten (10) consecutive days or more and is
apparently deserted. The term "abandoned vehicle" shall not be construed to include, for the purposes
of this article, any such vehicle, boat, trailer or mobile home which is kept in an enclosed building; on
the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the
operation of such business enterprise; or in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the city or other party.
DERELICT VEHICLE: A. Any inoperable, currently unregistered, discarded motor vehicle, regardless
of title, having lost its character as a substantial property or left unattended without justification
contrary to the public policy expressed in this article. "Inoperable" means any motor vehicle from
which, for a period of ten (10) days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the
vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power.
B. This definition shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable
of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair
operations. Nothing in this definition shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building
when not in use, to historic vehicles over twenty five (25) years of age or to a motor vehicle on
the premises of a place of business engaged in wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a street or highway, whether subject to or exempt from registration; except, however,
bicycles, snowmobiles and devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The term shall
include, for the purposes hereof, any motor vehicle or other vehicle, boat, trailer, or mobile home.
(Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000; amd. Ord. 2182, 1-28-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 151/460
5-8A-3: DERELICT VEHICLES:
A. Nuisance Declared; Penalty; Impoundment: The parking of all derelict motor vehicles, or parts
thereof, whether on public or private property and in the view of the general public, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. Any person who fails to obey a notice received from the city which
states that he is to dispose of any derelict motor vehicle under his control shall commit a nuisance
and may be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, or a police officer may authorize that
the vehicle, or part thereof, shall be removed after seven (7) days from the issuance of the
municipal notice. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000; amd. Ord. 2182, 1-28-2008; 2013 Code)
B. Storage Within Enclosed Buildings: Automotive vehicles, trucks or trailers of any kind or type
without current license shall not be parked or stored on any property other than in completely
closed buildings or carports. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000)
5-8A-4: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit any motor vehicle or other vehicle, boat, trailer, or mobile home,
or any part thereof, to be abandoned on private or public property, including, without limitation, any
street within the city, or otherwise be considered an abandoned or derelict vehicle. Any such
abandoned or derelict vehicle is hereby declared a nuisance whether on private or public property.
(Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000)
5-8A-5: NOTICE TO POLICE OF ABANDONED OR DERELICT VEHICLE;
REMOVAL:
A. When any abandoned or derelict vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of any
person in the city, not the owner of such vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the police
department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the city.
B. Upon receipt of such notification, the chief of police, or his designated representative, shall
authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or
unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and
its contents and maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other
person legally entitled to possession thereof.
C. When a vehicle removal from either public or private property is authorized by the police
department, the owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all towing costs. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-
2000)
5-8A-6: RECORDS SEARCHES TO IDENTIFY OWNER; NOTICES:
A. Identifying And Tracing Vehicle Ownership: Upon receiving notification of or otherwise discovering
an abandoned or derelict vehicle, the police department shall, if it does not already know the
identification of the registered owner or other person legally entitled thereto, cause the vehicle and
license registration records of the secretary of state of the state of Illinois, or a foreign state if
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 152/460
applicable, to be searched utilizing the vehicle identification number and license plate year and
number displayed on the vehicle, if any. The owner of such vehicle, as disclosed from the search,
shall be the owner of such vehicle for the purposes of the disposition of such vehicle. The city
police department shall further cause the motor vehicle files of the Illinois state police to be
searched by a directed communication to the Illinois state police for stolen or wanted information
on the vehicle. When the Illinois state police files are searched with negative results, the
information contained in the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files shall be searched in
accordance with state law by the Illinois state police. When the registered owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of a vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of the
state of Illinois or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the city police
department shall so notify the Illinois state police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle owner or
other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the
Illinois state police shall be immediately forwarded to the city police department.
B. Notice To Owner:
1. When the identity of the owner or other person legally entitled to an abandoned or derelict
vehicle is known or has been determined in accordance with subsection A of this section, the
chief of police, or his designee, shall cause such owner or other person to be given notice that
such vehicle has been determined to be an abandoned or derelict vehicle in violation of this
article and that unless such vehicle is removed within seven (7) days from the date such notice
is mailed, postage prepaid, by certified mail, the vehicle will be towed and impounded in
accordance herewith, and the owner will be charged with having violated this article. The chief of
police, or his designee, may cause, but is not required, to personally serve such notice on such
owner or other person, and need not establish whether such notice is actually received if mailed.
In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been returned by the
postal authorities to the city police department due to the addressee having moved, being
unknown at the address obtained from the registration records of the state of Illinois, or having
refused delivery, the sending of a second certified notice is not required. A copy of such notice
shall also be served upon any lienholder if the same has been disclosed by the title search
required herein. The notice required by this subsection B1 may be in substantially the following
form: (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
CITY OF MARION
1102 Tower Square Plaza
Marion, Illinois 62959
(618)993-2422 _ Fax (618)997-2028
Code Enforcement Officer
TO:
RE: Abandoned/Derelict Vehicles, Marion City Code Title 5, Chapter 8, Article A
DATE:
This letter will serve notice to you that you are in possession of a "derelict or abandoned
vehicle." The enclosed notice containing full details requires your response within seven (7) days
from the date of this letter.
As set forth in City Code Section 5-8A-1: Public Policy:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 153/460
The city council finds that abandoned and derelict vehicles constitute a safety hazard and a
public nuisance; are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the general public by
harboring disease, providing breeding places for vermin, inviting plundering, creating fire
hazards, and presenting physical dangers to children and others; produces scenic blights which
degrade the environment and adversely affect land values and the proper maintenance and
continuing development of the city; represent a resource out of place and an energy loss to the
economy; and require local governmental attention in order to assure the expeditious removal of
these abandoned and derelict vehicles.
The Marion City Council declares, therefore, that it is the policy of the City to prohibit the
abandonment of vehicles and the retention of derelicts and to enforce such prohibition by law.
I have also included a list of useful information that will assist you in disposing of the vehicle.
A full copy of Title 5, Chapter 8 (Including Articles A, B and C) of the City Code will be available
to you upon request at the cost of $3.00.
If you have any questions or require assistance, please feel free to contact me at (618)993-
2422.
Sincerely yours,
Code Enforcement Officer
Enclosures
(Ord. 2182, 1-28-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
2. When the identity of the owner or other person legally entitled to an abandoned or derelict
vehicle is not known and has been determined in accordance with the provisions hereof, and in
addition to the notice required in subsection B1 of this section, when the identity of the owner or
other person legally entitled to a vehicle is known, the chief of police, or his designee, shall
cause a prominent notice to be placed on the abandoned motor vehicle stating that the vehicle
has been determined to be abandoned in accordance with the abandoned or derelict vehicle
regulations of the city of Marion and that it will be towed and impounded unless removed within
seven (7) days from the date the notice was posted. The date the notice is posted shall be
endorsed on the notice, along with the name of the officer posting such notice, and the
telephone number of the city police department at which information may be obtained relative to
the notice. The chief of police, or his designee, shall cause the owner or other party in
possession of private property on which the vehicle is located to be informed that the vehicle will
be towed and impounded after seven (7) days, unless such vehicle is located on private property
of the owner of such vehicle or such private property owner notified the city police department of
such abandoned or derelict vehicle. Such private property owner shall have all rights of review
under this article if such private property owner is a person legally entitled to such vehicle.
Notice to the owner or party in possession is informational only and not jurisdictional. (Ord. 1759,
3-27-2000; amd. Ord. 2182, 1-28-2008; 2013 Code)
5-8A-7: REVIEW OF DETERMINATION OF ABANDONED OR DERELICT VEHICLE:
When a vehicle has been determined to be an abandoned or derelict vehicle within the meaning of
this article, the owner thereof or other person legally entitled thereto shall have the right to have such
determination reviewed in accordance with this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 154/460
A. Chief Of Police: Any owner of or other person legally entitled to a vehicle determined to be an
abandoned or derelict vehicle within the meaning of this article may, within seven (7) days of the
notification required under subsection 5-8A-6B of this article is mailed or personally delivered, as
the case may be, file a written request with the chief of police that he review such determination,
stating the reason or reasons why such vehicle is not an abandoned or derelict vehicle within the
meaning of this article. Within seven (7) days of such written request, the chief of police shall
review such determination, giving the owner or other person an opportunity to personally be heard
and present whatever information as such owner or other person considers pertinent. After
reviewing such determination, the chief of police shall render a written decision thereon which shall
be promptly mailed, postage prepaid, by certified mail, to such owner or other person, or delivered
personally as stated heretofore.
B. Mayor: If the owner of or other person legally entitled to such vehicle does not agree with the
decision of the chief of police after his review, such owner or other person may, within ten (10)
days after the decision of the chief of police is mailed to such owner or other person, file a written
request with the mayor that the mayor review the original determination and the decision of the
chief of police stating the reason or reasons why such vehicle is not an abandoned or derelict
vehicle within the meaning of this article. Within seven (7) days of such written request, the mayor
shall schedule and conduct a hearing to review such determination and such decision. At such
hearing, the mayor shall consider pertinent information presented by the city police department
and such owner or other person. The mayor may also personally inspect such vehicle. The parties,
personally or through counsel, shall also have the right to cross examine each other's witnesses.
After reviewing such determination and such decision, the mayor shall render a written decision
thereon which shall be promptly mailed, postage prepaid, by certified mail, to such owner or other
person, or delivered personally as stated heretofore. If such owner or such other person has not
been charged with violating this article, the review of the mayor shall be the final determination,
and such vehicle may then be towed and impounded if found to be an abandoned vehicle. If such
owner or such other person has been charged with violating this article, then the right of judicial
determination shall apply as hereinafter provided.
C. Judicial Determination: If the owner of or other person legally entitled to a vehicle determined to be
an abandoned or derelict vehicle within the meaning of this article does not agree with the decision
of the mayor, and such owner or such other person has been charged with violating this article,
such owner or such person may, within seven (7) days after the decision of the mayor is mailed to
such owner or such other person, file a request with the mayor that the vehicle not be towed or
impounded pending the disposition of such charge. If such request is filed, such vehicle shall not
be towed and impounded until such charge has been disposed of. After such charge is disposed
of, finding such owner or other person guilty, such vehicle shall then be towed and impounded
unless such nuisance has then been abated.
D. Stay Of Towing And Impounding: Pending any review of a determination that a vehicle is an
abandoned or derelict vehicle within the meaning of this article, any such vehicle shall not be
towed or impounded except as is permitted for emergency tows. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000; amd. Ord.
2182, 1-28-2008; 2013 Code)
5-8A-8: TOWING AND IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; RECLAMATION AND
DISPOSAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 155/460
A. Towing And Impoundment; Records Kept: Subject to review of any determination pursuant hereto
that a vehicle is an abandoned or derelict vehicle with the meaning of this article, such abandoned
and derelict vehicle may be towed and impounded after a waiting period of ten (10) days or more
from the date the notification required pursuant to section 5-8A-6 of this article has been mailed or
delivered, as the case may be. The chief of police, or his designee, shall authorize a towing service
to remove and take possession of the abandoned vehicle. The towing service shall safely keep the
towed vehicle and its contents and maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the
owner or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as
provided in this article. When any vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the city police
department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of
manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle
identification number, and license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall
also indicate the date and hour of tow, the location towed from, the location towed to, the reason
for towing, and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. A record search of the vehicle shall also
be made. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000; amd. Ord. 2182, 1-28-2008)
B. Reclaiming Vehicles: At any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided
in this article, the owner or other person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle
by presenting to the city police department proof of ownership or proof of the right of possession of
the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner thereof or other person entitled thereto until
and unless such owner or such person has paid all towing and storage fees on account of such
vehicle.
C. Disposal Of Unclaimed Vehicles: Abandoned or derelict vehicles which have been towed or
impounded shall be disposed of in accordance with this subsection.
1. Disposal With Notice:
a. Whenever an abandoned or derelict vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer, remains
unclaimed by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a
period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given by mail or delivered as provided in
subsection 5-8A-6B of this article, the city police department shall cause such vehicle to be
sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be
posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises
where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the city police
department or the towing service where the vehicle is impounded shall cause a notice of the
time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other person
known by the city police department or the towing service to be legally entitled to the
possession of such vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to
be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
b. Whenever an abandoned or derelict vehicle more than seven (7) years of age is towed or
impounded, it may be sold as provided above or disposed of as junk only at the discretion of
the chief of police, or his designee.
c. A vehicle classified as an antique (25 years of age or older) may also be sold to any person
desiring to restore same.
2. Disposal Without Notice:
a. When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
an abandoned or derelict vehicle seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined in
accordance with section 5-8A-6 of this article, the vehicle may be sold as provided in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 156/460
subsection C1 of this section, but without notice of the time and place of the sale being mailed
to the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
b. Whenever an abandoned or derelict vehicle is more than seven (7) years of age and is towed
and impounded, it may be sold as provided in subsection C1 of this section or disposed of as
junk only at the discretion of the chief of police, or his designee.
3. Proceeds Of Sale: When a vehicle located within the city is authorized to be towed, impounded
and disposed of as set forth in this article, the proceeds of the public sale or other disposition
after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the city
treasury.
4. Police Reports: When a vehicle in the custody of the city police department is reclaimed by the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or
otherwise disposed of as provided in this article, a report of the transaction shall be maintained
by the city police department for a period of one year from the date of sale or disposal. (Ord.
1759, 3-27-2000)
5-8A-9: EMERGENCY TOWS:
Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, when a vehicle is creating a traffic hazard
because of its position in relation to a highway, its physical appearance is causing the impeding of
traffic, or it otherwise presents a danger to the public health and safety on public or private property,
the chief of police, or his designee, may authorize and direct the immediate towing and impounding of
such vehicle without notice to the owner thereof or other person legally entitled thereto. Immediately
thereafter, the owner or other person legally entitled shall be identified and notified in accordance with
this article. The determination may also be reviewed and the vehicle disposed of in accordance with
this article; provided, that if it is concluded that such vehicle is not an abandoned or derelict vehicle
within the meaning of this article, such vehicle shall be released to the owner thereof or other person
legally entitled thereto upon payment of any charges incurred for towing. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000; amd.
2013 Code)
5-8A-10: NONLIABILITY OF POLICE AND TOWING SERVICE:
Any police officer or towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be
liable for damages in any action brought by the registered owner, former registered owner, or his legal
representative, or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a vehicle when the vehicle
was processed and sold or disposed of as provided in this article. All necessary parties shall have the
full right and authority to enter upon private property for the enforcement of this article when any
vehicle is in the view of the general public. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000)
5-8A-11: FEE FOR REMOVAL OF CONTAMINANTS:
Anyone in the business of receiving and storing abandoned or derelict motor vehicles who is required
by government regulations to remove from such vehicles mercury or other contaminants may impose
a service charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to cover the costs of complying with such regulations.
The city is not obligated for any cost incurred in such removal. (Ord. 3041, 2-27-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 157/460
5-8A-12: PROVISIONS NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this article shall be considered in addition to any procedures established otherwise
by law or ordinance for the removal and disposition of abandoned or derelict vehicles. (Ord. 1759, 3-
27-2000)
ARTICLE B. VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
5-8B-1: MULTIPLE VEHICLES FOR SALE:
The offering of two (2) or more motor vehicles for sale at the same time on private property located
within a residentially zoned area is prohibited. At no time and under no circumstances is the offering
for sale of a derelict vehicle or the sale of vehicle parts permitted in open areas on private property
upon which they are situated unless licensed by the city to permit such sale. For the purpose of this
section, a "For Sale" sign posted upon or adjacent to a motor vehicle constitutes an offering for sale
and is prohibited unless specifically allowed herein. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000)
5-8B-2: ENCLOSURE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES:
Unless otherwise provided herein, all unregistered, inoperable or derelict motor vehicles shall be kept
in a garage in a residential district. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000)
5-8B-3: DISMANTLING VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise provided herein, no motor vehicle which is in a state of major disassembly or
disrepair or which is being stripped or dismantled shall be permitted on any property located within a
residential or a nonresidential district unless the property is licensed for such use. The major repair or
demolition of motor vehicles shall not be permitted in residential areas. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000)
5-8B-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. Generally: All vehicles parked in a residential district shall be parked on a street, a clearly
delineated driveway or within a garage. At no time shall a motor vehicle be parked, stored or in any
manner placed on the front, side or rear yards or otherwise allowed to create a nuisance to
adjoining property owners by placing the vehicle in areas other than herein provided.
B. Commercial Vehicles:
1. No person shall park, store or house more than one commercial vehicle in a residential district.
2. The commercial vehicle parked, stored or housed within a residential district must be owned by
or assigned to the owner of the premises where the vehicle is situated and must be located on
the owner's lot in the residential district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 158/460
3. The vehicle must not exceed seven feet (7') in height and shall not be a school bus, tractor,
trailer, dump truck, front loader, crane, tow truck or similar vehicle.
4. The commercial vehicle shall be parked to the side or rear of a building so as to be screened
from view of the public right of way as much as possible.
5. For the purpose of this subsection, a commercial vehicle is a vehicle having been issued a B or
a D license plate by the secretary of state. All other commercial vehicles having greater than a D
license plate shall not be parked, stored, or housed within a residential district. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-
2000)
5-8B-5: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Recreational Vehicles: The provisions of this article shall not be construed to amend or alter any
provisions contained in other ordinances regulating the parking and/or storing of recreational
vehicles.
B. Trailers And Towable Vehicles: All provisions of this article shall apply to trailers and towable
vehicles. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000)
ARTICLE C. VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
5-8C-1: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or
occupy any structure or equipment regulated by this chapter when such conduct is contrary to or in
conflict with or in violation of any provisions stated herein. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000)
5-8C-2: PENALTY:
Any person, upon conviction of violating any provisions of this chapter, shall be fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. Any city police officer is authorized to issue a citation for
each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served, and each citation shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 1759, 3-27-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
5-8C-3: NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ORDER:
In case there is not prompt compliance with any violation order, the chief of police may request the city
council to direct the city attorney to institute an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
competent jurisdiction to collect the penalties provided in section 5-8C-2 of this article. (Ord. 1759, 3-
27-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 159/460
Chapter 9
HAZARDOUS OPENINGS AND STRUCTURES
5-9-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, the word "person" includes, but is not limited to, any individual, group
of individuals, partnership, firm or corporation. (1977 Code § 8.16.010)
5-9-2: PROHIBITIONS:
A. No person shall cause or allow to remain upon any lot or tract of real estate within the city any open
pit, well, basement or other similar opening, nor shall any person cause or allow to remain upon
any lot or tract of real estate any building or other structure which has been partially or
substantially destroyed by fire or otherwise and is either uninhabited or uninhabitable unless it is
sealed in such a manner or kept in such condition as to prevent it from being or becoming
hazardous to the public health, safety or welfare. (1977 Code § 8.16.020)
B. No person, firm or corporation shall keep or leave open, or permit or allow to remain open without
suitable safeguards therefor, any cellar door, or well, or cistern, or grating of any vault, or other
opening into any pit, hole, or subterranean chamber, upon any public street, alley or sidewalk
within the corporate limits of the city. (1977 Code § 8.16.030)
5-9-3: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (2013 Code)
Chapter 10
CLEANUP OF METHAMPHETAMINE LABS
5-10-1: PURPOSES:
The mayor and city council finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are to ensure that
people are not unnecessarily exposed to the dangers of chemicals used in the production of
methamphetamine, and that proper steps are taken to remove contaminants and assure appropriate
tests are conducted in affected structures to ensure they are sufficiently cleaned for human contact.
The mayor and city council finds that such sites may contain hazardous chemicals, substances, or
residues that place people, particularly children or adults of childbearing age, at risk of exposure
should they inhabit or visit the site. (Ord. 2364, 6-27-2011)
5-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 160/460
CERTIFIED INDUSTRIAL HYGIENIST: An individual who is certified by the American Board Of
Industrial Hygiene (ABIH) and is in good standing with that board.
ILLEGAL METHAMPHETAMINE LABORATORIES: The areas where methamphetamine has been
manufactured, processed, cooked, disposed of, or stored, and all proximate areas that are likely to be
contaminated as a result of such manufacturing, processing, disposing, or storing.
OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation who holds record fee title, in whole or in part, to the land,
buildings or structures associated with an illegal methamphetamine laboratory.
PROPERTY: Anything that may be the subject of ownership, including, but not limited to, land,
buildings, structures, mobile homes and vehicles. (Ord. 2364, 6-27-2011)
5-10-3: NOTICE TO OTHER AUTHORITIES:
Law enforcement or other authorities who identify the existence of an illegal methamphetamine
laboratory after the effective date hereof shall promptly notify county department of public health and,
if appropriate, child protection services. (Ord. 2364, 6-27-2011)
5-10-4: NUISANCE DECLARED:
A property identified as the site of an illegal methamphetamine laboratory shall be declared a public
health nuisance and unfit for human habitation or use. A warning sign shall be posted on the entrance
of the affected part of the property by law enforcement, the city fire chief, and the city code
enforcement officer or his designee. With respect to a vehicle, the warning sign shall be posted on the
front windshield. (Ord. 2364, 6-27-2011)
5-10-5: OCCUPANCY PROHIBITED:
Upon the issuance and posting of a declaration of public health nuisance, all occupants of such
building or structure shall immediately vacate the premises, and such vehicles shall be impounded by
the police. With the exception of persons evaluating the contamination level, remediating the
contamination, or conducting fire or police activities, no person shall occupy or enter, or allow
occupancy or entrance, to a building or structure which has been declared a public health nuisance,
and no person shall occupy or drive a vehicle which has been declared a public health nuisance until
such declaration is revoked or modified to allow occupancy. All who enter must have the required
health and safety training and wear appropriate personal protective equipment. Removal of the posted
declaration of public health nuisance by anyone other than the city code enforcement officer, the fire
chief or his designee or law enforcement authorities is prohibited. (Ord. 2364, 6-27-2011; amd. 2013
Code)
5-10-6: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Notice To Owner: The city shall notify the property owner that the property has been declared a
public health nuisance, that the property owner has the right to appeal the declaration to the mayor
and city council, that the city code requires cleanup according to the guidelines, and that the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 161/460
property owner must contract with a certified industrial hygienist to assess the contamination,
oversee the cleanup, and provide a cleanup report; or that, in the alternative, the property owner
may demolish the building or structure.
B. Failure To Abate; Abatement By City: If, after ten (10) days following notice, the city is unable to
obtain any reasonable assurance or plan from the property owner or occupant that the dwelling,
structure or vehicle is being properly vacated, cleaned, remediated and tested, and no appeal has
been requested:
1. A copy of the declaration of public health nuisance may be provided to the lienholders and
mortgage holders of the affected structure and/or properties, and may be recorded with the
clerk.
2. The city may seek to abate the nuisance itself and recover all costs associated with such
abatement.
3. The city may remove the structure or building and assess the whole cost of such removal,
including incidental costs, which assessment shall be a lien against such property until paid.
C. Appeal: Any appeal shall be heard by the mayor and city council within thirty (30) days. Upon a
finding that the declaration was validly issued, the property owner or occupant shall have ten (10)
days to offer reasonable assurance or a plan to the city that the dwelling or structure is being
properly vacated, cleaned, remediated and tested. (Ord. 2364, 6-27-2011)
5-10-7: AUTHORITY TO MODIFY OR REMOVE NUISANCE DECLARATION:
The code enforcement officer or the fire chief or his designee is authorized to modify the declaration
conditions or to remove the declaration of public health nuisance only after the certified industrial
hygienist submits his or her final report to the city for review and acceptance, and the owner notifies
the code enforcement officer that cleanup has occurred. (Ord. 2364, 6-27-2011)
5-10-8: PENALTY:
Any person and/or entity violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in section 1-
4-1 of this code per day. (Ord. 2364, 6-27-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 11
DEPOSITS INTO, INTERFERENCE WITH
WATERCOURSES AND DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
5-11-1: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN ACTS:
Unless a permit has been issued as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
entity or corporation to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 162/460
A. Place, deposit, or permit to be placed or deposited any debris, fill, sand, stone or other solid
materials of any kind or nature, or construction of any kind, into or across any stream, ditch,
culvert, pipe, watercourse or other drainage system within the city.
B. Construct and/or place any ditch, pipe, culvert or artificial watercourse of any kind or nature which
shall collect and direct the flow of natural surface waters or drainage, or increase in intensity or
quantity the flow of surface waters or drainage, from paved surfaces, structures, roads or
improvements directly into any stream, ditch, culvert, pipe or watercourse or other drainage system
in the city.
C. Fill, obstruct, dam, divert or otherwise change or alter the natural or artificial flow of waters or
drainage, or the intensity or quantity of flow, through any stream, ditch, pipe, culvert, watercourse
or other improvements or drainage system with the city. (Ord. 2283, 9-21-2009)
5-11-2: PERMIT APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL:
A. All applicants for a permit to do any of the acts set forth in section 5-11-1 of this chapter shall
submit a proposal to the city code enforcement officer who will determine if plans and
specifications prepared by a licensed professional engineer should be required. If it is determined
such plans and specifications are not required, the code enforcement officer may recommend to
the city council that a permit be issued. If it is determined such plans and specifications should be
required, the code enforcement officer, after review of plans and specifications submitted to him,
may recommend to the city council that the permit may be issued.
B. When an application for a permit to do any of the acts set forth in section 5-11-1 of this chapter that
would affect land lying partly without the area requiring approval of subdivision or site
development, then a separate plan shall be prepared for that affected land and filed with the city
clerk who will forward such plan to the code enforcement officer for review and, if need be, submit
to the city engineer.
C. If review by the city engineer is deemed appropriate, the city engineer shall report the results of his
review to the code enforcement officer who shall make a recommendation to the city council to
approve or deny the application. The city council shall advise the city clerk of its decision within
fourteen (14) days after receipt of the recommendation of the code enforcement officer. If the
application for permit is approved, the city clerk shall issue the permit. (Ord. 2283, 9-21-2009)
5-11-3: TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS WASTES PROHIBITED:
No toxic waste or hazardous material shall be deposited in any watercourse or drainage system with
the city. (Ord. 2283, 9-21-2009)
5-11-4: CORRECTION OF EXISTING CONDITIONS:
Except as hereinafter provided, all existing obstructions, dams, diversions, construction of any kind,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 163/460
deposits of debris, fill, sand, stone, logs, trees or other solid materials, or other alterations or
diversions of the natural flow of water or the intensity or quantity of flow through, across or to any
stream, ditch, culvert, watercourse or other drainage system within the city which:
A. Causes the inundation of real property and/or buildings on other premises; or
B. Constitutes an undue burden upon the official drainage system or hampers the proper present or
future course of development of the official drainage system; or
C. Presently constitutes, or in the reasonably foreseeable future will constitute, a danger or hazard to
the well being, safety or general welfare of the residents of the city of any property located therein;
or
D. Obstructs the natural flow of water;
shall be removed or corrected by the owners of the premises upon which said obstructions, dams,
diversion, construction, deposits or other alterations of the natural flow of water are situated, within
thirty (30) days after written notice to remove or correct same. (Ord. 2283, 9-21-2009)
5-11-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The requirement that a permit must be issued before engaging in any of the acts specified in sections
5-11-1 and 5-11-4 of this chapter shall not apply to works to be done pursuant to the authority of an
agency of the state, federal or other government entity. (Ord. 2283, 9-21-2009)
5-11-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Notice Of Violation: Any person, firm, entity or corporation found to be violating any provision of this
chapter shall be served with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a thirty
(30) day time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period
stated in such notice, correct or remove all violations. (Ord. 2283, 9-21-2009)
B. Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided in subsection A of this section shall be deemed guilty of a city ordinance violation and
shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. Each day the condition
exists after the thirty (30) day notice is received shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2283,
9-21-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
Title 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 164/460
Chapter 1
POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
6-1-1: APPOINTMENT OF POLICE CHIEF AND FIRE CHIEF:
The chief of police and the chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the city council, and said appointments need not be made from the members of
the police and fire departments, respectively. (1977 Code § 2.08.040; amd. 2013 Code)
6-1-2: REGISTRY LISTS:
A. Commencing with the expiration of the current registry lists for candidates for employment as city
police officers or firefighters, the fire and police merit board shall conduct examinations annually for
candidates to be enrolled in the registry lists.
B. The names of qualified candidates shall remain on the registry lists for two (2) years.
C. The fire and police merit board shall have the discretion of selecting names for employment from
those on lists up to two (2) years or on the most recently compiled lists. (Ord. 2253, 4-13-2009)
6-1-3: PREEMPLOYMENT CONTRACT:
A. Any applicant for a position in the fire department or the police department must agree to the
following conditions at the time of making application for such position: that should he/she be hired
as an employee of the city police or fire department, he/she will not voluntarily or involuntarily
separate from the employ of the city for a minimum of thirty six (36) months from the date of hire,
otherwise, he/she will remunerate the city for any and all costs incurred as enumerated in
subsection B of this section at the following rate: One hundred percent (100%), if separation is
prior to thirty six (36) months having elapsed from date of hire.
B. Schedule of costs which may be incurred by the city are: (Ord. 1744, 7-6-1999)
1. Any preentry medical examination required by the city police and firefighters' pension funds.
(Ord. 1744, 7-6-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
2. Basic training, including Fire Fighter Recruit Academy and Police Training Institute Recruit
Academy, including lodging, meals and travel expenses.
C. The obligations under the required agreement shall terminate after the completion of thirty six (36)
months from the date of hire. (Ord. 1744, 7-6-1999)
D. The agreement shall contain a statement that the applicant understands that employment with the
city is contingent upon his/her completion of a probationary period of twelve (12) months and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 165/460
continued performance to the satisfaction of the city. Nothing contained herein shall be construed
as a promise or agreement by the city to retain the applicant as an employee of the city for thirty
six (36) months or any portion thereof or thereafter. (Ord. 1744, 7-6-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
E. The city does not, by the agreement, waive any of the rights, privileges, or prerogatives it
possesses now or hereafter in effect.
F. The applicant acknowledges that he/she has examined the agreement that he/she has read and
understands the agreement, and he/she has the right to consult an attorney prior to entering the
agreement. (Ord. 1744, 7-6-1999)
6-1-4: MANDATORY RETIREMENT AGE:
A. Established: There is established a mandatory retirement age for all police officers and firefighters
now in the service of the city and for all police officers and firefighters who may hereafter enter the
service of the city. (1977 Code § 2.68.010)
B. Designated: The age at which such police officers and firefighters must retire from the service of
the city is designated to be sixty five (65) years. (1977 Code § 2.68.020)
C. Time For Retirement: Any police officer or firefighter shall be retired effective at the close of the first
regular pay period after such police officer or firefighter reaches his sixty fifth birthday. (1977 Code
§ 2.68.030)
6-1-5: SOLICITING, RECEIPT OF FUNDS OR EQUIPMENT FOR POLICE OR FIRE
DEPARTMENT:
A. No solicitation for money, directly or indirectly, in the name of or in behalf of the city police
department or the city fire department, expressed or implied, shall be conducted within the city by
mail, by telephone, in person or otherwise without the prior approval of the city council.
B. Neither the city police department nor the city fire department nor the personnel of either
department may receive money or equipment for use by or use in the respective departments from
any individual, organization or entity without the prior approval of the city council.
C. Personnel employed in the city police department or the city fire department are prohibited from
engaging in the solicitation of money or equipment, directly or indirectly, for use in or by either
department without the prior approval of the city council. (Ord. 1702, 10-19-1998)
ARTICLE A. POLICE DEPARTMENT
6-1A-1: ESTABLISHED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 166/460
There is established a police department of the city which shall consist of such officers of the city as
are by law clothed with police powers, a chief of police, and such other police officers as the city
council shall, from time to time by ordinance or resolution, prescribe. (1977 Code § 2.24.010; amd.
2013 Code)
6-1A-2: SUPERVISION:
The police force of the city shall be under the immediate supervision of the commissioner of public
health and safety of the city. (1977 Code § 2.24.100)
6-1A-3: JURISDICTION OF POLICE AND FIRE MERIT BOARD; EXEMPTIONS:
A. All personnel in the city police department are certified to be subject to and under the jurisdiction of
the police and fire merit board to the extent provided by law. The offices of chief of police and
assistant chief of police remain exempt from and outside the purview of the jurisdiction of the
police and fire merit board. In the event any person holding the office of chief of police returns to
the ranks of sworn personnel, that individual will revert to and be under the jurisdiction of the police
and fire merit board. (Ord. 1657, 6-23-1997; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Those employees of the city police department holding the supervisory positions of chief and
assistant chief are hereby specifically excepted and exempted from any collective bargaining unit
that is now or that may hereafter be formed by the members of the department. (Ord. 1097, 12-30-
1985; amd. 2013 Code)
6-1A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF CHIEF:
A. Generally: The chief of police shall superintend the police force of the city and have the custody,
care and control of the public property of the police department, subject to the directions of the
commissioner of public health and safety and the city council, and of all firearms and other
equipment thereof. It shall be his duty to preserve the peace, order, safety and cleanliness of the
city, and to this end, he shall execute or cause to be executed and enforced all orders of the city
council. He shall be charged with the duty of protecting the rights of persons and property and
cause to be enforced all ordinances of the city. (1977 Code § 2.24.020; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Health Duties: The chief of police shall execute or cause to be executed all orders directed to him
by the commissioner of public health and safety so far as they relate to the preservation of the
health and safety of the people of the city. (1977 Code § 2.24.030; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Reports: The chief of police shall, at the first meeting of the city council in May of each year, make
an annual report in writing to the city council of the state of the police force with a detailed report of
the transactions of the police department for the preceding year with such statistics and
suggestions in regard to the requirements of said department as he may deem advisable, and shall
also make reports of any matter or thing concerning such department whenever requested by the
commissioner of public health and safety or by the city council. (1977 Code § 2.24.090)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 167/460
6-1A-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
A. Serving Warrants: The chief of police and any regular or other police officer shall have power and
authority and it shall be his duty to serve and execute within the city warrants and other processes
for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with the violation of any city ordinance,
or any crime, misdemeanor or offense against the peace of the state of Illinois or the city, or held
for examination or trial, or taken on execution for the commission of any crime, misdemeanor or
violation of any law or ordinance of the city, and while serving or executing or assisting in the
service or execution of any such warrant or process as aforesaid, he shall be vested with and have
all the powers and authority conferred upon sheriffs by the common law and laws of the state of
Illinois. (1977 Code § 2.24.040; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Assist Fire Department: It shall be the duty of the police force to aid the fire department by giving
alarms in case of fire and by clearing the streets or grounds in the immediate vicinity of any fire so
that the members of the fire department shall not be hindered or obstructed in the performance of
their duty. (1977 Code § 2.24.060)
C. Arrests: The several members of the police force are severally authorized to arrest, with or without
process or on view, any person who breaks the peace or is found violating any ordinance of the
city or any criminal law of the state of Illinois, and to take such person before the proper judge or, if
necessary, detain such person in custody overnight or Sunday or any legal holiday in the county
jail or other qualified place of incarceration until he can be brought before the proper judge for trial.
(1977 Code § 2.24.070; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Court Duties: All police officers of the city making arrests shall attend as witnesses before the court
where the trial may be had and shall procure all necessary evidence in their power and furnish a
list of witnesses to the court and the prosecuting attorney. (1977 Code § 2.24.080; amd. 2013
Code)
6-1A-6: POLICE PENSION FUND AND BOARD:
A. State Regulations Apply: The provisions of 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., "police
pension fund - municipalities 500,000 and under", are in force and effect in the city. (1977 Code
§ 2.60.010; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Board Of Trustees: The mayor of the city is authorized and directed to appoint two (2) members to
serve upon the board of trustees to administer the police pension fund, one of whom shall serve
until the second Tuesday in May 1955, and the other to serve until the second Tuesday in May
1956, and the two (2) trustees so appointed shall call an election to be held as provided in the act
to choose the other members of the board of trustees. Each such trustee shall serve a term of
three (3) years which terms shall be staggered. (1977 Code § 2.60.030; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Treasurer:
1. The city finance director-treasurer shall be the treasurer and custodian of the police pension
fund and shall make disbursements therefrom only at the direction of and on the authority of the
board of trustees. (1977 Code § 2.60.040; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 168/460
2. The city finance director-treasurer shall set aside for the police pension fund the monies
provided to be set aside by the act designated in subsection A of this section. (1977 Code
§ 2.60.020; amd. 2013 Code)
6-1A-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The rules and regulations of the police department, as set out in ordinance 1407, as amended, are
hereby adopted by reference. A copy of said rules and regulations is on file in the office of the city
clerk for public use and inspection. (2013 Code)
6-1A-8: RESISTING, HINDERING POLICE PROHIBITED:
Whoever, within the city, resists any member of the police force or any other person duly authorized to
do police duty, in the discharge of his duty, or in any way interferes with, prevents or hinders in the
discharge of his duty as such member, or attempts to do so, or whoever in any manner assists any
person in the custody of any member of the police force to escape or to attempt to escape from such
custody, or attempts to rescue any person from such custody, shall be fined as provided in section 1-
4-1 of this code. (1977 Code § 2.24.050; amd. 2013 Code)
ARTICLE B. FIRE DEPARTMENT
6-1B-1: JURISDICTION OF POLICE AND FIRE MERIT BOARD; EXEMPTIONS:
A. All personnel in the city fire department are certified to be subject to and under the jurisdiction of
the police and fire merit board to the extent provided by law. The office of fire chief remains exempt
from and outside the purview of the jurisdiction of the police and fire merit board. In the event any
person holding the office of fire chief returns to the ranks of sworn personnel, that individual will
revert to and be under the jurisdiction of the police and fire merit board. (Ord. 1657, 6-23-1997;
amd. 2013 Code)
B. The city does hereby recognize the Marion Professional Firefighters Local 2977 of the International
Association Of Firefighters AFL-CIO-CLC as the exclusive bargaining representative for all full time
employees of the city fire department, excluding the chief, for the purpose of collective bargaining,
and establishing and administering a written labor agreement covering wages, rates of pay, hours
of labor, and all other terms and conditions of employment. (Ord. 1111, 3-31-1986)
6-1B-2: FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND AND BOARD:
A. State Regulations Apply: The provisions of 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-101 et seq.,
"firefighters' pension fund - municipalities 500,000 and under", are in force and effect in the city.
(1977 Code § 2.64.010; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Board Of Trustees:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 169/460
1. Created; Composition: There is hereby created the board of trustees of the firefighters' pension
fund. The membership of the board shall be as follows: the city finance director-treasurer, the
city clerk, the fire chief, the mayor, three (3) persons from the ranks of active firefighters and one
person who has retired under the firefighters' pension fund act of 1919.
2. Elected Members:
a. The members chosen from the active and retired firefighters shall be elected by ballot at
elections to be held on the third Monday in April of the applicable years under the Australian
ballot system, at such place or places in the city, and under such regulations as shall be
prescribed by the board.
b. No person shall cast more than one vote for each candidate for whom he or she is eligible to
vote. In the elections for board members to be chosen from the active firefighters, all active
firefighters and no others may vote. In the elections for board members to be chosen from
retired firefighters, the retired firefighters and no others may vote.
c. Each member of the board so elected shall hold office for a term of three (3) years and until
his or her successor has been duly elected and qualified.
d. The board shall canvass the ballots and declare which persons have been elected and for
what term or terms respectively. In case of a tie vote between two (2) or more candidates, the
board shall determine by lot which candidate or candidates have been elected and for what
term or terms respectively. In the event of the failure, resignation, or inability to act of any
board member, a successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special election called
by the board and conducted in the same manner as a regular election.
3. President And Secretary: The board shall elect annually from its members a president and
secretary.
4. Compensation: Board members shall not receive or have any right to receive any salary from a
pension fund for services performed as board members. (2013 Code)
C. Treasurer:
1. The city finance director-treasurer shall be treasurer and custodian of the firefighters' pension
fund and shall make disbursements thereof only at the direction of and the authorization of the
board of trustees. (1977 Code § 2.64.040; amd. 2013 Code)
2. The city finance director-treasurer shall set aside for the firefighters' pension fund the monies
provided to be set aside by the act designated in subsection A of this section from time to time
as required by law. (1977 Code § 2.64.020; amd. 2013 Code)
6-1B-3: NONRESIDENT FEES FOR DEPARTMENT SERVICES:
A. Established:
1. Any nonresident of the city who receives service from the city fire department personnel and city
emergency equipment, including the "jaws of life", while within the corporate limits of the city
shall pay a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. Any nonresident of the city who receives service from the city fire department personnel and city
emergency equipment, including the "jaws of life", outside the corporate limits of the city shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 170/460
pay a fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
B. Copies Of Provisions: Copies of reports of the providing of the services indicated in subsection A of
this section will be made available by the fire department upon payment of five dollars ($5.00) for
each copy. (Ord. 1568, 9-5-1995)
6-1B-4: HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES SPILLS:
A. Immediate Response Required: The city fire department is authorized and directed to respond,
immediately upon being notified, and to do all things within its capabilities to contain, remove and
dispose of any material hazardous to public health and safety that is leaked, spilled or otherwise
improperly released within the corporate limits of the city or within a reasonable distance thereof.
(Ord. 1570, 9-11-1995; amd. Ord. 2275, 7-20-2009)
B. Contract For Services: Should such response require the services of special personnel and
equipment beyond the capabilities of the city fire department to provide, the chief of the fire
department is authorized to obtain or to contract for the services of personnel or equipment
sufficient to contain, remove and dispose of such hazardous materials.
C. Responsibility For Costs: The costs incurred for the use of such special personnel and equipment,
in addition to the costs of the use of city personnel and equipment, shall be charged to the person,
firm or organization, jointly and severally, in possession of, in the process of transporting or
otherwise responsible for the containment of any hazardous material spilled, leaked or otherwise
improperly released.
D. Costs Established: The amount of the costs incurred by the city from the use of special personnel
and equipment are the amounts to be charged the person, firm or organization designated in
subsection C of this section. In addition, such person, firm or organization shall be charged for the
use of city personnel, equipment and materials as follows:
Pumper truck $300.00 per hour
Aerial ladder truck 300.00 per hour
Communications unit 300.00 per hour
Hazardous materials truck 300.00 per hour
Off duty personnel call back Hourly overtime rate, plus 30 percent
Other personnel Regular hourly rate
Materials Cost of replacement
Other equipment Regular hourly rate
(Ord. 1570, 9-11-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 171/460
6-1B-5: SPECIALIZED AND TECHNICAL RESCUE SERVICES:
A. Immediate Response Required: The city fire department is authorized and directed to respond,
immediately upon being notified, and to do all things within its capabilities to safely and responsibly
perform specialized and technical rescue services including, but not limited to, structural collapse,
tactical rescue, high angle rescue, underwater rescue and recovery, confined space rescue, below
grade rescue and trench rescue within the corporate limits of the city or within a reasonable
distance thereof.
B. Contract For Services: Should such response require the services of specially trained personnel
and equipment required to perform specialized and technical rescues beyond the capabilities of
the city fire department, the chief of the fire department is authorized to obtain or to contract the
services of personnel and/or equipment sufficient to perform such specialized and technical rescue
services.
C. Responsibility For Costs: The costs incurred for the use of specialized personnel and equipment, in
addition to the costs of the use of city personnel and equipment, shall be charged to the person,
firm or organization, jointly and severally, requiring or responsible for the deployment and
subsequent operations of such specialized and technical rescue personnel and equipment.
D. Costs Established: The costs incurred by the city from the use of specialized personnel and
equipment are the amounts to be charged the person, firm or organization designated in
subsection C of this section. In addition, such person, firm or organization shall be charged for the
use of city personnel, equipment and materials as follows:
Pumper engine $300.00 per hour
Aerial ladder truck 300.00 per hour
Technical rescue unit 300.00 per hour
Communications unit 300.00 per hour
Off duty personnel call back Hourly overtime rate, plus 30 percent
On duty personnel Regular hourly rate
Materials Cost of replacement
Other equipment Scheduled hourly rate
(Ord. 2282, 9-14-2009)
6-1B-6: TRAINING:
A. Participation In State Training Act: The city hereby elects to participate in the programs provided in
the Illinois fire protection training act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 172/460
B. Certification Required: Before any individual may commence regular full time employment as a
firefighter, he must have been certified by the Illinois state fire marshal as a firefighter II, as having
successfully completed an approved training course as provided in the act.
C. Time For Completion Of Training: The firefighter II certification must be completed by the trainee
within his probationary period of twelve (12) months or as soon as training schedules permit
thereafter. Failure of any trainee to complete such basic training and certifications within the
required period will render that individual and the city ineligible for reimbursement funding for basic
training for that individual in the fiscal year in which his probationary period ends. The individual
may later become certified without reimbursement. (Ord. 2269, 7-20-2009)
6-1B-7: ARSON INVESTIGATOR:
A. There is hereby created within the Marion fire department the position of "arson investigator".
B. The arson investigator shall be named by the chief of the fire department and possess the following
qualifications:
1. Be a full time sworn firefighter for the Marion fire department;
2. Be certified as a firefighter II or basic firefighter by the state of Illinois;
3. To have successfully completed a course in fire and arson investigation approved by the office
of the state fire marshal pursuant to the Illinois fire protection training act, 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 740/1 et seq.;
4. To have completed a training program offered or approved by the Illinois law enforcement
training and standards board which substantially conforms to standards promulgated pursuant to
the Illinois police training act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 705/1 et seq.;
5. To have completed an Illinois mandatory firearms training course offered or approved by the
Illinois law enforcement training and standards board which substantially conforms to standards
promulgated pursuant to the Illinois police training act and the peace officer and probation officer
firearm training act.
C. The arson investigator shall have the following duties and powers:
1. To investigate, at the direction of the chief of the department and in his absence the assistant
chief, fires having an unknown origin and cause or otherwise being suspicious in nature. In the
absence of the chief or assistant chief the next highest ranking officer shall be responsible for
determining the origin and cause of such fires;
2. To effect arrest when there exists probable cause to do so;
3. To apply for and secure warrants for arrest and searches;
4. To execute search warrants and seize such evidence described in the search warrant;
5. To carry weapons as may be reasonably necessary during the course of an investigation of the
origin, cause, and circumstances of such fires or explosions that are suspected to be arson or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 173/460
arson related crimes; and
6. To perform all other necessary and reasonable actions as directed by the chief of the
department.
D. The arson investigator is hereby classified as a peace officer.
E. The arson investigator shall be considered a member of the Marion fire department and shall, in
addition to the duties imposed by subsection C of this section, discharge the duties of their
assigned rank by the chief of the department. (Ord. 3268, 7-16-2015)
Chapter 2
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
6-2-0: DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT:
There is hereby established the department of emergency management, the purpose of which is to
plan for and prepare to manage the city response for carrying out emergency functions necessary to
contend with disasters or emergencies that disrupt normal community activities or city services in
order to preserve and protect the lives and property of the citizens of Marion. (Ord. 3132, 10-28-2013)
6-2-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters, natural and otherwise, which may result in
injury to persons and damage to property in order to assure preparations of the city will be adequate
to cope with such eventualities, it is hereby declared to be necessary:
A. To establish a department of emergency management for the planning and preparation for
emergency government operations in times of disasters.
B. To create the office of emergency manager, the occupant of which shall administer the operations
of the department of emergency management.
C. To comply with provisions of statutes which allow a local unit of government to establish an
organization for emergency management.
D. For the emergency manager to exercise such necessary powers as may be required to facilitate
the operation of the department as are authorized by the city council and relative state and federal
regulations.
E. To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the city and other units of government with
respect to the carrying out of emergency preparedness management subject to direction of the city
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 174/460
council. (Ord. 3132, 10-28-2013)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
DISASTER: Considered to be an occurrence that has resulted in injury to persons or extensive
damage to property for which customary resources for relief or assistance within the affected area are
insufficient to succor such injuries or repair such damage after they occur.
EMERGENCY: A sudden condition or state of affairs calling for immediate action to prevent injury to
person or damage to property, or to call for immediate response where injury to person or damage to
property has occurred precipitously.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: Considered to include preparation for and to carry out emergency
functions to prevent injury to persons and damage to property which could result from a potential
catastrophic or disastrous event. Emergency management shall include providing necessary functions
for the care of persons afflicted and minimizing the effect of damage to property resulting from such an
event.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES: The total personnel resources engaged in emergency
management functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or order
hereunder. This includes personnel from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private
organizations and agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGER: The staff element responsible for coordinating city planning and
preparation for disaster response. This position is a city liaison and coordinates with federal, state and
local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures implementation of federal
and state program requirements. (Ord. 3032, 1-30-2012; amd. 2013 Code; Ord. 3132, 10-28-2013)
6-2-3: EMERGENCY MANAGER:
A. Created; Appointment And Term; Compensation: There is hereby created the office of emergency
manager, the occupant of which shall administer the operation of the department of emergency
management and have responsibility in cooperation with the superintendents of other city
departments for the organization and operation of emergency preparedness for response to a
disaster or emergency. The emergency manager shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice
and consent of the city council. The emergency manager shall serve at the will of the mayor and
will receive salary and benefits as determined by the city council. (Ord. 3132, 10-28-2013)
B. Powers And Duties:
1. The emergency manager, with the consent of the mayor, shall represent the city on any city,
regional, or state meetings or conferences relating to emergency management.
2. The emergency manager shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an
emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present such agreements to the city
council for its action. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state emergency plan.
3. The emergency manager shall make studies and surveys of the manpower, industries,
resources and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 175/460
emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in times of an emergency or
disaster.
4. The emergency manager shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards and subboards, if required, in accordance with state and federal plans and
directions, subject to approval of the mayor and city council.
5. The emergency manager shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency
preparedness of the city including municipal and unincorporated areas and shall present such
plan to the city council for its approval. When the city council has approved the plan by
resolution, it shall be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be
modified in like manner from time to time.
6. The emergency manager shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to
the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plan of the federal
government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of other political subdivisions
within the state.
7. In accordance with the state emergency plan, the emergency manager shall institute such
training programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and
emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the city
comprehensive emergency management plan when a disaster occurs.
8. The emergency manager shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities
of existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers
and personnel of all such departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable,
cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the city emergency manager upon
request. The head of each department or agency, in cooperation with the emergency manager,
shall be responsible for the planning and programming of such emergency activities as will
involve the utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.
9. The emergency manager shall, in cooperation with existing city departments and agencies
affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of such emergency management
personnel that may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the city
and state. To the extent that such emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city
department or agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to such departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of said department or agency.
10. Consistent with the state emergency services law, the emergency manager shall coordinate
the activity of the municipal emergency management plan within the city and assist in
establishing and conducting training programs as required to assure emergency operational
capability in the various emergency response and recovery services.
11. The emergency manager shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the
governor with reference to emergency management.
12. The emergency manager shall act as principal aide and adviser to the mayor who shall be
responsible for direction and control of all city emergency operations during an emergency. The
emergency manager's main responsibility is to assure coordination among the operating
departments, nongovernmental groups, and with higher and adjacent governments.
13. The emergency manager shall prepare and submit such reports on emergency preparedness
activities as may be requested by the city council or the mayor. (Ord. 3032, 1-30-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 176/460
14. The emergency manager shall be the liaison to and coordinator with federal, state and other
local jurisdictions with regard to disaster and emergency preparedness and implementation of
federal and state program requirements. (Ord. 3132, 10-28-2013)
6-2-4: LOCAL EMERGENCIES:
A local emergency may be declared only by the mayor or his legal successors. It shall not be
continued for a period in excess of three (3) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any
order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly by the city clerk. A declaration of a local emergency
shall invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or
interjurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance thereunder. (Ord. 3032, 1-30-
2012)
6-2-5: EMERGENCY REGULATIONS:
A. Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for such an emergency for which
adequate regulations have not been adopted by the governor or city council, the council may, by
resolution, promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting:
1. The conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies.
2. The repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire,
and safety regulation, drills, or practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other
matters which are required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies.
B. Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall be dated; shall refer to the
particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited; and shall be filed in the office of the city
administrator, which copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours. Notice of the existence of such regulation and its availability for inspection at the
administrator's office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other
headquarters of the city or at such other places in the affected area as the council or mayor shall
designate in the resolution. By like resolution, the council or mayor may modify or rescind any such
regulation.
C. The city council or mayor may rescind any such regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner
rescinded, every such regulation shall expire at the end of thirty (30) days after its effective date or
at the end of the emergency to which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or
regulation inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the council or mayor shall be
suspended during the period of time and to the extent such conflict exists.
D. During a declared emergency, the city, notwithstanding any statutory provision to the contrary, is
empowered, through its governing body acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to
enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster by protecting the
health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of
such disaster. The city may exercise such powers in light of the exigencies of the disaster without
compliance with normal procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 177/460
performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and
materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds
including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of call for bids, provisions of
personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for budgets. (Ord. 3032,
1-30-2012)
6-2-6: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FUNCTIONS:
All functions hereunder and all other activities relating to emergency management are hereby
declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any
person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this chapter, or under the
workers' compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any such person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any act of congress. (Ord. 3032, 1-30-2012)
6-2-7: EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN:
All agencies shall abide by and cooperate fully with the provisions described or referenced in the
emergency operations plan attached to the ordinance codified herein. All responsibilities of tasked
organizations to prepare and maintain standard operating procedures and commit them to training,
exercising and plan maintenance efforts needed to support the EP is declared. All tasked
organizations further agree to implement full compliance with all principals and operational protocols in
compliance with the national incident management system (NIMS) to ensure effective cross
jurisdictional cooperation between multiple organizations when responding to incidents. (Ord. 3045, 4-
9-2012)
Chapter 3
FALSE ALARMS
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM SYSTEM: A device or assembly of equipment or devices designed or arranged to signal the
presence or existence of a hazard requiring urgent attention of fire department personnel. These
systems include:
A. Smoke, fire, sprinkler alarms and any other alarm which requires an emergency response by
the fire department;
B. Those systems terminating at a dedicated piece of equipment within the Marion fire department
or Marion police department;
C. Automatic devices which transmit voice reproductions or messages over telephone lines; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 178/460
D. Systems which notify certain alarm stations which, in turn, notify the Marion fire department or
Marion police department of such alarms.
ALARM USER: Any person who owns, possesses, controls, or otherwise exercises dominion over a
premises or property, or who regularly supervises the operation of any business thereon, on or in
regard to which premises or property an alarm system is maintained. A person owns or controls
property if he is the grantee under a deed, purchaser under a contract or a tenant.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system resulting in a signal or calls when there is no threat
to life, safety, or property requiring urgent attention in, on, or at the property in regard to which the
signal or call was sent. A false alarm includes, but is not limited to, activation of an alarm system
caused by human error; a mechanical or system malfunction which results from neglect or failure to
maintain; or an intentional activation when no threat is present.
Prior notification must be received by the fire department and police department, from the responsible
party, if the alarm system is being installed, repaired, maintained, or tested. Failure to notify the
departments in advance of the activity in connection with the alarm system will result in a fee being
imposed for a false alarm.
PERSON: A natural person or a firm, organization, association, partnership or corporation. (Ord. 2271,
7-20-2009)
6-3-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR FALSE ALARMS:
The alarm user shall be responsible for all false alarms sent because of the activation of an alarm
system in, or in regard to, his property, or because of the action or statement of any of his employees
or agents, if such action or statement is likely to result in the sending of an alarm, except when the
agent or employee making the statement, taking the action or sending the alarm does so with the
specific intention of sending a false alarm or causing one to be sent, or does so without caring
whether the alarm is false. (Ord. 2271, 7-20-2009)
6-3-3: NOTICE OF FALSE ALARMS:
The fire chief or his designee shall notify the responsible person in writing, by personal service or by
U.S. postal service. The notification will inform the person after the third occurrence of a false alarm to
take corrective action in regard to false alarms and inform him that any further false alarms will be
subject to the false alarm fee schedule. (Ord. 2271, 7-20-2009)
6-3-4: SERVICE FEES:
A. Fees Established: The fourth false alarm occurring and every false alarm thereafter from or in
regard to the same premises or property shall result in the alarm user being assessed a service
fee. The service fee for the fourth false alarm shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); the service
fee for the fifth false alarm shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00); with each subsequent false
alarm increasing an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 179/460
B. Waiver Of Fee: The service fee may be waived by the fire chief or his designee in cases where the
false alarm is not reasonably attributable to the alarm user or the alarm user's equipment. (Ord.
2271, 7-20-2009)
6-3-5: FALSE ALARMS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to send or give a false alarm. (Ord. 2271, 7-20-2009)
6-3-6: PENALTY:
Any person who knowingly sends or causes to be sent a false alarm shall be punishable by a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2271, 7-20-2009; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
of the city and to ensure the humane treatment of animals by regulating the care and control of
animals within the city by guarding against the annoyance and injury caused by animals and to protect
them from neglect and abuse, and to discourage the unnecessarily excessive multiplication of animals
which have a tendency to run at large. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter and unless otherwise specified, the following words and phrases shall
be defined as follows:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: A full time sworn police officer, who is responsible for enforcing and
administering and performing such duties as prescribed by the provisions and requirements contained
in this chapter. The animal control officer will report to the chief of police or his designee.
ASSISTANT TO ANIMAL CONTROL: A full or part time employee who is responsible to the animal
control officer who performs duties as assigned by the animal control officer or his supervisors.
CRUELTY: Any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death of an animal is
caused or permitted, including failure to provide proper drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the
elements, a sanitary and safe living environment, veterinary care or nutritious food in sufficient
quantity.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any individual dog which, when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended
by its owner or custodian, in a terrorizing or menacing manner, approaches any human being in a
reasonably apparent attitude of attack upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place, or private
property which is not owned by the owner of such animal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 180/460
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Any dog, cat, domesticated sheep, horse, cow, goat, swine, fowl, duck, goose,
turkey, confined domestic hare and rabbit, pheasant, and other birds and animals raised and/or
maintained in confinement.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, designed to prevent the escape of
a dog from said structure and the entry of any young children, and suitable to confine a dangerous
dog in conjunction with other measures that may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering
of the dangerous dog within the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and
designed with secure sides, top, and bottom and shall be capable of preventing the animal from
escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is a room within a residence, it cannot have direct
ingress from or egress to the outdoors unless it leads directly to an enclosed pen, and the door must
be locked. A dangerous dog may be allowed to move about freely within the entire residence if it is
muzzled at all times.
FERAL CAT: A cat that is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or feral cat, and is not
socialized, or a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and is no longer socialized or lives on a
farm.
HAS BEEN BITTEN: Having been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the human or animal seized
has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced, or has had contact of animal saliva with a break or
abrasion of the skin.
IMPOUNDED: The taking into custody by the animal control officer, the assistant to the animal control,
or a Marion police officer of any animal to be in violation of this chapter.
OWNER: Any person who has:
A. A right or interest in an animal;
B. Keeps or harbors an animal;
C. Has an animal in his care or custody; or
D. Who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him without
taking steps to remove said animal within three (3) days.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, society, or association.
PHYSICAL INJURY: The impairment of a physical condition.
POLICE ANIMAL: An animal owned or used by a law enforcement department, fire department, or
other enforcement agency in the course of the department's or agency's work.
POUND: An animal control facility used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or
unwanted animals.
PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL: Any animal that unreasonably annoys or endangers the life or health of
persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of persons, other than the owners
of the animal, to the enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 181/460
not be limited to:
A. Any animal that makes repeated, unreasonable, and disturbing noises, including, but not limited
to, continued, repeated and excessive howling, barking, whining, or other utterances which
cause unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others of ordinary
sensibilities who are in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored.
B. Any animal that causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates
unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises
where the animal is kept or harbored.
C. Any animal that damages, soils, defiles or defecates on any property other than that of its
owner.
RUN AT LARGE: To be free of any restraint, leash, cord, chain, or otherwise not in the control or
custody of a person physically capable of restraining the animal when the animal is not upon the
owner's premises.
STRAY ANIMAL: Any animal (dog or cat) running at large without a collar.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any individual dog that:
A. When unprovoked, inflicts a bite to a human being or any other animal whether on public or
private property;
B. Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury,
or to otherwise endanger the safety of any human being or domestic animal;
C. Has a trait or characteristic and a generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or
unprovoked attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner
or with special equipment;
D. Attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation; or
E. Has been found to be a "dangerous animal" upon three (3) separate occasions. (Ord. 2189, 3-
10-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
6-4-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
A. Mayor And Chief Of Police: The mayor is responsible for the administration of this chapter. He may
delegate any and all necessary and reasonable powers to appropriate city departments to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter. The delegated enforcement of this chapter will be with the
chief of police. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 182/460
B. Animal Control Officer: The animal control officer shall work under the supervision of the chief of
police, assistant chief of police, or their designee. This sworn officer will have the authority to act
on behalf of the city to investigate complaints, impound and destroy animals, issue citations and
take other necessary and lawful actions as required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. It
shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with the animal control officer or any city police
officer in the performance of his duties. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
6-4-4: IDENTIFICATION AND VACCINATION OF DOGS AND CATS:
A. Identification Required: Every owner of a dog or cat within the city limits shall cause a collar to be
worn around the neck of such animal(s) bearing a tag identifying the name, address and phone
number of such owner.
B. Vaccination Required:
1. The owner of a dog or cat four (4) months of age and older shall cause such animal to be
inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian each year. Terms of subsequent vaccine
administration and duration of immunity must be in compliance with USDA licenses of vaccines
used. Evidence of the current rabies inoculation shall be kept by the owner and provided to the
animal control officer or any city police officer upon request.
2. Each owner of a dog or cat four (4) months of age or older shall cause a tag issued by a
licensed veterinarian to be worn on or upon the collar, showing evidence of compliance with this
subsection.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the animal control officer, a police officer, licensed
veterinarian, or owner to remove the tags from any dog or cat within the city limits without the
consent of the owner of such animal.
4. Any dog or cat found without a collar will be presumed to be a stray animal and dealt with
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-5: AT LARGE ANIMALS:
A. Dogs: It shall be unlawful for an owner or person in control of a dog to permit such dog to be upon
any public street, sidewalk, parkway, public area or unenclosed premises within the city, except on
a leash, cord, chain, or other similar restraint. No leash, cord, chain, or other similar restraint shall
be longer than eight feet (8').
B. Impoundment And Redemption Of Dogs And Cats: Any dog or cat running at large may be
impounded in an animal control facility by the animal control officer. The owner or person in control
of such animal may obtain the release upon payment of the fees set forth in section 6-4-18 of this
chapter. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-6: ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 183/460
A. School Grounds And Recreational Areas: No person shall permit his dog or cat on any school
ground when school is in session or on any public recreation area unless the animal is controlled
by a leash or similar device. Any animal not so controlled shall be deemed to be running at large.
B. Cemeteries: No person shall permit his animal to be present upon the grounds of any cemetery
within the city limits. Any animal found upon the grounds of any cemetery shall be deemed to be
running at large and impounded accordingly. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-7: ANIMAL BITES; RABIES CONTROL:
A. Notice Of Bites; Restrictions Regarding Disposal Of Animal:
1. The animal control officer shall be notified of all bites. It shall be unlawful to sell, euthanize, give
away, or otherwise dispose of an animal known to have bitten any person or companion animal.
2. Any owner of an animal which has bitten a person or other animal must report the incident to the
animal control officer.
B. Investigation: The animal control officer shall investigate or cause to be investigated all reports of
animal bites.
C. Notice And Confinement:
1. If the animal has bitten a person or other animal, the animal control officer shall notify the owner
of the animal of such fact and inform that owner of the necessary confinement procedures
pursuant to subsection C2 of this section.
2. Any animal which has bitten a person shall be confined pursuant to the animal control act, as
amended. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-8: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Acts Prohibited: No owner shall permit his dog or cat to:
1. Molest or threaten persons or vehicles by chasing, barking, biting or clawing;
2. Damage any property of another in any manner;
3. Bark, whine, howl, or make any other sound excessively; or
4. Create noxious or offensive odors. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
B. Nuisance Declared; Destruction Of Animal: Any dog or cat which is found to have committed any of
the actions stated in subsection A of this section on three (3) or more separate occasions shall be
considered a public nuisance and may be destroyed in a humane manner, or the owner may be
required to remove such animal from the city limits. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 184/460
C. Impoundment: The animal control officer may impound any dog or cat committing any action stated
in subsection A of this section. The owner of any dog or cat impounded may obtain the return of
his animal upon payment to the city of the fees set forth in section 6-4-18 of this chapter. (Ord.
2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-9: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROVISIONS:
A. Authority; Conditions For Impoundment: The animal control officer may impound an animal
committing any act in violation of sections 6-4-5, 6-4-7 and 6-4-8 of this chapter, or an abandoned
animal. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
B. Record Of Impoundment: Upon impoundment, the animal control officer must scan dogs and cats
for the presence of a microchip1. The animal control officer shall make a record of the animal
impounded, and if a microchip was present, the record must also include the breed, color, and
gender of the animal, and (if the information is present) whether or not the animal is licensed,
name and address of the owner or person responsible for such an animal, and the number of the
license tag. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Notice To Owner; Contents: Upon impoundment, the animal control officer shall make all
reasonable and feasible attempts to notify the owner of the impounded animal by either telephone
or letter. The animal control officer shall record any attempt to notify in the log used to record the
impoundment of the animal. Such notice to the owner shall inform him of the procedure to regain
custody of the animal.
D. Costs: The cost of impoundment shall be set by the city council and pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
E. Disposition Of Unclaimed Animals:
1. Any animal not recovered by the owner within seven (7) days after notification is attempted, or
any animal whose owner cannot be ascertained, may be destroyed in a humane fashion unless
the animal can be placed for adoption, placed with a humane society licensed under the animal
welfare act of the state, or a rescue group.
2. Any animal which has bitten any person or has been declared a dangerous or vicious animal
shall not be placed for adoption, but shall be destroyed in a humane fashion.
F. Conditions Of Redemption: If an owner of an impounded animal desires to make redemption
thereof, he may do so upon the following conditions:
1. Present proof of current rabies inoculation for the animal or pay for the animal's rabies
inoculation if the animal has not been inoculated;
2. Pay for microchipping, if not already done;
3. Pay any outstanding fines, fees or penalties imposed by the city and/or a court of law;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 185/460
4. For animals found running at large, present proof that the animal is spayed or neutered in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and
5. Comply with the requirements of the city animal control facility for release of such animal. (Ord.
2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-10: DANGEROUS, VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Dangerous Animals:
1. Determination Of Dangerous Animal: Any individual dog which, when either unmuzzled or
unattended by its owner or custodian, acts in a vicious or terrorizing manner and approaches
any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or
places, or upon private property not owned or belonging to the owner of the animal may be
declared "dangerous" by the animal control officer. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
2. Conditions For Prohibiting Dangerous Animals; Impoundment:
a. Upon declaring any animal "dangerous" pursuant to this subsection, the owner shall not keep
or maintain the animal within the city if the animal control officer finds two (2) or more of the
following factors to be present:
(1) The incident which led the animal being declared "dangerous" was unprovoked;
(2) The incident occurred in an area in which there resides children under the age of thirteen
(13) years, senior citizens, and/or persons with physical or mental impairments;
(3) The incident would have resulted in a bite if it were not for the location of the person
attacked;
(4) The animal in question has previously been found to have run at large; or
(5) The nature of and the circumstances surrounding the incident requires that the animal be
banned from the city in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens.
b. The animal control officer shall impound the animal and shall inform its owner, within twenty
four (24) hours of impoundment, that two (2) or more of the factors enumerated herein exist.
The owner shall not allow or permit the animal declared "dangerous" to return to the city under
any circumstances.
3. Conditions For Permitting Dangerous Animal To Remain In City: Any animal declared to be
"dangerous" pursuant to subsection A1 of this section, but for which two (2) or more of the
factors enumerated in subsection A2 of this section do not exist, shall be permitted to remain
within the city limits. However, such animal shall be restrained so that while on the premises of
its owner, the animal cannot come into physical contact with anyone who is lawfully on the
premises other than its owner and members of the owner's household. Further, the owner of
such animal shall not permit the animal to leave the premises unless such animal is muzzled or
caged. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
B. Vicious Animals:
1. Reports Investigated: The animal control officer shall investigate all reports of a "vicious animal"
as defined section 6-4-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 186/460
2. Determination Of Vicious Animal; Restrictions:
a. A written finding shall be made that a dog is vicious when any of the following circumstances
have been determined by the animal control officer to be present:
(1) Any individual dog that, when unprovoked, inflicted a bite or has attacked a human or any
other animal either on public or private property, including the property of the owner;
(2) Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without
provocation has caused an injury or has otherwise endangered the safety of a human being
or domestic animal;
(3) Any individual animal that has a trait or characteristic and a generally known reputation for
viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks upon human beings or other animals,
unless handled in a particular manner; or (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
(4) Any individual animal has been found to be a "dangerous animal" pursuant to subsection A
of this section upon three (3) separate occasions.
b. Vicious animals shall not be classified "vicious" only on the basis of breed. No animal shall be
deemed "vicious" if it: (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
(1) Bites, attacks, or menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner;
(2) Harms or menaces anyone who has tormented or abused it;
(3) Is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement, fire, or guard duties; or
(4) Is a guide dog for the blind or hearing impaired, or a support dog for the physically
handicapped, provided an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing
duties as expected.
3. Vicious Animals Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to keep any dog which has been declared
"vicious" pursuant to this subsection or the Illinois animal control act within the city.
C. Impoundment And Disposition Of Dangerous Or Vicious Animals:
1. Any animal found to be in violation of this section may be impounded by the animal control
officer pursuant to the provisions of section 6-4-7 of this chapter.
2. Any animal within the city which cannot be safely taken up and impounded pursuant to this
chapter may be slain by a city police officer; provided, however, that in all cases where any dog
is so slain, said dog shall have bitten a person or caused an abrasion of the skin of a person. It
shall be the duty of the animal control officer to immediately deliver the dead animal to the state
department of public health for determination of whether the animal is rabid. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-
2008)
D. Complaints Filed; Destruction Of Vicious Animals: The city attorney may file a complaint in the
name of the city to enjoin any or all persons from keeping or maintaining any dangerous or vicious
animal, to abate the same, and to enjoin the owner of a dangerous animal from permitting the
same to leave his premises when not under control by leash or other reasonable method. The city
attorney may request an order that any vicious animal be humanely dispatched if such disposal is
not otherwise granted therein. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 187/460
6-4-11: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
A. No person or owner may abandon, beat, torment, overload, molest, starve, refuse to water, or
otherwise abuse an animal in any manner. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
B. No person shall expose an animal to any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or
not, so that the same may be digested by the animal.
C. No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner that places it in a
life or health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold. In
order to protect the health and safety of an animal, the animal control officer, who has probable
cause to believe this subsection is being violated, may enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable
means under the circumstances after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person.
(Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-12: CARING FOR ANIMALS; SANITATION:
Each owner shall provide his animals:
A. Sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and clean water;
B. Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;
C. Veterinary care when needed to prevent pain or suffering; and
D. Humane care and treatment. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-13: DISEASED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal afflicted with or suspected of being afflicted with a
contagious or infectious disease to allow such animal to run at large or be exposed to any public place
so that the health of other animals or human beings may be affected. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-14: REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
If an animal dies within the city limits, the owner shall remove or cause the animal to be removed and
disposed of in a reasonable, nonhealth hazardous, humane manner within twenty four (24) hours after
having received knowledge or information of the animal's death. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-15: REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 188/460
The owner or any person in control of any dog or cat shall be responsible for the immediate removal
and sanitary disposal of any excrement deposited by his animal anywhere within the city limits. (Ord.
2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-16: INJURY TO, INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, or kill any dog
used by any law enforcement agency or in the performance of the functions or duties of such agency,
or to interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by said agency or any officer
thereof. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
6-4-17: STRAY ANIMALS:
A. Prohibitions: Feeding or allowing stray, feral or uncontrolled animals on public property, public rights
of way, abandoned structures of an unknown person or persons without permission and accessible
by such animals is prohibited.
B. Impoundment And Disposition: Any animal observed on private property by the animal control
officer, a police officer, the code enforcement officer or other authorized official that appears to be
feral, stray or abandoned by virtue of not being constrained in some fashion, does not have a
collar, and has no identification tag may be taken into custody and confined in the city animal
control facility. If such animal is not claimed by someone professing to be its owner, it may be
disposed of in such manner as the animal control officers deems fit. (Ord. 2309, 5-24-2010; amd.
2013 Code)
6-4-18: FINES AND FEES:
A. Within the time period provided by the animal control officer, any person may settle a claim by the
city against that person for a violation of subsection 6-4-4A, section 6-4-5, 6-4-6, 6-4-11, 6-4-12, 6-
4-13, 6-4-14 or 6-4-16 of this chapter by making payment to the city in accordance with the
following schedule:
1. If paid within five (5) days of commission of the violation, ten dollars ($10.00).
2. If paid between six (6) and fourteen (14) days of commission of the violation, twenty dollars
($20.00).
3. If paid between fifteen (15) days of the commission but before the filing of a complaint, thirty five
dollars ($35.00).
4. After the filing of a complaint, pursuant to section 6-4-19 of this chapter.
B. The fees or fines assessed to the owner under this section shall be applicable only if they are paid
within the time period provided in subsection A of this section. Otherwise, penalties for any
violation of this chapter shall be imposed pursuant to section 6-4-19 of this chapter. Nothing in this
section shall prevent the city attorney's office from filing a complaint in circuit court for any violation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 189/460
of this chapter, and imposing the penalties in section 6-4-19 of this chapter. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008;
amd. 2013 Code)
6-4-19: COURT ORDERED PENALTIES:
A. The city attorney may file a complaint against any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
at any time in order to prosecute such violations in circuit court, subjecting the person to the
penalties as stated in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008)
B. Except a provided in subsection 6-4-18A of this chapter, any person who is found guilty of or pleads
guilty to violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code in addition to any other costs or charges authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 2189, 3-10-2008;
amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 5
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-5-1: RIOTS:
It is unlawful for two (2) or more persons within the corporate limits of the city to do the following:
A. To meet to do any unlawful act upon a common cause or quarrel, and make advances toward it.
B. To engage in a fight by agreement in a public place. (1977 Code § 9.28.010)
6-5-2: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It is unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to commit the following acts:
A. To commit an assault and battery upon the person of another.
B. To disturb the peace and quiet of any family or neighborhood by loud or unusual noises or by
tumultuous and offensive carriage, threatening bodily harm or damage to property, quarreling,
challenging to fight or fighting.
C. To wear or carry concealed upon or about the person any pistol, revolver, metallic knuckles, bowie
knife, dirk or other dangerous or deadly weapon or to flourish any such weapon in a manner that
may reasonably be construed as threatening to the life, limb or property of another. (1977 Code
§ 9.26.010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 190/460
D. To engage in profane swearing, loud and unusual noises or any other conduct disorderly in nature
that disturbs or interrupts any assembly of people met for worship. (1977 Code § 9.26.010; amd.
2013 Code)
E. To engage in conduct disorderly in nature that interrupts or disturbs any school or other assembly of
people met for lawful purpose.
F. To interrupt or disturb any funeral service or procession. (1977 Code § 9.26.010)
6-5-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT AT FUNERAL OR MEMORIAL SERVICE:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection:
FUNERAL: Any ceremony, ritual, procession, or memorial service held at a funeral site in
connection with the burial, cremation, or memorial of a deceased person. The term does not
include the wake (sometimes referred to as a visitation or vigil).
FUNERAL SITE: A church, synagogue, mosque, funeral home, mortuary, cemetery, gravesite,
mausoleum, or other place at which a funeral is conducted or is scheduled to be conducted within
the next hour or has been conducted within the last hour.
B. Determination Of Offense: A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct at a funeral or
memorial service when he or she:
1. Engages, with knowledge of the existence of a funeral site, in any loud singing, playing of music,
chanting, whistling, yelling, or noisemaking with or without noise amplification including, but not
limited to, bullhorns, auto horns, and microphones within two hundred feet (200') of any ingress
or egress of that funeral site, where the volume of such singing, music, chanting, whistling,
yelling, or noisemaking is likely to be audible at and disturbing to the funeral site;
2. Displays, with knowledge of the existence of a funeral site and within two hundred feet (200') of
any ingress or egress of that funeral site, any visual images that convey fighting words or actual
or veiled threats against any other person; or
3. With knowledge of the existence of a funeral site, knowingly obstructs, hinders, impedes, or
blocks another person's entry to or exit from that funeral site or a facility containing that funeral
site; except, that the owner or occupant of property may take lawful actions to exclude others
from that property. (Ord. 2337, 2-14-2011)
C. Penalty: Any person who violates any provisions of this section is guilty of disorderly conduct at a
funeral or memorial service and shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2337,
2-14-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
6-5-4: THEFT:
It is unlawful for any individual to take possession without consent of the owner of, or otherwise obtain
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 191/460
unauthorized control of, the goods, products or personal property of any individual, firm or business.
(1977 Code § 9.40.010)
6-5-5: POSTING SIGNS ON UTILITY POLES:
No placard, sign or poster of any kind shall be nailed, stapled, pasted, taped or otherwise attached in
any fashion to any utility pole located upon any city street right of way. Any person, firm or
organization found to be in violation of this section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation. For a second violation, the fine shall
be not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1639, 11-12-
1996)
6-5-6: SOUND AMPLIFICATION IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
No person within the city shall operate or permit the operation, in an area zoned residential, of any
type of sound amplification equipment, including, but not limited to, radios, boom boxes, and musical
equipment that can be heard a distance of twenty five feet (25') from the point of emanation. Any
violation of this section shall be a petty offense punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars
($50.00). (Ord. 1980, 8-9-2004)
ARTICLE A. OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS AND
DECENCY
6-5A-1: PROHIBITED GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person in any public place within the corporate limits of the city to engage in open
lewdness, disorderly conduct, loud and profane swearing, the use of obscene language or other act of
indecency, or keep a disorderly house to the encouragement of gaming, drinking of intoxicating liquor,
or fornication, and it is unlawful for any person to patronize any such house or to be an inmate thereof,
or to lease or let any house, room or other premises for any such purpose. It is also unlawful for any
person, as agent, custodian or owner, to lease or let to another any house, room or other premises, in
whole or in part, for the use of the same as a disorderly house to the encouragement of gaming,
drinking of intoxicating liquor or fornication, or knowingly permit the same to be used or occupied as
such. (1977 Code § 9.18.010)
6-5A-2: PROSTITUTION:
A. Practicing Prostitution: It shall be unlawful for any person to practice prostitution in the city.
B. Soliciting: It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on any street, alley or other public place in the
city for the purpose of inducing any person to engage in prostitution or any unlawful sexual
intercourse of any kind.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 192/460
C. House Of Prostitution: It shall be unlawful to maintain, frequent or patronize any house of
prostitution in the city. (2013 Code)
6-5A-3: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
A. Definition: "Public place", for purposes of this section, means any place where the conduct may
reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
B. Determination Of Public Indecency: Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards
who performs any of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
1. An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct; or
2. A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the
person.
C. Exemption: Breast feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency. (2013 Code)
6-5A-4: OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS AND GRAFFITI:
A. It is unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to write, mark, cut, draw, paint,
post or otherwise make, leave, put up or expose to public view any obscene, lewd or indecent
word, line, sentence, phrase, picture, painting, drawing, caricature, poster, or a combination
thereof, upon any building, bulletin board, post, pole, fence, billboard, walk, pavement, wall or
vehicle, or, within the corporate limits of the city, sell, expose or offer for sale, circulate, distribute,
or expose, or offer for circulation or distribution, whether for gain or gratuity, any obscene, lewd or
indecent book, pamphlet, circular, periodical, magazine, paper, picture, drawing, painting, poster or
caricature.
B. A thing is obscene if, considered as a whole, its predominant appeal is to prurient interest, that is, a
shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and if it goes substantially beyond
customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters. (1977 Code
§ 9.20.010)
6-5A-5: WINDOW PEEPING:
It is unlawful for any person to enter upon any lot or plot of ground within the city which has thereon
any building occupied as a private residence or home and, while on said lot or plot of ground, to look
through any door, window or aperture in said building to see or observe anyone or anything within said
building, without having the permission so to do of the person occupying or using the building as a
residence or home. (1977 Code § 9.42.010; amd. 2013 Code)
6-5A-6: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 193/460
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (2013 Code)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES INVOLVING LIQUOR AND
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
6-5B-1: PUBLIC LIQUOR CONSUMPTION IN CERTAIN AREAS PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibitions: Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public, including consumption in public view on
private property contrary to the public good, within one hundred feet (100') of a school, park or
church is prohibited. (Ord. 1821, 11-13-2001; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Exemptions: The prohibition herein provided does not include alcoholic beverages that may be
consumed in privately owned buildings or fully enclosed structures.
C. Penalty: Any violation of this section shall subject the violator to a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1821, 11-13-2001)
6-5B-2: CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Definitions: When used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish or other substances which are identified as including
any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin
extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all
other synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical
synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks,
oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seeds of such plant. Cannabis shall also include any substance
defined as cannabis in section 3 of the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 550/3, and as hereafter amended.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any substance as defined in article II of the Illinois controlled
substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/201 et seq.
DELIVER OR DELIVERY: Actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession of cannabis,
with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products, and materials of any kind, other than
"methamphetamine manufacturing materials", as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
646/10, which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 194/460
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of
this section, the cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 500/1 et seq., or the Illinois
controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq. The term includes, but
is not limited to:
1. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing cannabis or a controlled substance.
2. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any
species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance.
3. Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of cannabis or controlled substances.
4. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled
substance by private persons.
5. Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body including, where applicable,
the following items:
a. Water pipes.
b. Carburetion tubes and devices.
c. Smoking and carburetion masks.
d. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
e. Carburetor pipes.
f. Electric pipes.
g. Air driven pipes.
h. Chillums.
i. Bongs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 195/460
j. Ice pipes or chillers.
6. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of
this section.
KNOWLEDGE: Knows, acts knowingly or with knowledge:
1. The nature or attendant circumstances of his/her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he/she is consciously aware that his/her conduct is of such nature or that
such circumstances exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the
substantial probability that such fact exists.
2. The result of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when he/she is
consciously aware that such result is likely to be caused by his/her conduct.
3. Knowledge may be inferred from the surrounding circumstances.
MANUFACTURE: The production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion or
processing of cannabis, either directly or indirectly, by extraction from substances of natural
origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or
repackaging of cannabis or labeling of its container; except, that this term does not include the
preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of cannabis as an incident to lawful research,
teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or
any other entity.
POSSESSION: May be either actual or constructive.
1. "Actual possession" means exercising physical dominion.
2. Constructive possession may be inferred if the defendant has intent and capacity to
maintain control and dominion over the cannabis or drug paraphernalia.
PRODUCE OR PRODUCTION: Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting. (Ord. 2177, 12-10-
2007; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Possession Of Cannabis Prohibited:
1. Violation: No person shall possess ten grams (10 g) or less of any substance containing
cannabis. (Ord. 2177, 12-10-2007)
2. Penalty: Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court of law of a violation of this
subsection shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2177,
12-10-2007; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 196/460
3. Administrative Fee: In addition, any person who violates any provision of this subsection and is
convicted, pleads guilty, and receives court supervision or probation by a court of law shall be
ordered to pay an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be paid to the law
enforcement agency for testing of the substance(s) collected.
4. Forfeiture: Any items which may be seized or forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
550/12 may be forfeited in the same manner as described therein for a violation of this section.
5. Exceptions: Any person who manufactures, distributes, dispenses, or is in possession of
cannabis for research purposes pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/11, as hereafter
amended, shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection.
C. Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia Prohibited:
1. Violation: No person shall knowingly possess any item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to
use it for the purpose of unlawfully ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or a
controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for
that use within the corporate limits of the city. In determining intent for purposes of this
subsection, the trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or
controlled substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a controlled
substance on the drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 2177, 12-10-2007)
2. Penalty: Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court of law for violating this
subsection shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2177,
12-10-2007; amd. 2013 Code)
3. Forfeiture: "Drug paraphernalia", as defined in subsection A of this section, seized by police
officers pursuant to an arrest or issuance of a notice to appear for a violation of this subsection,
shall be forfeited to the city upon a plea of guilty, a finding of guilt and/or a disposition of court
supervision or probation by a court of law or upon the individual utilizing any administrative
remedy allowed by the city without further order of the court. Any other items which may be
seized or forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/5 may be forfeited in the same
manner as described therein for a violation of this subsection.
4. Exceptions: This subsection does not apply to:
a. Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis or
a controlled substance as an incident to lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and
not for sale.
b. Items historically and customarily used in connection with the planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling tobacco or any other lawful substance unless such
item has the presence of cannabis or a controlled substance. Items exempt under this
subsection C4b include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco
pipes, and cigarette rolling papers.
c. Items listed in the definition of "drug paraphernalia" in subsection A of this section, if said
items are used solely for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered
completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purposes prohibited by this
subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 197/460
d. A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the
hypodermic syringes and needles act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/0.01 et seq.
D. Sale Or Delivery Of Drug Paraphernalia Prohibited:
1. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for sale, offer for sale, sell, or deliver for any
commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 2177, 12-10-2007)
2. Penalty: Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court of law for violating this
subsection shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each item
of drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 2177, 12-10-2007; amd. 2013 Code)
3. Forfeiture: "Drug paraphernalia", as defined in subsection A of this section, seized by police
officers pursuant to an arrest or issuance of a notice to appear for a violation of this subsection,
shall be forfeited to the city upon a plea of guilty, a finding of guilt and/or a disposition of court
supervision or probation by a court of law or upon the individual utilizing any administrative
remedy allowed by the city without further order of the court. Any other items which may be
seized or forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/5 may be forfeited in the same
manner as described therein for a violation of this subsection. (Ord. 2177, 12-10-2007)
6-5B-3: POSSESSION OF SYNTHETIC CANNABIS:
A. Definitions: When used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
DELIVER OR DELIVERY: Actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession of synthetic
cannabis, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
KNOWLEDGE: Knows, acts knowingly or with knowledge:
1. The nature or attendant circumstances of his/her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he/she is consciously aware that his/her conduct is of such nature or that
such circumstances exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the
substantial probability that such fact exists.
2. The result of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when he/she is
consciously aware that such result is likely to be caused by his/her conduct.
3. Knowledge may be inferred from the surrounding circumstances.
MANUFACTURE: The production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion or
processing of synthetic cannabis, either directly or indirectly, by extraction from substances of
natural origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or
repackaging of synthetic cannabis or labeling of its container; except, that this term does not
include the preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of synthetic cannabis as an
incident to lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 198/460
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or
any other entity.
POSSESSION: May be either actual or constructive.
1. "Actual possession" means exercising physical dominion.
2. Constructive possession may be inferred if the defendant has intent and capacity to
maintain control and dominion over the cannabis or drug paraphernalia.
PRODUCE OR PRODUCTION: Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting.
SYNTHETIC CANNABIS: Includes the brand names K2 and spice. The term is an herbal and
chemical product which mimics the effects of cannabis including, but not limited to, synthetic
cannabinoids, cannabicyclohexanol, JWH-018, JWH-073 and HU-210.
B. Possession Prohibited: No person shall possess any substance containing synthetic cannabis.
(Ord. 2329, 9-27-2010)
C. Penalty: Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court of law shall be punishable by a
fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2329, 9-27-2010; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Administrative Fee: In addition, any person who violates any provision of this section and is
convicted, pleads guilty, receives court supervision or probation by a court of law shall be ordered
to pay an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be paid to the law enforcement
agency for the testing of the substance(s) collected.
E. Forfeiture: Any items which may be seized or forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
550/12 may be forfeited in the same manner as described therein for a violation of this section.
(Ord. 2329, 9-27-2010)
F. Exceptions: Any person who manufactures, distributes, dispenses, or is in possession of any
synthetic cannabis for research purposes pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/11, as
hereafter amended, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2329, 9-27-2010;
amd. 2013 Code)
6-5B-4: POSSESSION OF SYNTHETIC COCAINE OR SUBSTANCES CONTAINING
COCAINE:
A. Definitions: When used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 199/460
DELIVER OR DELIVERY: Actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession of synthetic
cocaine or substance containing cocaine, with or without consideration, whether or not there is
an agency relationship.
KNOWLEDGE: Knows, acts knowingly or with knowledge:
1. The nature or attendant circumstances of his/her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he/she is consciously aware that his/her conduct is of such nature or that
such circumstances exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the
substantial probability that such fact exists.
2. The result of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when he/she is
consciously aware that such result is likely to be caused by his/her conduct.
3. Knowledge may be inferred from the surrounding circumstances.
MANUFACTURE: The production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion or
processing of synthetic cocaine or a substance containing cocaine, either directly or indirectly, by
extraction from substances of natural origin or independently by means of chemical synthesis
and includes any packaging or repackaging of synthetic cocaine or a substance containing
cocaine or labeling of its container; except, that this term does not include the preparation,
compounding, packaging or labeling of synthetic cocaine as an incident to lawful research,
teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or
any other entity.
POSSESSION: May be either actual or constructive.
1. "Actual possession" means exercising physical dominion.
2. Constructive possession may be inferred if the defendant has intent and capacity to
maintain control and dominion over the synthetic cocaine or substance containing cocaine
or drug paraphernalia.
SYNTHETIC COCAINE, BATH SALTS OR SUBSTANCES CONTAINING COCAINE: Includes,
but not limited to, the names, MDPK, magic, super coke, PV, ivory wave, ocean, cloud nine,
charge plus, white lightning, scarface, hurricane, charlie red dove and white dove. They are
herbal and chemical products which mimic the effects of cocaine including, but not limited to,
methylenedioxypyrovalerone (a psychoactive drug) or cathinone derivatives. "Bath salts" is a
substance that contains methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV) or contains a norepinephrinedopamine
reuptake inhibitor (NDRI). (Ord. 2340, 2-28-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Possession Prohibited: No person shall possess any substance containing synthetic cocaine or a
substance containing cocaine. (Ord. 2340, 2-28-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 200/460
C. Penalty: Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court of law shall be punishable by a
fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2340, 2-28-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Administrative Fee: In addition, any person who violates any provision of this section and is
convicted, pleads guilty, receives court supervision or probation by a court of law shall be ordered
to pay an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be paid to the law enforcement
agency for testing of the substance(s) collected.
E. Forfeiture Of Seized Items: Any items which may be seized or forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 550/12 may be forfeited in the same manner as described therein for a violation
of this section. (Ord. 2340, 2-28-2011)
F. Exemptions: Any person who manufactures, distributes, dispenses, or is in possession of any
synthetic cocaine or substances containing cocaine for research purposes shall be exempt from
the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2340, 2-28-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
6-5B-5: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND LIQUOR ON CITY PROPERTY:
A. Prohibitions:
1. Possession or use of any controlled substance or drug, not prescribed by a physician, upon any
property owned by the city is prohibited.
2. Possession or consumption of any alcoholic beverage upon any property owned by the city is
prohibited.
B. Special Permit For Liquor: Notwithstanding the prohibition set forth in subsection A2 of this section,
the liquor control commissioner, upon application, may, at his discretion, allow the possession, sale
and consumption of alcoholic beverages on city owned property for such time and on such
conditions as he deems allowable. (Ord. 2226, 10-20-2008)
C. Penalty: Any person who is found guilty of violating the terms of subsection A1 or A2 of this section
shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2226, 10-20-2008; amd.
2013 Code)
ARTICLE C. LOITERING
6-5C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
DRUG RELATED ACTIVITIES: Remaining in any one place under circumstances that would warrant a
reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect of that behavior is to facilitate the distribution
of substances in violation of the cannabis control act or the Illinois controlled substances act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 201/460
LOITERING: Standing around, moving slowly about, spending time idly, sauntering, delaying,
lingering, or lagging behind, whether on foot, in a motor vehicle, or any other form, method, or
conveyance.
PUBLIC PLACE: The public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or
privately owned. (Ord. 3007, 10-10-2011)
6-5C-2: LOITERING WHICH OBSTRUCTS TRAFFIC:
A. Prohibited Conduct: It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person or any group of persons
to loiter, obstruct, encroach upon, or block the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in an
unreasonable manner upon any public highway, street, sidewalk, alley or common area or upon
any private way, or any part thereof, by any means whatsoever.
B. Exceptions: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any such conduct which is
protected under local, state, or federal law. (Ord. 3007, 10-10-2011)
C. Penalty: Any person or group of persons who is found guilty of violating any provision of this
section shall be ordered to cease and desist the prohibited conduct and/or be fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3007, 10-10-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
6-5C-3: LOITERING FOR DRUG RELATED ACTIVITIES:
A. Prohibited Conduct: It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person or any group of persons
to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, in or near any place open to the public, or near any public or
private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug
related activity contrary to any of the laws of the state of Illinois.
B. Determination Of Conduct: Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such purposes are "manifested":
1. Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes of this section, a
"known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" is a person who has, with the knowledge of the
arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use,
possession, or sale of any of the substances referred to in the Illinois criminal code as controlled
substances or such person has been convicted of any drug violations or similar laws of any
political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or a person who displays physical
characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as "needle tracks"; or a person who
possesses "drug paraphernalia" as defined in the Illinois criminal code.
2. Such person is currently subject to an order prohibiting his/her presence in a high drug activity
geographic area.
3. Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is
about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug related activity including, by way of
example only, such person acting as a "lookout".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 202/460
4. Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a "gang" or association which
has as one of its purposes illegal drug activity.
5. Such person transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion.
6. Such person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer.
7. Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably
could be involved in an unlawful drug related activity.
8. The area involved is, by public repute, known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking.
9. The premises involved is known to have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected
of drug activity.
C. Exceptions: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any such conduct which is
protected under local, state, or federal law. (Ord. 3007, 10-10-2011)
D. Penalty: Any person or group of persons who is found guilty of violating any provision of this
section shall be ordered to cease and desist the prohibited conduct and/or be fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3007, 10-10-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
6-5C-4: LOITERING RESULTING IN LITTERING OR DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY:
A. Prohibited Conduct: It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person or any group of persons
to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, in or near any place open to the public, or near any public or
private place under which such circumstances cause the depositing of litter or debris onto such
above described property or which cause the destruction of property whatsoever.
B. Exceptions: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any such conduct which is
protected under local, state, or federal law. (Ord. 3007, 10-10-2011)
C. Penalty: Any person or group of persons who is found guilty of violating any provision of this
section shall be ordered to cease and desist the prohibited conduct and/or be fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3007, 10-10-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
6-5C-5: LOITERING ON BUSINESS PROPERTY:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless
the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
LITTERING: Dropping, throwing or otherwise disposing of any material or object other than in a
container provided for that purpose.
LOITERING: Remaining idle in one location, including walking around aimlessly, and sitting or
standing in or out of a motor vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 203/460
B. Prohibited:
1. No person shall engage in loitering in any area that has been posted with "NO LOITERING".
2. No person shall loiter on private property that is customarily used by the public as an integral
part of a commercial venture in such a manner as to:
a. Disturb the peace as defined by state law and the city of Marion's ordinances;
b. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
c. Obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully seeking access or the use of the commercial
enterprise conducted on the property or adjacent or contiguous to said private property.
3. No person shall litter while loitering on any property on which loitering is prohibited.
C. Notice: No person shall be guilty of a violation of this section unless:
1. The business property owner or tenant shall post the property with "NO LOITERING" signs or
other notices of like meaning at the entrance or entrances to the property and at intervals of not
less than one hundred fifty feet (150') on such property. Property of fifty feet (50') or less may
contain only one sign.
D. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 3197, 8-11-2014)
Chapter 6
MINORS
6-6-1: CURFEW:
A. Age And Hour Restrictions: It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following times
unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at
least twenty one (21) years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a
business or occupation which the laws of the state authorize a person less than seventeen (17)
years of age to perform:
1. Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Saturday;
2. Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Sunday; and
3. Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. on the following day.
B. Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate subsection A of this section. (Ord.
1460, 10-12-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 204/460
C. Penalty: A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be fined not more
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 1460, 10-12-1992; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 7
WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS
6-7-1: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS:
A. No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol, cannon or firearms of any description within the
corporate limits of the city without written permission or proclamation from the mayor of the city to
do so, which permission or proclamation shall limit the time of such firing and shall be subject to
revocation by the mayor at any time after it has been granted. (1977 Code § 9.52.010; amd. 2013
Code)
B. No person, firm or corporation shall fire, discharge or explode, within the corporate limits of the city,
any gun, pistol or firearm unless in discharge of a legal duty or official act, except by written
consent or proclamation of the mayor, and then only at such time or times as may be designated in
such written consent or proclamation of the mayor. (1977 Code § 9.52.020; amd. 2013 Code)
6-7-2: FIREWORKS:
A. Definitions:
FIREWORKS: Fireworks or any explosive device, composition, or any substance or combination
of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a
temporary exhibitional nature by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks
shall include "prohibited fireworks" and "permitted fireworks" as defined in this subsection.
PERMITTED FIREWORKS: Means and includes snake or glow worm pellets, smoke devices,
trick noisemakers, also referred to as party poppers, booby traps, snappers, trick matches,
cigarette loads, and auto burglar alarms; sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
similar devices and toy pistol paper or plastic caps as hereinafter specifically defined:
Smoke Devices: Small devices made of cork or cardboard containing not more than five
grams (5 g) of pyrotechnic composition that produce a small cloud of smoke after activation.
Snakes, Glow Worms: Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large
snakelike ash upon burning. The ash expands in length as the pellet burns. These devices
may not contain arsenic.
Snappers: Small, paper wrapped items containing not more than one milligram (1.0 mg) of
silver fulminate coated on small bits of sand or gravel.
Sparklers: Devices that consist of wire or wood dowel coated with pyrotechnic composition
that produce a shower of sparks upon ignition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 205/460
Toy Pistols, Toy Canes, Toy Guns, And Other Similar Devices: Devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain or less of explosive compound are
used. A small report is produced upon detonation.
Trick Noisemakers: Items that produce a small report intended to surprise the user; these
devices include, but are not limited to:
1. Party Popper: A small device with paper or plastic exteriors that is actuated by means of
friction (pulling a string or trigger). Upon activation, the device expels nonflammable paper
streamers and/or other nonflammable novelties and produce a small report.
2. Booby Trap: A small tube with string protruding from both ends, similar in design to party
poppers. Upon pulling the strings, a friction sensitive compound ignites causing a small
report.
3. Trick Match: A match that has been coated with a small quantity of explosive or
pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition of the match, a small report or shower of sparks
emits from the match.
4. Cigarette Load: A small wooden peg that has been coated with a small quantity of
explosive compound. Upon ignition of a cigarette containing such device, a small report is
produced.
5. Auto Burglar Alarm: A tube which contains a pyrotechnic composition that produces a
loud whistle when ignited. A small quantify of explosive of which not more than fifty
milligrams (50 mg) of explosive compound may be used to produce a small report.
PROHIBITED FIREWORKS: All fireworks except "permitted fireworks" as defined in this
subsection and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Blank cartridges;
2. Toy cannons in which explosives are used;
3. Balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same;
4. Firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, bottle rockets, roman candles, bombs or other devices
of similar nature;
5. Any fireworks containing any explosive compound;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 206/460
6. Any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible
substances providing visual effects;
7. Sparkling devices, which may produce a shower of sparks upon ignition (except those
defined as permitted fireworks by the U.S. department of transportation and commonly
known as sparklers), which include, but are not limited to, items commonly known as
"fountains", "spinners", "wheels", or similar devices. Such prohibited sparkling devices may
be ground based, handheld, or secured to an object above ground level.
SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS: Neither the state of Illinois nor the city of Marian recognize the
term "safe and sane fireworks", and any item labeled as such is subject to the definitions
contained herein. The labeling of such devices shall not determine whether the device is a
permitted firework or is a prohibited firework. (Ord. 1943, 4-5-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Sale Or Distribution: No person, corporation or other entity may sell, hold for sale, offer for sale, or
otherwise distribute in any fashion any prohibited fireworks within the corporate limits of the city.
C. Fireworks Displays: No person, corporation or other entity may discharge, detonate, or ignite any
prohibited fireworks within the corporate limits of the city except as provided in this subsection.
1. Permit Requirements:
a. A permit may be issued to the designated individual in an organization, corporation or other
entity to detonate, discharge or ignite otherwise prohibited fireworks as part of a display for the
public generally pursuant to subsection C1b of this section.
b. Application for a permit to detonate, discharge or ignite prohibited fireworks as part of a
display for the public shall be made in writing to the city clerk no less than twenty one (21)
days in advance of the proposed display. The permit shall be issued to the individual in such
organization, corporation or other entity who shall be in charge of the detonating, discharging
or igniting such fireworks, provided no permit shall be issued until or unless approved by the
chief of the city fire department or his designee. (Ord. 1943, 4-5-2004)
2. Compliance With State Law: The individual permitted to detonate, discharge or ignite such
fireworks display shall do so in compliance with the provisions of the Illinois pyrotechnic use
act1, and the ordinances of the city.
D. Penalty: Any person, corporation or other entity that violates any provision of this section shall be
fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and each day a violation by the same person,
corporation or other entity occurs shall be a separate violation. (Ord. 1943, 4-5-2004; amd. 2013
Code)
Chapter 8
FAIR HOUSING
6-8-1: CITY POLICY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 207/460
A. In furthering the policy of the state of Illinois as expressed in its constitution and other laws, in order
that the safety and general welfare, peace and health of all the inhabitants of the city may be
ensured, it is hereby declared the policy of the city to assure equal opportunity to all residents,
regardless of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental
handicap, familial status, marital status, age, military status, sexual orientation, unfavorable
discharge from the military, or order of protection status to live in decent, sanitary, healthful,
standard living quarters.
B. It is the policy of the city that no owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent, or other
person, firm or corporation having the right to sell, rent, lease or otherwise control any housing
accommodation and/or real property within the city, or any agent of these, shall refuse to sell, rent,
lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of persons such housing
accommodations and/or real property because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
gender, creed, physical or mental handicap, familial status, marital status, age, military status,
sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or order of protection status of such
person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental handicap, familial status, marital
status, age, military status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or order of
protection status in the conditions, terms, or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities and/or services in connection
therewith.
C. Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum choice within the city's total
housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation
and racially inclusive patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities. (Ord. 2071, 3-
13-2006; amd. 2013 Code)
6-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following terms shall have the
meanings as described in this section and as used in this chapter:
DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS: Housing which is in sound,
clean, and weathertight condition in conformance with applicable local, state, and national codes.
DISCRIMINATE OR DISCRIMINATION: Any difference expressed in any way toward a person or
persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or financing for housing accommodation
and/or real property in regard to such sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental handicap, familial status, marital
status, age, military status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or order of
protection status of such person.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person, institution or business entity of any kind which loans money to
persons and receives as security for said loans a secured interest of any kind in the real property of
the borrower.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any building, structure, or portion thereof which is used or
occupied or maintained, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a home, residence or
sleeping place of one or more human beings, or any real estate so used, designed or intended for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 208/460
such use.
OWNER: Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own any beneficial interest in any
real property, or who hold legal or equitable title to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real
estate cooperative which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or agent thereof who,
for a fee or other valuable consideration, offers, sells, purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for
the sale, purchase, exchange or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rent for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of another.
REAL PROPERTY: Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing accommodations
within the corporate limits of the city of Marion, Illinois. (Ord. 2071, 3-13-2006; amd. 2013 Code)
6-8-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sublessee, real estate broker or salesman,
financial institution or employee of the financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the
foregoing, to discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color, religion, national
origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental handicap, familial status, marital status, age,
military status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or order of protection status
with regard to the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing accommodation
and/or real property. In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real estate broker or
employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial institution dealing with housing or real property
in the city:
A. To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the price, terms, conditions, or privileges
of any kind relating to the sale, rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real
property in the city or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith.
B. To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any notice, statement or
advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any form of application for the purchase, lease,
rental or financing of real property, or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the
prospective purchase, rental or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or indirectly any
discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or
mental handicap, familial status, marital status, age, military status, sexual orientation, unfavorable
discharge from the military, or order of protection status of any person.
C. To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing accommodation and/or real property.
D. To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, of any housing accommodation and/or real
property on the grounds of loss of value because of the present or prospective entry into any
neighborhood of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental handicap, familial status, marital status, age, military
status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or order of protection status.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 209/460
E. To distribute or cause to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner
of any housing accommodation and/or real property to sell or lease his or her property because of
any present or prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, gender,
creed, physical or mental handicap, familial status, marital status, age, military status, sexual
orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or order of protection status of persons in the
neighborhood.
F. To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the anticipated listing for sale or
the sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property for the purpose of inducing or
attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property
by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental handicap, familial status,
marital status, age, military status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or
order of protection status in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in the
block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
G. For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or otherwise deal with such owner's
housing accommodations and/or real property with any limitation on its sale based on race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or mental handicap, familial status,
marital status, age, military status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or
order of protection status.
H. For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any housing accommodation and/or real
property because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, gender, creed, physical or
mental handicap, familial status, marital status, age, military status, sexual orientation, unfavorable
discharge from the military, or order of protection status of the proposed buyer or tenant. (Ord.
2071, 3-13-2006; amd. 2013 Code)
6-8-4: PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. This section shall in no way abrogate or impair the right of the city to specifically enforce, by
any legal means, any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2071, 3-13-2006; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 9
ABANDONED PROPERTY
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein, the following terms shall mean:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police for the city of Marion, Illinois, police department.
CITY: The city of Marion, Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 210/460
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The city of Marion, Illinois, police department.
PROPERTY: Shall include any item of personal property that has been either impounded, seized,
confiscated, or otherwise placed in the control of the city of Marion police department. (Ord. 3105, 5-
13-2013)
6-9-2: NOTICE:
The city of Marion police department shall make reasonable inquiry and efforts to identify and notify
the owner or other person entitled to possession of property, and shall return the property after such
person provides reasonable and satisfactory proof of his ownership or right to possession and
reimburses the agency for all reasonable expenses of such custody. (Ord. 3105, 5-13-2013)
6-9-3: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
Any property that remains unclaimed with the city of Marion police department for a period in excess
of ninety (90) days following the final disposition of the original underlying matter from which the
property was seized, confiscated, or otherwise taken into custody shall be deemed as abandoned.
(Ord. 3105, 5-13-2013)
6-9-4: DISPOSITION AND SALE OF ABANDONED PROPERTY:
Any property which remains unclaimed by its lawful owner for a period in excess of ninety (90) days as
defined as abandoned above, shall either be placed into the city's treasury, in the case of currency, or
sold at a public auction to the highest bidder. (Ord. 3105, 5-13-2013)
6-9-5: TERMS OF SALE:
The chief of police shall be responsible for establishing the terms, conditions, and procedures for any
such public sale held by the police department, including, but not limited to, the dates and times of any
such sales. (Ord. 3105, 5-13-2013)
6-9-6: PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF PROPERTY:
The proceeds of the sale of any abandoned property at public auction, less reimbursement to the law
enforcement agency of the reasonable expenses of custody thereof, shall be deposited into the city's
treasury. (Ord. 3105, 5-13-2013)
6-9-7: EXEMPT PROPERTY:
This chapter shall not apply to such property or evidence which is subject to lawful destruction
according to the laws of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 3105, 5-13-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 211/460
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS; ENFORCEMENT AND
PENALTY
7-1-1: STATE TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or inappropriate, all of the definitions,
requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by the City. Any and all
violations thereof shall be considered violations of this title, and each such violation shall subject the
violator thereof to penalty provisions under this title. (2013 Code)
7-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this section:
ALLEY: A public way within a block generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings, and not
used for general traffic circulation.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power, upon which any person may ride, having two (2)
tandem wheels, either of which is more than twenty inches (20") in diameter.
CROSSWALK: That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the sidewalk lines at
street intersections.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLES: Police vehicles, vehicles of the Fire Department, ambulances, vehicles
carrying a State, County or Municipal officer or employee in response to an emergency call, and
emergency vehicles of public service corporations on an emergency call.
EXPLOSIVE: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for
the purpose of producing any explosion and which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or
other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion, or by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such
a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of
producing destructible effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Any liquid which has a flashpoint of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) or less,
as determined by tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
IMPROVED HIGHWAY: A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 212/460
INTERSECTION: A. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines,
or if none, then the lateral boundary lines, of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another
at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
B. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways forty feet (40') or more apart, then every crossing
of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a
separate intersection.
LANED ROADWAY: A street, the roadway of which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the
loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
MERGING TRAFFIC: A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging roadways to
permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction thereof, wherein the driver of each vehicle
involved is required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with any
other vehicle.
METAL TIRES: Every tire, the surface of which in contact with the roadway is wholly or partially of
metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by
electric power obtained from overhead wires, but not operated upon rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on
not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater than is reasonably
necessary for the actual loading or unloading of persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or property abutting
thereon.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the city, the county, any park district, school district, the state
of Illinois, or the United States government.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory of the city contiguous to and including a highway not comprising
a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or
more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so
constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or
load so drawn.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 213/460
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of
pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly
visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a public or governmental
agency or by or for a private or religious organization solely for the transportation of pupils in
connection with school activities.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for
being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load
rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the adjacent property line
designated for pedestrian use.
SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed
air for the support of the load.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever
nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of
vehicular traffic.
THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every highway or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from
intersecting highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop
signs are erected as provided in this title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, whether singly or
together while using any highway for the purpose of travel.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or property and for
being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing
vehicle.
TRUCK-TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and
not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with
structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one
hundred feet (100') for a distance of one-fourth (1/4) mile or more.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a highway except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks.
YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: When required by an official sign, means the act of granting the privilege of
the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic within the intersection and to vehicles
approaching from the right or left; provided, that when the roadway is clear, the vehicle may proceed
into the intersection. (1977 Code §§ 10.04.010 - 10.04.380; amd. 2013 Code)
7-1-3: UNATTENDED ANIMALS:
It is unlawful to leave any animal unattended in any street without having such animal securely
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 214/460
fastened. (1977 Code § 10.20.290; amd. 2013 Code)
7-1-4: ACCIDENTS:
The driver of a vehicle which has collided with or been in an accident with any vehicle, person or
property in such a manner as to cause injury or damage shall stop immediately and render such
assistance as may be possible, and give his true name and residence to the injured person or any
other person requesting the same on behalf of the injured person, or the owner of the property
damaged, and to a police officer, if one is present. The driver of each vehicle concerned in any such
accident shall report to the nearest police authority promptly after such accident. (1977 Code
§ 10.48.020)
7-1-5: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
A. Authority To Direct Traffic:
1. Members of the police department and special police assigned to traffic duty are authorized to
direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this title, or in emergencies as public safety
or convenience may require, and it is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer. Except in case of emergency, it is unlawful for
any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic. (1977 Code § 10.08.010)
2. The fire department officer in command, or any firefighter designated by him, may exercise the
powers and authority of a police officer in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the
fire department has responded to an emergency call for so long as fire Department equipment is
on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police. (1977 Code § 10.08.020)
B. Arrests And Bail: Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be released
upon proper bail being furnished as required by law. (1977 Code § 10.52.010)
C. Prima Facie Proof Of Violation: The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is
registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in
control of the automobile at the time of such violation. (1977 Code § 10.52.020)
D. Penalty: Unless otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any provision of this title
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (2013
Code)
7-1-6: IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN CONNECTION WITH
ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES:
A. Violations Authorizing Impoundment: A motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or
implied, of the owner of record, which is used in connection with the following violations, may be
subject to seizure and impoundment by the City if the violation prevents the driver, or any person at
the scene of the violation authorized to operate the vehicle by the owner of the vehicle, from
lawfully operating the vehicle, or if a police officer authorized to make arrests in the City
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 215/460
determines that impoundment of the vehicle is reasonably necessary as a community caretaking
function so that the vehicle does not jeopardize public safety and the efficient movement of
vehicular traffic. The owner of record of said vehicle shall be liable to the City for an administrative
penalty in addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided.
Offenses:
1. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or attempted commission of any offense
for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/36-1 et seq.
2. Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compounds, in violation
of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.
3. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the commission or attempted commission
of any felony offense in violation of the provisions of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 550/1.
4. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the commission or attempted commission
of any offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 570/100.
5. Unlawful use of a weapon in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1; aggravated
discharge of a firearm in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.5; and unlawful
possession of a firearm and firearm ammunition, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/24-3.1.
6. Driving while driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or
revoked, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to
seizure and impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving), or due
to failure to comply with emissions testing.
7. Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or attempting to solicit or
possess cannabis or a controlled substance as defined by the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/2, or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 570/100 et seq.
8. Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license in violation of section 6-101
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101 where the period of expiration
is greater than one year.
9. Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit
in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101,
or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to
a person's age.
10. Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant, other than a warrant
for an emission suspension, has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for any and all
misdemeanor and/or felony offenses, including, but not limited to: failing to answer charges that
the driver violated the offenses of: driving while license is revoked or suspended, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-303; operating a motor vehicle without a valid driver's license, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-101; and/or driving under the influence of alcohol, other drugs,
intoxicating compound(s), or any combination thereof, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 216/460
11. A violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204, "fleeing or attempting to elude a peace
officer", of the Illinois Vehicle Code; 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-503, "reckless driving;
aggravated reckless driving", of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended; 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-506, "street racing", of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
12. A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-2, "aggravated assault", of the Illinois Criminal
Code of 1961, as amended; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-3.2, "domestic battery", of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-4, "aggravated
battery", of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16,
subdivision 10, "offense of retail theft", of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended; 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18-1, "robbery", of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended;
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-1.1, "aggravated arson", of the Illinois Criminal Code of
1961, as amended; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1, "criminal damage to property", of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended; or 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1, "mob
action", of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961.
13. A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14, "prostitution", of the Illinois Criminal Code
of 1961, as amended; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14.1, "solicitation of a sexual act", of
the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-15,
"soliciting for a prostitute", of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended; 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-18, "patronizing a prostitute", of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as
amended; or 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-18.1, "patronizing a juvenile prostitute", of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended.
14. A violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.8, "suspension of driver's license;
persons under age 21" of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended.
15. Failure to stop or remain at the scene of an accident that resulted in personal injury or death, or
failure to report the accident within one-half (1/2) hour after the motor vehicle accident or within
one-half (1/2) hour of being discharged from the hospital in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-401.
16. Failure to stop or remain at the scene of an accident that resulted in damage to any motor
vehicle in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-402.
17. This section shall not apply: a) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at that time and
the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty four (24) hours after the
theft was discovered.
B. Seizure And Impoundment: Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for
the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the City or its agents. Before or at the time the
vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself as the owner of the
vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a vehicle
impoundment hearing to be conducted under this section.
C. Request For Hearing: If the owner of record of a vehicle seized pursuant to this section desires to
appeal the seizure, said owner must make a request for said hearing within twenty four (24) hours
of the seizure. Said request shall be in writing and filed with the Chief of Police or her designee. If
an appeal is timely filed, a Hearing Officer of the City shall conduct such appeal hearing within forty
eight (48) hours after the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. All interested
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 217/460
persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the vehicle impoundment hearing.
The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines there is probable cause to believe
that the vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the Hearing Officer
shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this section, unless the owner
of the vehicle posts with the City Clerk, a cash bond in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00), plus any applicable towing and storage fees.
D. Hearing; Failure To Appear: Unless a hearing is held pursuant to subsection C of this section,
within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section, the City shall
notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of record of the date, time and location
of a hearing that will be conducted pursuant, to this section. The hearing shall be scheduled and
held, unless continued by order of the Hearing Officer, no later than forty five (45) days after the
vehicle was seized. The hearing shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer appointed by the Mayor.
All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. If, after
the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that the vehicle was
used in connection with a violation of section 30-225, and that none of the exceptions described in
clauses (1) or (2) of subsection (a) applies, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the
owner of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the City for an administrative penalty in the amount
not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing,
the Hearing Officer shall enter a default order in favor of the City requiring the payment to the City
of an administrative penalty in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). If the
Hearing Officer finds that no such violation occurred, the Hearing Officer shall order the immediate
return of the owner's vehicle or cash bond.
E. Administrative Penalty: If an administrative penalty is imposed pursuant to this section, such
penalty shall constitute a debt due to owing the City. If a cash bond has been posted pursuant to
this section, the bond shall be applied to the penalty. If a vehicle has been impounded when such a
penalty is imposed, the City may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment
against the vehicle as provided by law. Except as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle shall
continue to be impounded until: 1) the penalty, plus any applicable towing and storage fees, is paid
to the City, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally
entitled to possess the vehicle; 2) the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment
to enforce a lien as provided by law. If the administrative penalty and applicable fees are not paid
within thirty (30) days after an administrative penalty is imposed under subsection D of this section
against an owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the hearing, the vehicle shall be
deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative penalty and applicable fees are not paid
within thirty (30) days after the expiration of time at which administrative review of the Hearing
Officer's determination may be sought or within thirty (30) days after an action seeking
administrative review has been resolved in favor of the City, whichever is applicable, the vehicle
shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of unclaimed vehicles under section 4-208 of the Illinois Vehicle Code1.
F. Penalty And Fees Paid: Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder or
other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded under this section
until the civil penalty and fees applicable under this section have been paid. (Ord. 3376, 5-8-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 218/460
Chapter 2
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
7-2-1: SPECIFICATIONS:
All signs and signals established by direction of the city council shall conform to the "Illinois State
Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways". (1977 Code § 10.08.030; amd.
2013 Code)
7-2-2: OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instruction of any traffic sign or signal placed
in view by authority of the corporate authorities or in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois,
excepting on direction of a police officer. (1977 Code § 10.08.030)
7-2-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words "Go", "Caution", or "Stop",
or exhibiting different colored lights successively, the following colors only shall be used, and said
terms and lights shall indicate as follows:
A. Circular Green Alone:
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign
at such place prohibits either such turn; but vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk, unless directed otherwise by a pedestrian signal.
B. Steady Yellow:
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red indication will be exhibited
immediately thereafter or the related green movement is being terminated, and shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a
vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
2. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal, pedestrians facing such signal are thereby
advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.
C. Steady Red Alone:
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line; if there is no such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 219/460
line, then vehicles shall stop before entering such crosswalk and shall remain standing until the
green indication is shown, unless otherwise directed by a sign or arrow.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without
interfering with any vehicular traffic or unless a separate "Walk" indication is shown.
D. Green Turn Arrow (Alone Or With Circular Green, With Steady Yellow, With Steady Red, Or With
Green Straight Through Arrow): Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall comply with the meaning of
the circular green, steady yellow or straight through arrow indication as if it were shown alone;
except, that such vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the intersection to make the movement
indicated by the green turn arrow. Vehicular traffic shall yield right of way to pedestrians lawfully
within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. (1977 Code § 10.08.040)
7-2-4: FLASHING SIGNALS:
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows:
A. Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of
vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
B. Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(1977 Code § 10.08.050)
7-2-5: LOCATION AT OTHER THAN INTERSECTIONS:
A. In the event that an official traffic control signal or flashing red signal is erected and maintained at a
place other than an intersection, the provisions of section 7-2-3 or 7-2-4 of this chapter shall be
applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required
shall be at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
B. In the event an official traffic control signal or flashing red signal is erected and maintained at a
place other than an intersection, the provisions of section 7-2-3 of this chapter shall be applicable
except as to provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at
a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. (1977 Code § 10.08.040)
7-2-6: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS:
A. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any unauthorized sign,
signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 220/460
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, nor
shall any person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any other sign which hides
from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic control device or
any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
Any such unauthorized device is declared to be a nuisance and may be removed by any police
officer. (1977 Code § 10.08.060)
B. It is unlawful to maintain anywhere in the city any sign, signal, marking or device, other than a traffic
sign or signal authorized by the city council or the Illinois state department of transportation, which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or
signal, in view of any street or highway, and it is unlawful to place or maintain any sign which hides
from view any lawful traffic control device. (1977 Code § 10.08.070; amd. 2013 Code)
C. It is unlawful to maintain or operate in view of any street or highway any flashing or rotating beacon
of light. (1977 Code § 10.08.070)
Chapter 3
DRIVING RULES
7-3-1: TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a manner as to form an
unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. (1977 Code § 10.20.260)
7-3-2: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. Operation Of Ambulances: No person shall operate an ambulance, which includes any motor
vehicle primarily designed and used for conveyance of sick or injured persons, in a manner not
conforming to the provisions of the motor vehicle laws and regulations of the state or ordinances of
the city as such provisions apply to motor vehicles in general, except in compliance with the
following conditions:
1. The person operating the ambulance shall be either responding to a bona fide emergency call or
specifically directed by a licensed physician to disregard traffic laws in operating the ambulance
during and for the purpose of the specific trip or journey that is involved; (1977 Code
§ 10.08.080)
2. The ambulance shall be equipped with a siren producing an audible signal of an intensity of one
hundred (100) decibels at a distance of fifty feet (50') from said siren, and with a lamp or lamps
emitting an oscillating, rotating or flashing red beam directed in part toward the front of the
vehicle and containing a power rating of at least one hundred (100) amperes; (1977 Code
§ 10.08.080; amd. 2013 Code)
3. The aforesaid siren and lamp shall be in full operation at all times during such trip or journey;
and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 221/460
4. Whenever the ambulance is operated in a speed in excess of forty (40) miles per hour, the
ambulance shall be operated in complete conformance with every other motor vehicle law and
regulation of the state and ordinances of the city, relating to the operation of motor vehicles, as
such provision applies to motor vehicles in general, except laws and regulations pertaining to
compliance with official traffic control devices or to vehicular operation upon the right half of the
roadway. (1977 Code § 10.08.080)
B. Fire Department Vehicles:
1. Following Fire Apparatus: It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, to follow any fire apparatus in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred feet
(500'), or to stop any vehicle within five hundred feet (500') of any fire apparatus stopped to
answer a fire alarm.
2. Crossing Fire Hose: It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive over an unprotected hose
of the fire department without the consent of the fire chief or the assistant in command. (1977
Code § 10.20.120; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Duty On Approach Of Emergency Vehicles:
1. Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver is giving
audible sign by siren or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall
immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge of
curb of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
2. This subsection shall not operate to relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. (1977 Code
§ 10.20.210)
7-3-3: THROUGH, ONE-WAY, YIELD RIGHT OF WAY AND STOP INTERSECTIONS:
A. Through Streets: The streets and parts of streets of the city designated by ordinance as through
streets are declared to be through streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a
through street and shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection
or which are approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard unless
directed otherwise by a traffic officer or a traffic control signal. (1977 Code § 10.12.010)
B. One-Way Streets And Alleys: It is unlawful to operate any vehicle on any roadways, streets or
alleys, designated as one-way roadways, streets or alleys by ordinance and signposted, in any
direction other than that so designated. (1977 Code §§ 10.12.020, 10.20.190)
C. Stop Streets: The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where
a stop sign is erected pursuant to ordinance, at one or more entrances thereto, and shall proceed
cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or
approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event, there shall be compliance with the directions
of the police officer. (1977 Code § 10.12.100)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 222/460
1. Any street designated by ordinance as a yield right of way street and so posted is declared to be
a yield right of way street.
2. The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right of way sign shall reduce the speed of his
vehicle to not more than twenty (20) miles per hour and shall yield the right of way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersecting street either from the right or left or which are
approaching so closely on such intersection as to constitute a hazard; but said driver having so
yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
3. If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of other
vehicles after driving past a yield right of way sign, such collision shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right of way. (1977 Code § 10.12.110)
7-3-4: RIGHT OF WAY:
Excepting as otherwise provided in this chapter, the driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection
shall yield the right of way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different highway;
and when two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same
time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right. (1977
Code § 10.20.070)
7-3-5: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
A. Specific Speed Limits Established:
1. Urban District: It is unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the jurisdiction of
the Illinois state department of transportation, or the county, in an urban district within the city at
a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour, or in an alley at a speed in excess of fifteen (15)
miles per hour.
2. Outside Urban District: It is unlawful to drive any vehicle on any highway outside the urban
district at a speed of more than fifty five (55) miles per hour.
3. First Division Vehicles: It is unlawful to drive any vehicle of the first division towing another
vehicle outside of an urban district at more than fifty five (55) miles per hour, in an urban district
at more than thirty (30) miles per hour or fifteen (15) miles an hour in an alley; provided, that if
the mayor and city council, by ordinance, set other limits as provided by 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-604 after an engineering or traffic survey, then such limits shall govern the rate of
speed on the streets indicated in such ordinance. Appropriate signs shall be posted showing
such speed limits.
4. Roadways Under Jurisdiction Of State: It is unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or
highway within the city under the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation, or of the
county, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such street; provided further, that the speed of
all vehicles of the second division, as defined by statute, shall be as follows:
a. If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight and has a gross weight of
eight thousand (8,000) pounds or less, the maximum speed is fifty five (55) miles per hour
outside of an urban district, thirty (30) miles per hour in an urban district, and fifteen (15) miles
per hour in an alley; but if such vehicle is equipped with two (2) or more solid tires, the
maximum is ten (10) miles per hour at all times and in all locations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 223/460
b. If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight and has a gross weight of
more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds, the maximum speed is fifty five (55) miles per hour
outside of an urban district, thirty (30) miles per hour in an urban district, and fifteen (15) miles
per hour in an alley.
c. If the vehicle is a bus, the maximum speed is fifty five (55) miles per hour. (1977 Code
§ 10.20.230; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Duty To Decrease Speed: The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable
maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when
approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway or when special
hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic by reason of weather or highway
conditions, and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person
or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all
persons to use due care. (1977 Code § 10.20.230)
7-3-6: DRIVE ON RIGHT:
Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway
except as follows:
A. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules
governing such movement.
B. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair.
C. Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon.
D. Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
E. Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public highway and two (2) vehicles
meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the wider shoulder shall give the right of way on such
pavement to the other vehicle. (1977 Code § 10.20.140)
7-3-7: DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the
following rules, in addition to all others consistent with this section, shall apply:
A. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved
from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 224/460
B. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such
center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such
center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction that the vehicle is
proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation.
C. Official signs may be erected directing specific traffic to use a designated lane or designating those
lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway,
and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
D. Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of
roadways, and drivers of vehicles shall obey such signs. (1977 Code § 10.20.200)
7-3-8: OVERTAKING, PASSING VEHICLES:
A. Meeting And Passing Vehicles: Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in
each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion
of the roadway as nearly as possible. (1977 Code § 10.20.150)
B. Overtaking And Passing Vehicles: The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of
vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations, exceptions and special rules
stated in this subsection:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to
the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle
shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not
increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (1977 Code
§ 10.20.160)
C. Overtaking Vehicles On Right:
1. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making
or about to make a left turn.
2. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and, allowing sufficient clearance, pass another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a roadway with
unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for four (4) or more lines of moving traffic when such
movement can be made in safety. No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder
of the roadway in overtaking or passing on the right.
3. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right on a one-way
street or on any street on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement where the
roadway is free from obstruction and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving
vehicles. (1977 Code § 10.20.170)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 225/460
D. Overtaking Vehicles On Left:
1. No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing
another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is
free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to
be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from
the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the overtaking vehicle must
return to the right hand side of the roadway before coming within two hundred feet (200') of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
2. No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other time, be driven to the
left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
a. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the driver's view
is obstructed within sufficient distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might
approach from the opposite direction.
b. When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing any intersection or railroad
grade crossing. (1977 Code § 10.20.180)
c. When official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the right, or a distinctive line also
so directs traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by the Illinois state department of
transportation. (1977 Code § 10.20.180; amd. 2013 Code)
d. The limitations in subsections D2a and D2b of this section shall not apply upon a one-way
street or upon a street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes
of moving traffic in each direction when such movement can be made with safety. (1977 Code
§ 10.20.180)
7-3-9: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
A. Turning At Intersections: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right
hand curb or edge of the roadway, or as indicated by traffic markers or signs.
2. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway
entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half
of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline
where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever
practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of
the intersection, or as indicated by traffic markers or signs.
3. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways,
the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the
intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to
leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in such direction upon the roadway being entered, or as indicated by traffic markers or signs.
(1977 Code § 10.20.010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 226/460
B. Left Turns:
1. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right of
way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so
close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having
given a signal when and as required, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right of way to
the vehicle making the left turn. (1977 Code § 10.20.080)
2. It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn left at any place where such turns are
prohibited by ordinance. Such prohibitions shall be indicated by appropriate signs. (1977 Code
§ 10.20.110)
C. Turning Around: It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made with safety and without backing into
traffic or otherwise interfering with traffic. (1977 Code § 10.20.090)
D. U-Turns: It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a U-turn at any place where such
turns are prohibited by ordinance. Such prohibitions shall be indicated by appropriate signs. (1977
Code § 10.20.100)
7-3-10: DRIVER'S SIGNALS:
A. No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first giving a
suitable signal in such manner as to apprise others who might be affected by his action.
B. No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway unless and until such
movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after giving a clearly audible signal
by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement or after giving an
appropriate signal in the manner provided in this section in the event any other vehicle may be
affected by such movement.
C. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during not less than the last two hundred feet
(200') traveled by the vehicle before turning. The signals required in this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or signal device, but when a vehicle is so
constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to front and rear of
such vehicle, then said signal must be given by such a lamp or device.
D. All signals required to be given by hand and arm in this section shall be given from the left side of
the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows:
1. Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
2. Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
3. Stop or decrease of speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (1977 Code § 10.20.030)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 227/460
7-3-11: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
A. The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and
prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of
the street.
B. The driver of any motor vehicle of the second division or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a street outside of a business or residence district, shall not follow within three
hundred feet (300') of another motor vehicle of the second division or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prevent overtaking and
passing, nor shall the same apply upon any lane specifically designated for use by motor vehicles
of the second division.
C. Motor vehicles being driven upon any street outside of a business or residence district in a caravan
or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient
space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to
enter and occupy such space without danger. This subsection shall not apply to funeral
processions. (1977 Code § 10.20.420)
7-3-12: RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
A. Obedience To Signs And Signals:
1. The driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing when a signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not less than
fifteen feet (15') from the nearest track of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so
safely.
2. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at and not traverse such grade crossing when a crossing gate
is lowered or when a flagman or automatic signal warns of the approach of a train.
B. Certain Vehicles Required To Stop At All Crossings: The driver of any motor vehicle carrying
passengers for hire, or any school bus carrying any schoolchildren, or any vehicle carrying
explosives or flammable liquids as cargo shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet (50') but not less
than ten feet (10') from the nearest rail of the tracks and shall listen and look in both directions
along such track from which a train might come before proceeding across such tracks at a grade
crossing; provided, that no such stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or
a traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed. (1977 Code § 10.20.330)
7-3-13: TRUCK TRAFFIC:
A. Prohibited On Certain Streets: It is unlawful to drive any truck, except for the purpose of making a
delivery upon any street upon which truck traffic is prohibited. (1977 Code § 10.20.390; amd. 2013
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 228/460
B. Limited Load Streets: It is unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the city when the gross
weight on the surface of the road through any axle of such vehicle exceeds sixteen thousand
(16,000) pounds. Where lower limits are imposed by ordinance and signs indicating such
limitations are posted, it is unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street,
except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case, such vehicle may be
driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose. (1977
Code § 10.20.400)
7-3-14: OPERATION OF VEHICLE ON APPROACHING SCHOOL BUS:
The driver of a vehicle on any street or highway upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any
school bus which has stopped on the street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any
schoolchildren shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on
the bus a visual signal as required by statute for operation while the bus is transporting pupils;
provided, that the driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway of which the roadways for traffic moving
in opposite directions are separated by a strip of ground at least four feet (4') wide which is not
surfaced or suitable for vehicle traffic, or on a controlled access highway where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross, need not stop his vehicle upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on the
opposite roadway. (1977 Code § 10.20.410)
7-3-15: RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING:
A. Driving From Alleys, Driveways Or Garages:
1. The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or across a sidewalk line projected across such
alley, and shall exercise extreme care in driving upon said sidewalk or across such line to a city
street. (1977 Code § 10.20.040; amd. 2013 Code)
2. The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street or highway from a private road or
driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said street or highway. (1977
Code § 10.20.010; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Driving On Sidewalks, In Safety Zones:
1. No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary
driveway, nor at any time into or upon any portion of a roadway marked as a safety zone. (1977
Code § 10.20.050)
2. It is unlawful for any person to ride or propel any bicycle or any motor vehicle upon any sidewalk
in the city. (1977 Code § 10.20.060)
C. Backing Vehicles: The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interference with other traffic. (1977 Code § 10.20.370)
D. Restricted Access Roadways: No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access or
limited controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public
authority. (1977 Code § 10.20.380)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 229/460
7-3-16: PROCESSIONS:
A. Driving Through Processions: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this section. (1977 Code § 10.20.340)
B. Driving In Processions: Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right
hand side of the roadway and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as practical and safe. (1977
Code § 10.20.350)
C. Identification Of Funeral Processions: A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying
insignia and by having the lights of each vehicle lighted. (1977 Code § 10.20.360)
7-3-17: RIDING ON BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES:
A. Riding On Bicycles:
1. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular
seat attached thereto.
2. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped; except, that an adult rider may carry a child securely attached to his
person in a backpack or sling.
B. Riding On Motorcycles:
1. A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a
motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event, a
passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or
upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator.
2. A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
3. No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars higher than the height of the shoulders
of the operator when the operator is seated in the normal driving position astride that portion of
the seat or saddle occupied by the operator. (2013 Code)
7-3-18: MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS:
A. Clinging To Vehicles: It is unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle, or any
toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any moving motor vehicle. (1977 Code
§ 10.20.300; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 230/460
B. Toy Vehicles: It is unlawful for any person upon skates, a skateboard, a coaster, a sled or other toy
vehicle to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk. (1977 Code § 10.20.310; amd. 2013
Code)
C. Riding On Running Boards: It is unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board or
outside step of any vehicle. (1977 Code § 10.20.320)
7-3-19: RECKLESS, NEGLIGENT OR CARELESS DRIVING:
It is unlawful to operate any vehicle in the city in a careless, reckless, negligent or wanton manner, or
carelessly so as to endanger life or property. (1977 Code § 10.20.220)
7-3-20: DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF INTOXICANTS:
A. A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle within the city while:
1. The alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath is 0.08 or more based on the definition
of blood and breath units in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.2;
2. Under the influence of alcohol;
3. Under the influence of any intoxicating compound or combination of intoxicating compounds to a
degree that renders the person incapable of driving safely;
4. Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a degree that renders the
person incapable of safely driving;
5. Under the combined influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or
compounds to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving; or
6. There is any amount of a drug, substance, or compound in the person's breath, blood, or urine
resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of cannabis listed in the cannabis control act1, a
controlled substance listed in the Illinois controlled substances act2, an intoxicating compound
listed in the use of intoxicating compounds act3, or methamphetamine as listed in the
methamphetamine control and community protection act4.
B. The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has been legally entitled to use
alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof,
shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section. (2013 Code)
Chapter 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
7-4-1: METHOD OF PARKING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 231/460
A. Parallel Parking; Parking Within Stall: In parking motor vehicles or other vehicles upon any street in
the city, other than the public square, where marked parking stalls are lined off and designated by
authority of the commissioner of accounts, finances and streets, such vehicles shall be parked
within one of said marked parking stalls with the vehicle parked parallel to and adjoining the curb of
the street, and it is unlawful to park or leave standing any motor vehicle or other vehicle, when
unoccupied by a competent driver thereof, upon any of such streets in any other manner. (1977
Code § 10.28.050; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Parking On Right: When parking a motor vehicle upon any street or alley in the city, other than the
public square, said motor vehicle or any other vehicle shall be parked adjacent to and parallel with
the right hand curb or right hand edge of the traveled portion of said street or alley, and it is
unlawful to stop or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle, when said vehicle is unoccupied by a
competent driver thereof, in any other manner. "Right hand edge or curb" means the edge or curb
of a street or alley which is on the right hand side of the driver of a vehicle when such driver is
facing the same direction as the vehicle is facing. (1977 Code § 10.28.060)
C. Parking On Left; Angle Parking: No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to
the curb except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street
other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve
inches (12") of the regularly established curb line; except, that upon those streets that have been
marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such
marks. (1977 Code § 10.28.130)
D. Use Of More Than One Stall: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning, controlling,
driving or operating any motor vehicle or other vehicle of any kind to cause or permit such vehicle
to be stopped or parked upon the public square, or upon any part of any street in the city, upon
which has been marked parking stalls by authority of the commissioner with jurisdiction over
streets, in such manner as to cover parts of more than one of such marked parking stalls. (1977
Code § 10.28.070; amd. 2013 Code)
7-4-2: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such movement
can be made with reasonable safety. (1977 Code § 10.20.020)
7-4-3: UNATTENDED VEHICLE:
A. No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of such vehicle is running, and no vehicle shall
be left without a driver on any hill or incline unless the vehicle is secured against moving.
B. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or causeway or in any
tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is authorized to provide
for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. (1977 Code
§ 10.20.280)
7-4-4: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 232/460
A. Vehicles For Sale; Peddling Merchandise: It is unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the
purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle
merchandise is peddled. (1977 Code § 10.28.140)
B. Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within any alley in such a manner or under such conditions
as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for the free movement of
vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within any alley in such a
position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1977 Code § 10.28.160)
C. Private Property: It is unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the
consent of the owner of the property. (1977 Code § 10.28.180)
D. Inoperable Motor Vehicles: No inoperable motor vehicle, or a motor vehicle incapable of moving
under its own power, shall be parked or allowed to remain by its owner, operator or person
responsible therefor in or on a city street, alley, or public way for more than twenty four (24) hours.
The owner, operator or person responsible for parking or allowing a motor vehicle to remain in or
on a city street, alley or public way in violation of this subsection shall be fined, upon conviction of
such violation, an amount as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation
continues is a separate offense. (Ord. 1154, 5-18-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
7-4-5: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
A. Authority To Designate Numbers And Locations:
1. The commissioner with jurisdiction over streets is hereby authorized to establish and designate
the amount and location of spaces upon public streets or public parking lots, and owners of
private property are authorized to establish and designate the amount and location of spaces
upon their private property, within the city, to be allowed for parking of vehicles which display:
(Ord. 1494, 1-10-1994; amd. 2013 Code)
a. A current disabled veteran's license plate.
b. A current state issued handicapped license plate.
c. A handicapped parking permit identification card issued by state or federal authorities. (Ord.
1494, 1-10-1994)
2. In designating handicapped parking spaces, the designated persons shall be guided by the
number of handicapped drivers anticipated to be using the parking lot or on street parking, the
needs of handicapped persons and the needs of the public.
3. The requirements of this subsection shall apply to existing parking lots as well as to new parking
lots to be constructed after the effective date hereof. Persons responsible for existing parking
lots shall have sixty (60) days from the date of notification to comply. Permits for a new parking
lot shall not be issued until handicapped parking spaces are provided as required by this
subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 233/460
B. Unauthorized Parking: No person shall park any motor vehicle in a space designated for use for
handicapped parking upon a public street or a public or private parking lot unless such vehicle
shall have displayed thereon a current disabled veteran's license plate or handicapped parking
permit identification card. For the purposes of this subsection, a "space designated for
handicapped parking" shall mean any parking space located upon a public street or a public or
private parking lot which is marked and designated with a sign which is painted blue in color, with a
symbol of an individual in a wheelchair, painted in white in the middle of the blue area, or with such
symbol painted on the pavement. (Ord. 1493, 1-3-1994, eff. 1-17-1994)
C. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1493, 1-
3-1994, eff. 1-17-1994; amd. 2013 Code)
7-4-6: SPECIFIC NO STANDING OR NO PARKING PLACES:
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall:
1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
a. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
b. On a sidewalk.
c. Within an intersection.
d. On a crosswalk.
e. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs
or markings.
f. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic.
g. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.
h. On any railroad tracks. A violation of any part of this subsection A1h shall result in a
mandatory fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fifty (50) hours of community service.
i. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
j. On any controlled access highway.
k. In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers.
l. In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a current annual registration sticker or
current temporary permit pending registration.
m. At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of the roadway for
moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 234/460
2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge
passengers:
a. In front of a public or private driveway.
b. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
c. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
d. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic
control signal located at the side of a roadway.
e. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when
properly signposted).
f. At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
3. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers:
a. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
b. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away
from a curb such distance as is unlawful. (2013 Code)
7-4-7: PARKING DURING STREET CLEANING:
It is unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion thereof in the city at any time when
such street is being cleaned. Signs indicating that a street or portion thereof is being cleaned shall be
posted immediately before the cleaning of the street and shall be removed after the cleaning of the
street is finished. (1977 Code § 10.28.110)
7-4-8: TRUCK AND TRAILER PARKING:
A. Parking In Residential Areas:
1. Parking Restricted:
a. No motor vehicle licensed or titled as a "truck", rated as a "three-quarter ton truck" or higher,
may be parked in or on any city street, alley or public way in any area of the city bearing any
one of the city's residential zone classifications, except as hereinafter provided.
b. A motor vehicle licensed or titled as a "truck", rated as a "three-quarter ton truck" or higher,
used by a public utility, used in home delivery of goods or services, used in waste pick up, or
used in facilitating home repairs or maintenance may be parked upon a city street, alley or
public way in any area of the city bearing any one of the city's residential zone classifications
for the period of time reasonably required to complete such delivery, pick up, service, repair or
maintenance, as the case may be.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 235/460
2. Impoundment: The chief of police may cause to be removed from such city street, alley or public
way any such truck parked or allowed to remain thereon in violation of the provisions hereof. Any
cost incurred for the removal of any such truck shall be charged to the owner, operator or person
responsible for such truck. (Ord. 1154, 5-18-1987)
3. Penalty: The owner, operator or person responsible for parking or allowing a truck, as described
in this subsection, to remain in or on a city street, alley or public way in violation of this
subsection shall be fined, upon conviction of such violation, an amount as provided in section 1-
4-1 of this code. Each day such violation continues is a separate offense. (Ord. 1154, 5-18-1987;
amd. 2013 Code)
B. Parking After Dark: It is unlawful for any person to park a tractor or trailer or to leave a tractor or
trailer parked after dark on any street or alley of the city. (1977 Code § 10.28.030; amd. 2013
Code)
7-4-9: LOADING ZONES:
It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is
necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any place
designated by the city council as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the following
designated places:
A. At any place, not to exceed seventy five feet (75'), along the curb before the entrance to any
hospital or hotel at any time. (1977 Code § 10.28.150)
B. At any place, not to exceed seventy five feet (75'), along the curb line before the entrance to a
public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. except on a Sunday.
(1977 Code § 10.28.150; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the theater is open. (1977 Code
§ 10.28.150)
7-4-10: SIGNS POSTED:
Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited, indicating such
limitations or prohibitions. (1977 Code § 10.28.190)
7-4-11: TOWING ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
A. Authority To Tow: The police department and all members thereof are authorized to remove and
tow away, or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any car or other
vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic
hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any
emergency vehicle; or any vehicle which has been parked in any public street or other public place
for a period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours. (1977 Code § 10.28.120; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 236/460
B. Storage And Redemption; Costs To Owner: Cars so towed away shall be stored on any city
property or in a public garage or parking lot and shall be restored to the owner or operator thereof
after payment of the expense incurred by the city in removing and storing such vehicles. (1977
Code § 10.28.120)
7-4-12: EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXEMPT:
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, all emergency and rescue vehicles, when
answering emergency calls, are permitted to use and travel in any direction upon any of the streets
and alleys of the city. (1977 Code § 10.28.090; amd. 2013 Code)
ARTICLE A. OFF STREET PARKING LOTS
7-4A-1: LOTS DESIGNATED:
In order to relieve traffic confusion on the streets of the city and provide off street parking facilities for
motor vehicles in the city, the following improved parking lots are designated as lots on which the city
is authorized to mark off parking stalls:
A. Parking Lot No. 1: Parking lot no. 1 is located at the intersection of Madison and Union Streets in
block 11 of the original survey of Marion, Illinois, except that part occupied by the city hall.
B. Parking Lot No. 2: Parking lot no. 2 is located between Jefferson and Union Streets on lots 1 and 2
of block 10 of the second survey of the city of Marion, Illinois.
C. Parking Lot No. 3: Parking lot no. 3 is located between Jefferson and Union Streets on lots 1 and 2
of block 1 of the second survey of the city of Marion, Illinois.
D. Parking Lot No. 4: Parking lot no. 4 is located at the intersection of Madison and College Streets on
lots 1 and 2 of block 7 of the original survey of Marion, Illinois.
E. Parking Lot No. 5: Parking lot no. 5 is located on Union Street between North Van Buren and Print
Avenue.
F. Parking Lot No. 6: Parking lot no. 6 is located at the intersection of West Union Street and North
Van Buren north of the Methodist Church.
G. Parking Lot No. 7: Parking lot no. 7 is located on Print Avenue between West Jefferson Street and
West Johnson Street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 237/460
H. Parking Lot No. 8: Parking lot no. 8 is located between East Jefferson Street and East Union Street
and North Market Street and North Madison Street.
I. Parking Lot No. 9: Parking lot no. 9 is located on the west side of North Liberty Street between West
Main Street and West Union Street. (1977 Code § 10.36.010; amd. 2013 Code)
7-4A-2: PERMITS TO PARK IN LOTS; FEE:
The city clerk is authorized to issue permits for parking motor vehicles in any vacant parking stalls
located upon the parking lots for a fee to be determined and a period of time to be agreed upon. (1977
Code § 10.36.060; amd. 2013 Code)
7-4A-3: LARGE TRUCKS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to drive into any one of the improved parking
lots described in section 7-4A-1 of this article a truck which has over a three-quarter ton rating. (1977
Code § 10.36.090)
ARTICLE B. PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN SPECIFIC
AREAS AND ON SPECIFIC STREETS
7-4B-1: PARKING IN OR NEAR PUBLIC SQUARE:
A. Method Of Parking: In parking motor vehicles or other vehicles on the public square, such vehicles
shall be placed in a parking stall, as marked off on the pavement by authority of the commissioner
with jurisdiction over streets. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning, controlling,
driving or operating any such vehicle to cause or permit such vehicle, when unoccupied by a
competent driver thereof, to be stopped or parked on the public square in any other manner. (1977
Code § 10.28.040; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Truck Parking Prohibited: The parking of trucks having a capacity of more than three-quarter ton on
the public square at any time is prohibited. (1977 Code § 10.28.020; amd. 2013 Code)
7-4B-2: PARKING NEAR SCHOOLS:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the direction of a
police officer, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any motor vehicle, either attended or
unattended, on the parts of streets on the days and at the times designated as follows: (1977 Code
§ 10.32.040; amd. 2013 Code)
A. Longfellow School: Upon the east side of Russell Street for a distance of three hundred fifty seven
feet (357') north of the north line of Hendrickson Street and on the south side of Hendrickson
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 238/460
Street for a distance of six hundred sixty feet (660') west of a point on the south side of
Hendrickson Street opposite the southwest corner of the intersection of South Russell Street and
Hendrickson Street, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or
between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days on which
school is held in Longfellow School of Community Unit school district 2 in the county. (1977 Code
§ 10.32.040)
7-4B-3: PARKING PROHIBITED ON SPECIFIC STREETS:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or a traffic control device, no person, firm or corporation owning, controlling, driving or operating
any vehicle shall cause or permit such vehicle to be parked on the following streets, in the following
locations in the city:
Street
Side(s)
Location Penalty
Boyton
Street
Both Between the intersection of Boyton Street and
South Buchanan Street and a point on Boyton
Street 1,340 feet east of such intersection
$50.00
East Boyton
Street
Both Between South Market Street and South Buchanan
Street
50.00
West
Boyton
Street
Both Within 100 feet of the intersection with South Court
Street
Calumet
Street
Between Allen Avenue and Hemingway Drive Not more than
$750.00 for
each offense
Carbon
Street
Both $50.00
South
Carbon
Street
50.00
West
Copeland
Street
From South Carbon Street to South First Street Not less than
$50.00 nor more
than $100.00
North Court
Street
Both From Main Street to Illinois Route 13 $50.00
South Court
Street
Both From Wildcat Drive to Main Street 50.00
Crab
Orchard
Drive
Both Any location
Dallas Lane Between Wildcat Drive and Lisa Lane Not more than
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 239/460
$750.00 for
each offense
East
DeYoung
Street
Both Between North Fair Street and North Carbon Street
Not less than
$50.00 nor more
than $100.00
North
Glendale in
the first
block
Off of DeYoung Street Not less than
$50.00 nor more
than $100.00
West
Hendrickson
Street
Both From South Court Street/Route 37 to South
Vicksburg Street
Not less than
$50.00 nor more
than $100.00
Illinois
Route 13
Both From Skyline Drive (station 735+68) to Smothers
Road (station 777+05)
$50.00
Both From Walton Way (station 777+02) to Interstate 57
(station 813+00)
50.00
Both From Interstate 57 to Halfway Road 50.00
Illinois
Route 37
Both Intersection with Hendrickson Street 50.00
Both Adjacent to the northbound and southbound
through lanes from station 35+00 extending
southerly to station 3+25
50.00
Jackson
Street
Both From Illinois Route 37 to Monroe Street 50.00
Both From Van Buren Street to North Market Street 50.00
West
Jackson
Street
West Between North Court Street and North Market
Street
50.00
Jefferson
Street
Both From Monroe Street to Van Buren Street 50.00
West
Jefferson
Street
South Between North Van Buren Street and North Monroe
Street
50.00
Kokopelli
Drive
Between Williamson County Parkway and Ryder
Cup Boulevard
Not less than
$50.00 nor more
than $100.00
East Main
Street
From South Virginia Street to Fair Street $50.00
North Between the public square and South Virginia
Street
50.00
West Main
Street
From First Street to North Pine Street 50.00
Both From Fifth Street to Halfway Road Not less than
$50.00 nor more
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 240/460
than $100.00
Both Between the west right of way line of the Union
Pacific Railroad and the east line of Court Street
North
Market
Street
Both Between East DeYoung Street and East Calvert
Street
$50.00
From Calvert Street north 50.00
South
Market
Street
50.00
Monroe
Street
West From Jackson Street to Jefferson Street 50.00
North
Monroe
Street
West Between West Jefferson Street and West Jackson
Street
50.00
North
Russell
Street
East Between West Main Street and Long Street 50.00
South
Russell
Street
East Between West Main Street and West Cherry Street
50.00
Skyline
Drive
Both Between West Main Street (Old Route 13 West)
and a point 2,700 feet north
50.00
North Van
Buren Street
Both From Jefferson Street to Jackson Street 50.00
Both Between West Jefferson Street and West Jackson
Street
50.00
South
Vicksburg
Street
Both Between West Main Street and West Cherry Street
50.00
(1977 Code §§ 10.32.030, 10.32.080, 10.32.090, 10.32.100, 10.32.110, 10.32.120, 10.32.130,
10.32.140, 10.32.150, 10.32.160, 10.32.170, 10.32.180, 10.32.190, 10.32.200, 10.32.210, 10.32.220,
10.32.230; amd. Ord. 994, 9-21-1981; Ord. 1265, 2-27-1987; Ord. 1340, 5-14-1990; Ord. 1389, 6-18-
1991; Ord. 1424, 1-27-1992; Ord. 1600, 1-29-1996; Ord. 1633, 9-23-1996; Ord. 1706, 11-16-1998;
Ord. 1819, 9-24-2001; Ord. 2093, 7-10-2006; Ord. 2248, 2-16-2009; Ord. 2254A, 4-13-2009; Ord.
2286, 9-28-2009; 2013 Code; Ord. 3189, 6-23-2014; Ord. 3335, 6-27-2016)
Chapter 5
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
7-5-1: STOP STREETS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 241/460
A. Designated: Motor vehicle traffic control stop signs are authorized to be installed on the following
streets in the city:
Intersection Location
North Bentley and Morgan Avenue Three-way
College Street and Van Buren Street Four-way
Concord Street and Duncan Street Four-way
Copeland Street and Aikman Street Four-way
Dulle Street and Smith Street Four-way
South Future Street and East Everett Street Four-way
Glendale and Finucane Street Four-way
Highland Street and West Stockton Street Four-way
South Madison Street and East College Street Four-way
Marion Street and Buchanan Street Four-way
North Monroe Street and West White Street Four-way
North Monroe Street and West Union Street Each corner
North Otis Street and East Carter Street Four-way
First Street and Walnut Street Four-way
(Ord. 2167, 9-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2321, 7-26-2010; Ord. 3024, 12-12-2011; Ord. 3031, 1-9-2012; Ord.
3083, 4-8-2013; Ord. 3098, 4-22-2013; Ord. 3099, 4-22-2013; Ord. 3144, 12-9-2013; Ord. 3156, 1-13-
2014; Ord. 3167, 3-10-2014; Ord. 3248, 3-23-2015; Ord. 3257, 5-11-2015; Ord. 3262, 7-13-2015; Ord.
3295, 1-25-2016)
B. Crab Orchard And Egyptian Railroad:
1. Stop signs shall be installed for the purpose of directing operators of motor vehicles to stop at
the street-rail crossings of the Crab Orchard And Egyptian Railroad on the following streets:
North Bentley
North Garfield
North Hamlet
North Harper
North Logan
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 242/460
North Madison
North Monroe
North Otis
North Van Buren
North Vicksburg
North Walker
North Seventh
2. The stop signs mandated in subsection B1 of this section shall be installed to conform with the
criteria set forth in the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
3. The city shall supply the mandated stop signs; the Crab Orchard And Egyptian Railroad shall
install, maintain and keep the signs in good repair.
4. Any operator of a motor vehicle found to have failed to stop at the street-rail crossing at which a
stop sign has been installed shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 2192, 2-25-2008)
7-5-2: SPEED LIMITS:
The following speed limits are established in the city:
A. Twenty Five Miles Per Hour:
Any city street not specifically designated in this section
Ingersoll Lane
Kokopelli Drive
Michael Lane (Ord. 1547, 5-1-1995; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Thirty Miles Per Hour:
That part of West Hendrickson Street which lies between Carbon Street and Court Street. (1977
Code § 10.20.240; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Thirty Five Miles Per Hour:
Street Direction Of
Traffic
Location Penalty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 243/460
Halfway
Road
Northbound
and
southbound
Between new State Route 13 and Old Route
13
Not less than $50.00
nor more than
$100.00
East
Main
Street
Between George Sims Street and Old Creal
Springs Road
Not less than $50.00
nor more than
$100.00
West
Main
Street
Eastbound
and
westbound
From the intersection of Court Street and
Main Street to the intersection of Halfway
Road
Not less than $50.00
nor more than
$100.00
(Ord. 1437, 4-6-1992; amd. Ord. 2005, 2-28-2005; Ord. 2174, 11-13-2007; 2013 Code)
D. Forty Five Miles Per Hour:
Street Location
Golf Course Road From South Market Street to Old Creal Springs Road
Norman Road From south of the second curve north of Illinois Route 13 to Spring
Garden
Old Creal Springs
Road
From East Boyton Street to Caplinger Pond Road
(Ord. 2310, 5-24-2010)
7-5-3: TRUCK ROUTES; VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS:
A. No More Than Ten Thousand Pounds:
1. The weight limit for vehicles traveling on the following streets in the city is no more than ten
thousand (10,000) pounds:
South Market Street south to East Boyton Street.
That part of Williamson County Parkway which encircles the Illinois Center Mall.
2. Any person who violates this subsection, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord.
1439, 5-11-1992; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Ten Thousand Pounds Or More:
1. Weight Limit Established: There are established truck routes through the city for any truck
whose destination is beyond the city, and which carries no cargo to be delivered at any point in
the city not on said routes, and whose gross weight, including truck and semitrailer or tractortrailer
and cargo, is ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more. (1977 Code § 10.16.010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 244/460
2. Truck Routes Designated: The route to be followed by any such truck shall be on one or more of
the following streets or parts of streets: that part of South Market Street which lies south of
Hendrickson Street; Hendrickson Street from South Market Street west to South Court Street;
Court Street from Hendrickson Street to the north city limits; West Main Street from Court Street
to the west city limits; DeYoung Street from the west city limits to its intersection with North Fair
Street; and North Fair Street from DeYoung Street south to State Route 13. (1977 Code
§ 10.16.020)
7-5-4: ONE-WAY STREETS:
A. Generally: Vehicular traffic shall be limited to the following directions on the following streets in the
city:
Street
Direction
Of Traffic Location
West Dewey Street Easterly Between North Russell Street and North Carbon Street
West Faust Street Westerly Between North Russell Street and North Carbon Street
South Madison Street Southerly Between East Main Street and East College
South Mechanic Northerly Between East Main Street and East College
(Ord. 1037, 11-28-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Near Public Square: Those portions of the following streets, between said streets and the public
square, are designated as one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to drive
along said portions of said streets in other than the directions indicated:
Street Location
Direction
East
College
Street
The alley extending southwardly from the southeast corner of the
public square (sometimes known as South Franklin Avenue)
Southerly
North
Madison
Street
The alley extending eastwardly from the northeast corner of the
public square (sometimes known as City Hall Avenue or as Marion
Alley)
Easterly
South
Madison
Street
The alley extending eastwardly from the southeast corner of the
public square (sometimes known as East Paradise Avenue or East
Oak Avenue)
Easterly
East Union
Street
The alley extending northwardly from the northeast corner of the
public square (sometimes known as North Franklin Avenue)
Northerly
North Van The alley extending westwardly from the northeast corner of the Westerly
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 245/460
Buren
Street
public square
South Van
Buren
Street
The alley extending westwardly from the southwest corner of the
public square (sometimes known as West Paradise Avenue)
Westerly
(1977 Code §§ 10.12.030, 10.12.040, 10.12.060, 10.12.070, 10.12.080, 10.12.090)
C. Penalty: Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
(2013 Code)
7-5-5: ADDITIONAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS IN PUBLIC SQUARE:
Vehicular traffic entering the public square from the east or from the west shall have precedence over
traffic entering the public square from the north or the south. (1977 Code § 10.12.120)
7-5-6: SIGNS POSTED:
Appropriate signs shall be posted at the appropriate locations indicating the traffic restrictions set out
in this chapter. (2013 Code)
Chapter 6
PEDESTRIANS
7-6-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Where traffic control signals or pedestrian control signals provided in chapter 2 of this title and
section 7-6-4 of this chapter are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway or street
within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk.
B. Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or a marked crosswalk
between intersections, the pedestrian shall have the right of way over drivers of vehicles; and at
such marked places, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk, and any
pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of
way over any vehicle so stopped.
C. The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any vehicle proceeding in the
same direction is stopped at such crosswalk for the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.
(1977 Code § 10.24.010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 246/460
7-6-2: USE OF ROADWAYS:
A. Pedestrian Crossings:
1. At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most direct route to the
opposite curbing, and when crossing at any place other than a crosswalk, he shall yield the right
of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. (1977 Code § 10.24.020)
2. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall
not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
3. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than at a crosswalk in any business district. (1977
Code § 10.24.050)
B. Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways:
1. Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an
adjacent roadway.
2. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall,
when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic and, upon
meeting a vehicle, shall step off to the left.
3. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any
vehicle. (1977 Code § 10.24.060)
4. No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if such act interferes
with the lawful movement of traffic. (1977 Code § 10.24.020)
7-6-3: SOLICITING CONTRIBUTIONS:
A. City Approval Required: No solicitation of persons in vehicles by persons standing upon a public
street or highway shall be undertaken without the prior consent of the mayor or the commissioner
of public health and safety. (1977 Code § 9.32.040)
B. Conditions: No person shall stand on a public street or highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except under the following conditions:
1. When the solicitation is made at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop.
(1977 Code § 9.32.010)
2. When the solicitation is made at the intersection of Market Street and Main Street within the
public square. (2013 Code)
C. Qualifications Of Solicitor: Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be sixteen (16) years
of age or more and shall be wearing a high visibility vest. (1977 Code § 9.32.030)
D. Liability Of Soliciting Agency: The soliciting agency shall be liable for any injuries to any person or
property during the solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 247/460
soliciting agent. (1977 Code § 9.32.020)
E. Penalty: Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined as provided in section 1-
4-1 of this code. (1977 Code § 9.32.050; amd. 2013 Code)
7-6-4: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
At intersections where traffic is directed by a police officer or by a stop and go signal, it is unlawful for
any pedestrian to cross the roadway other than with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with
the lawful movement of traffic. (1977 Code § 10.24.030)
7-6-5: STANDING ON SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as near as reasonably possible to the
building line or curb line if such standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians.
(1977 Code § 10.24.040)
7-6-6: PEDESTRIANS WITH DISABILITIES:
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian with clearly visible disabilities.
(2013 Code)
Chapter 7
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
7-7-1: DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any street or highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such
unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is
not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as
required by statute, or which is equipped in any manner in violation of the statutes. (1977 Code
§ 10.44.040; amd. 2013 Code)
7-7-2: CLEAR VISION:
A. It is unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or in such a condition that the operator does
not have a clear vision of all parts of the roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle.
B. Any vehicle with the view of the roadway to the rear so obstructed shall be equipped with a mirror
so attached as to give him a view of the roadway behind him. (1977 Code § 10.44.010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 248/460
7-7-3: LIGHTS:
A. General Requirements:
1. It is unlawful to operate or park on any street or highway any vehicle not equipped with
adequate lights conforming to the requirements of state law; provided, that vehicles may be
parked at nighttime without lights on any street or portion thereof designated by ordinance as a
place where vehicles may be so parked at nighttime. (1977 Code § 10.44.090)
2. During the period from sunset to sunrise, or at any other time when visibility is so limited as to
require the use of lights for safety, every motorcycle operated on any street or other public place
in the city shall carry and exhibit one lighted lamp, commonly known as a driving light, and every
motor vehicle two (2) such lighted lamps showing white light, or lights, of a yellow or amber tint,
visible at least five hundred feet (500') in the direction toward which each motorcycle or motor
vehicle is proceeding, and each motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer shall also exhibit at least two
(2) lighted lamps which shall be so situated as to throw a red light visible for at least five hundred
feet (500') in the reverse direction; provided, that every trailer having a gross weight of three
thousand (3,000) pounds or less, including the weight of the trailer and maximum load, shall be
equipped with two (2) lighted lamps, one on each side of the rear of such trailer which shall be
so situated as to throw a red light visible for at least five hundred feet (500') in the reverse
direction. (1977 Code § 10.44.190; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Bicycles: Every bicycle, when upon a street during the period from sunset to sunrise, shall be
equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a white light, or light of a yellow or amber tint,
visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of the bicycle and with at least one
lighted lamp exhibiting a red light or a red reflector visible from a distance of five hundred feet
(500') to the rear. (1977 Code § 10.44.180; amd. 2013 Code)
7-7-4: SIGNAL LAMPS AND SIGNAL DEVICES:
A. Every motor vehicle and trailer having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds or less,
including the weight of the trailer and the maximum load, shall be equipped with a signal lamp or
signal device which is so constructed and located on the vehicle as to give a signal of the intention
to stop, which shall be red or yellow in color, and signals of intention to turn to the right or left, all of
which signals shall be plainly visible and understandable in normal sunlight and at night from a
distance of one hundred feet (100') to the rear, but shall not project a dazzling or glaring light;
except, that a stop signal need be visible only from the rear.
B. All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated during the period from sunset to sunrise or
when visibility is limited as to require the use of lights for safety. (1977 Code § 10.44.130; amd.
2013 Code)
7-7-5: BRAKES:
It is unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless such vehicle is equipped with good and
sufficient brakes in good working condition, as required by the state traffic law, or to operate any
vehicle which is so loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the mechanics operating
the brakes of such vehicle. (1977 Code § 10.44.060)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 249/460
7-7-6: HORN AND WARNING DEVICES:
A. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible signaling device in
efficient working condition. Such signaling device shall be sounded when necessary to give timely
warning of the approach of a vehicle. (1977 Code § 10.44.070; amd. 2013 Code)
B. No motor vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle, shall be equipped with a siren or gong
signaling device. (1977 Code § 10.44.070)
7-7-7: NOISE CONTROL:
A. Muffler Required; Cutout Prohibited: No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such
vehicle is provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition, and the use of a cutout is
prohibited. (1977 Code § 10.44.100)
B. Unnecessary Noise Prohibited: It is unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise. (1977 Code § 10.44.030)
C. Noise From Engine Braking System:
1. Definition: For the purpose of this subsection, "compression/release engine brake" is defined as
any engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the
braking or deceleration of any vehicle by converting engine power to compressed air which
results in excessive, loud, or unusual noise from such vehicle, or otherwise known as jake
braking.
2. Excessive Noise Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to operate or cause
to be used any engine braking system that emits excessive noise, which shall include the use of
engine compression brakes, also known as jake brakes, on any street, highway, or road within
the city limits.
3. Exemptions For Emergencies: This subsection shall not apply if the driver used an engine
braking system that emits excessive noise in an emergency to avoid a collision with a person or
another vehicle.
4. Signs Posted: The street superintendent shall order and post signs at locations where streets
enter the city which state: "Excessive Engine Braking Noise Prohibited". Such signs shall be
erected and placed in accordance with rules adopted by the Illinois department of transportation.
(Ord. 2165, 9-17-2007)
5. Penalty: The fine for violating the provisions of this subsection shall be not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2165, 9-17-
2007; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Sound Amplification Systems: No operator or person in possession of a motor vehicle within the
city shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard
outside the vehicle more than fifty feet (50') unless such system is being operated from an
authorized emergency vehicle to warn of a situation hazardous to life, limb or property, or to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 250/460
request assistance in dealing with an emergency. Any violation of this subsection shall be a petty
offense punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1818, 9-24-2001; amd.
2013 Code)
7-7-8: TIRES; NONSKID DEVICES:
A. Tires: It is unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which is not equipped with tires
conforming to the requirements of the Illinois state traffic law. (1977 Code § 10.44.140)
B. Nonskid Devices: It is unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped with any
nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or nonflexible portion thereof comes into contact with
the pavement or roadway. (1977 Code § 10.44.110)
7-7-9: SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD:
A. Dimensions Of Vehicles And Loads:
1. The maximum width, length and height of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed the limits
expressed in the Illinois state traffic law.
2. No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a load extending beyond the
line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor extending more than six inches (6") beyond
the line of the fenders on the right side thereof.
3. No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3') in front of the extreme front
portion of the vehicle.
4. No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than two (2) units, but such
limitation shall not apply to vehicles operated in daytime when transporting pipes, poles,
machinery and other objects which cannot be readily dismembered, nor to such vehicles
operated at nighttime by a public utility when engaged in emergency repair work, but such loads
carried at night shall be clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full dimensions of the
load. (1977 Code § 10.44.120)
B. Weight:
1. It is unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with a weight, including load, in excess of
that permitted by the state traffic law for driving on improved highways, or with weight distributed
in a manner not conforming to such law, or in violation of special weight limits provided for by
ordinance and signposted. (1977 Code § 10.44.150)
7-7-10: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS:
A. Emissions: It is unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an amount of
smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or as to endanger the drivers of other
vehicles. (1977 Code § 10.44.020)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 251/460
B. Spilling Loads: No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any street or
alley in the city. (1977 Code § 10.44.050)
Chapter 8
SKATEBOARDS AND BICYCLES
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Words and phrases, for the purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings set forth in this section,
unless normal construction in context shall clearly indicate to the contrary:
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals, having two (2) or more wheels.
NEGLIGENT MANEUVER: Any maneuver that may cause injury to a person, including the rider,
and/or damage to property, and/or any maneuver that threatens such injury or damage.
RIDING A SKATEBOARD: Standing with one or both feet touching the skateboard, crouching, sitting
or lying upon the skateboard, or standing on hands upon the skateboard while it is in motion and/or
propelling a skateboard.
SKATEBOARD: Has its ordinary meaning and includes a board of any material with wheels affixed to
the underside, designed to be ridden by a person. For the purposes of this chapter, the term
"skateboard" shall include the terms "scooter" and "coaster". (Ord. 3172, 4-14-2014)
7-8-2: PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard or bicycle in any area of the city designated
herein as an area where skateboarding or bicycling is prohibited and/or operate a skateboard or
bicycle in a negligent manner as provided herein.
A. Skateboarding and bicycling shall be prohibited in the city at the following areas:
1. City hall and city hall grounds including sidewalks, parking areas, driveways, stairs and rails,
yards, and all areas associated with the city hall;
2. The Tower Square, including the tower area, its sidewalks, benches, rails and common area;
3. Municipal parking areas including sidewalks, parking areas, driveways, stairs and rails, yards,
and all areas associated with the parking lots;
4. The Marion Carnegie Library including sidewalks, parking areas, driveways, stairs and rails,
yards, and all areas associated with the parking lots;
5. The Pavilion of the city of Marion including sidewalks, parking areas, driveways, stairs and rails,
yards, and all areas associated with the parking lots;
6. The Marion Cultural And Civic Center including sidewalks, parking areas, driveways, stairs and
rails, yards, and all areas associated with the parking lots.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 252/460
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to ride a skateboard or a bicycle in a negligent
manner within the city.
C. In areas of the city where skateboarding or bicycling is not prohibited, it shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person to ride a skateboard or bicycle in a manner contrary to traffic and/or
pedestrian regulations.
D. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any skateboard or bicycle to be out of the direct physical
control of the owner or user while it is in motion anywhere within the city. Any skateboard or bicycle
in violation of this subsection is subject to seizure and forfeiture as provided in section 7-8-3 of this
chapter. (Ord. 3172, 4-14-2014)
7-8-3: SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE:
Whenever a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that a skateboard or bicycle was
used or is intended to be used in violation of any section of this chapter, such skateboard or bicycle is
subject to seizure and forfeiture. If the skateboard or bicycle is seized, then the owner may seek for its
return by application to the city council or in a court of law. (Ord. 3172, 4-14-2014)
7-8-4: PENALTIES:
Upon the admission or determination of responsibility for a violation of this chapter, the responsible
person shall be assessed the following civil fines and costs:
First violation $ 50.00
Second violation 150.00
Third or more violations 300.00
and all costs incurred by the city in enforcement and prosecution including actual attorney fees.
Violators shall be responsible for reimbursement/restitution for any damage caused by the violation. In
the event that the individual that violates this chapter is a minor, then the parents of that child shall be
assessed the fines stated herein. (Ord. 3172, 4-14-2014)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
8-1-1: STREETS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 253/460
A. Specifications:
1. Compliance Required:
a. No dedication of a plat of a subdivision or part thereof will be accepted unless there is
compliance with the conditions of this section.
b. No city service will be available for an unplatted residential development unless there is
compliance with the conditions of this section.
2. Application And Interpretation:
a. The conditions set forth in this subsection shall apply to any proposed street that would be an
extension of any existing city street.
b. The provisions of this subsection take precedence over any ordinance or part thereof in
conflict herewith. (Ord. 1704, 10-19-1998)
3. Specifications: Any street proposed or offered to become a city street shall have a right of way
fifty feet (50') in width with a street surface of a minimum of twenty seven feet (27'). Such street
shall have a six inch (6") compacted rock base and a surface of at least three inches (3") of
asphalt or six inches (6") concrete; either type surface to meet the standards for such surfaces
established according to standards of the Illinois department of transportation.
4. Curb And Gutter Required: All streets constructed after the effective date hereof shall have an
eighteen inch (18") curb and gutter abutting either side of the street. A "V" type curb and gutter
will be permissible after approval by the city. (Ord. 1704, 10-19-1998; amd. 2013 Code)
5. Stormwater Drainage: A plan for stormwater drainage or, if necessary, stormwater
impoundment, prepared by a licensed professional engineer, must be submitted with any plat
proposed for dedication to the city. The same condition shall apply to any street proposed for
dedication to the city. (Ord. 1704, 10-19-1998)
B. Street Lighting:
1. New Subdivisions:
a. The developer of any subdivision shall include in the plan for development the suggested
appropriate location for installation of streetlights.
b. Upon receipt of the suggested location for streetlights, the city shall determine if such
streetlights are warranted.
c. In the event it is determined such streetlights are warranted, it shall be the responsibility of the
developer to pay to the providing utility the cost of such installation.
d. The city shall have the responsibility to pay the monthly price for the operation of each
streetlight installed.
2. Existing Developments: Upon approval by the city of a request for a streetlight in a developed
area, the person making the request shall pay the cost of installation of the streetlight. The city
shall pay the cost of the pole and light and shall be responsible for the monthly cost of operation.
(Ord. 2175, 11-13-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 254/460
8-1-2: EXCAVATIONS:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
APPLICANT: Any person applying for a permit from the city to: 1) cut, excavate or bore under the
surface of a city street, right of way, and/or sidewalk, and/or 2) extend a tap into a city water line or
sewer.
DESIGNEE: An employee of the city of Marion authorized by a city superintendent to act on his or
her behalf.
EASEMENT: A written consent by the city council allowing the use of city real estate for a limited
specified purpose.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole, bore, trench or ditch in the surface of a city street or other
city real estate by removing material from there.
PERMIT: A written form provided by the city giving consent to excavate or bore under a city street
or other city real estate.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a permit has been issued.
PERSON: Any individual, business entity or one acting in a representative capacity for any
purpose.
STREET: Any public way or thoroughfare owned by the city for use by vehicular traffic by the
public.
STREET CUT: A trench, ditch, bore or hole cut in the surface of a city street, alley, sidewalk or right
of way.
STREET SUPERINTENDENT OR DESIGNEE: The person employed by the city council to
supervise and administer the construction and maintenance of city streets, alleys, sidewalks and
the city stormwater drainage system.
UTILITY: Any corporation or entity that provides, but is not limited to, electric, gas, telephone,
internet, fiber optic or television service.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SUPERINTENDENT: The person employed by city council to
supervise and administer the construction, maintenance and all aspects involved in the treatment
of wastewater for the citizens of Marion.
WATER SUPERINTENDENT: The person employed by the city council to supervise and
administrate the construction, maintenance and all aspects involved in distribution of water to the
citizens of Marion.
B. Permits:
1. Any person who desires to make a street cut or bore or otherwise use city real estate or right of
way must make application to the director of the water office or her designee for a permit. The
application shall be referred to the appropriate superintendent(s) who shall review and determine
if a permit should be issued. The application must be signed off by each superintendent of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 255/460
affected city departments before any excavation may begin. No street cut or other similar use of
city real estate shall be made unless a permit has been issued.
2. The application for such permit shall state the purpose of the proposed cut or bore, the location
and the dimension of the cut.
3. Before the permittee begins a cut of the surface of city property, i.e., city street, alley or other
city owned real estate, or involving a city owned utility, the permittee must notify the designated
superintendent(s) of the time and day he intends to commence. Unless the designated
superintendent(s) determines there is reason to delay, the permittee may proceed.
4. When the permittee has completed the purpose for which the cut is made, the superintendents
of each affected department shall be notified by the permittee, before the hole, trench or ditch is
backfilled. The designated superintendents shall inspect the project to ensure the
tap/extension/cut is completed to the city requirements.
5. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) and the further sum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) as security
deposit (security deposit does not include water or sewer tap fees; see section 9-2-2 of this
code) which will be refunded to permittee after superintendents of said departments have
confirmed to the director of the water department, the completion of the project in compliance
with the city requirements.
For ongoing projects, such as the laying of substantial lengths of line/cable, a blanket cashiers'
check in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), in lieu of the seven hundred fifty dollar
($750.00) security deposit, must be submitted with the permit application.
6. No extension or tap of a city water line or sewer main shall be made except by a licensed
plumber, with the state of Illinois, after the permit to do so has been issued. The city requires a
copy of the plumber's license and insurance bond.
C. Excavation And Cuts:
1. Any concrete or asphalt street surface to be disturbed for excavation shall have the edges of the
area to be excavated saw cut.
2. Excavation for any water/sewer extension or tap shall not be filled until the superintendents of
water/wastewater treatment or designees have inspected the extension or tap and given
approval.
3. All excavation backfill shall consist of granular crushed stone compacted in eight inch (8") lifts to
compaction of ninety percent (90%). Backfill shall be made to eight inches (8") of the surface.
Then concrete eight inches (8") thick shall be put in place for the surface.
4. If necessary to preserve the safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic, barricades or other traffic
control devices should be put in place. The permittee shall notify the street superintendent for
direction or assistance.
5. Before commencing any cut the permittee shall notify JULIE of the proposed area to cut.
6. The permittee shall be liable for all damage inflicted on any real or personal property as a result
of undertaking to make a cut or bore.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 256/460
7. The permittee shall be responsible for removing from the site and disposing of all material
excavated from the site. Permittee shall be responsible for cleanup of the site otherwise.
8. As nearly as can be done responsibly, permittee shall use all precaution to prevent obstruction
of flow of stormwater at the site of excavation.
D. Restoration Of Street Cuts:
1. Backfill of an excavation and resurface of the street cut shall be completed in compliance with
subsection C2 of this section. Such completion shall be done within no more than three (3) days
and must meet the approval of the street superintendent or his designee. All traffic control
devices shall remain in place for the safety of the public until the removal of material and
cleanup is completed.
E. Inspection:
1. Upon completion by the permittee of all requirements pertaining to a street, sewer, or water
excavation, cut or bore, the permittee shall notify the designated superintendent(s) who shall
inspect the site. If the said superintendent determines the requirements have been met, he shall
approve the work and sign off on the project completion. The permittee shall take the signed
permit to the director of the water office or her designee who will refund the security deposit of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Should any of the designated superintendents determine
the work has not been completed as required, the amount of such refund will be used to
reimburse the city for repairs. If the cost of repairs exceeds the deposit the permittee will be
responsible for actual cost of repairs.
F. Violation: Any person violating any provision of this section may be subject to a fine not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) together with any attorney fees incurred by the city. Each day
a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 3305, 3-14-2016)
8-1-3: REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND DRIVEWAY
ENTRANCES:
The street department may replace or repair sidewalks, curbs and driveway entrances upon the
following conditions:
A. Request For City To Do Work:
1. Notice Of Replacement Or Repair: The owner of the real estate adjacent to the sidewalk, curb or
driveway entrance shall notify the street superintendent of the desire to have such sidewalk,
curb or driveway entrance replaced or repaired.
2. Estimate Of Costs: Upon being so notified, the street superintendent shall cause an estimate to
be made of the cost of materials including, but not limited to, concrete, required to effect such
replacement or repair. A copy of such estimate shall be given to the real estate owner.
3. Fee: Should such owner accept and agree to such estimate, a fee in the amount of fifty dollars
($50.00) will then be due and payable to the city in addition to the estimated cost of materials as
aforementioned.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 257/460
4. Records Kept: The street superintendent shall keep and maintain a list of those owners who
desire replacement or repair of a sidewalk, curb or driveway entrance, the owner's names being
kept in the order in which the fifty dollar ($50.00) fee and acceptance of such estimate is
received.
B. Work Done By Owner: Anyone who desires to replace or repair a sidewalk, curb or driveway
entrance without city assistance must receive approval by the street superintendent of the plan for
replacement or repair, as proposed, as well as approval of the individual, firm or organization
expected to make such replacement or repair.
C. Authority Of City To Repair Or Replace: The street superintendent may repair or replace a
sidewalk, curb or driveway entrance at any time upon making a determination such repair or
replacement is necessary to preserve and protect the public safety, anything herein contained to
the contrary notwithstanding. (Ord. 1703, 10-19-1998)
8-1-4: CLOSURE OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS, BRIDGES AND CULVERTS DURING
CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT:
A. Closure Authorized; Safety Precautions: At any time a city street, sidewalk, bridge or culvert is
being built, repaired or replaced, the street superintendent or his designee may close to traffic such
street, sidewalk, bridge or culvert or such part thereof necessary to preserve the safety of the
public and to allow sufficient area for the efficient and expeditious completion of such building,
repair or replacement; and the street superintendent, or his designee, shall erect suitable barriers
to prevent traffic access to such street, sidewalk, bridge or culvert. (Ord. 1703, 10-19-1998)
B. Damage To Safety Devices Prohibited: Whenever any public street, or bridge or culvert thereon, or
sidewalk within the city has been closed as provided in subsection A of this section, no person
shall wilfully deface, injure or remove any such barrier so placed or erected, nor walk, ride or drive
upon any part of any such street, or bridge or culvert thereon, or sidewalk so closed to traffic.
(1977 Code § 12.08.020)
8-1-5: DAMAGING, INJURING PUBLIC WAYS:
A. Permit Required: No person, firm or corporation shall, within the corporate limits of the city, wilfully
injure or tear up any public pavement, sidewalk, fireplug or any part thereof, or dig any hole, ditch
or drain in such public pavement or sidewalk, or dig or remove any sod, stone, earth, sand or
gravel from any public street, alley or sidewalk within the city without first having obtained the
written permission of the superintendent of streets to do so. (1977 Code § 9.36.010; amd. 2013
Code)
B. Malicious Damage Prohibited: No person shall wilfully and maliciously tear up, injure, deface or
destroy any public sidewalk, curbing, street paving, street surface, fire alarm, sewer, drain, bridge,
or culvert within the corporate limits of the city. (1977 Code § 9.36.020)
8-1-6: OBSTRUCTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 258/460
A. Permit Required: No person, firm or corporation shall, within the corporate limits of the city,
encumber or obstruct any public street, alley, or sidewalk in the city, or any part thereof, with
building materials, vehicles, implements, boxes, or any article or thing whatever without first having
obtained written permission from the mayor of the city. (1977 Code § 9.36.030)
B. Structures On Public Ways Prohibited: No person, firm or corporation shall make, erect, place or
construct any structure, enclosure, fence, gate, stairway, or building encroaching, in whole or in
part, upon any public street, alley, or sidewalk within the city. (1977 Code § 9.36.040)
C. Obstructing Sidewalks:
1. Prohibited Generally: No person or other entity shall place upon any city sidewalk any object
that in any way obstructs the sidewalk.
2. Exemptions:
a. The prohibition mandated in subsection C1 of this section shall not apply to sidewalk sales
conducted by an organized merchant group recognized by the city, provided such sales are
limited to three (3) consecutive days on no more than three (3) separate occasions in each
calendar year, and further provided, the items included in such sales are so placed as not to
create or pose a hazard to the safety of the public or to prevent use of the sidewalk by the
public.
b. The prohibition of subsection C1 of this section shall not apply to temporary barricades or
other paraphernalia intended to warn or alert the public to a potentially hazardous condition.
(Ord. 1743, 6-28-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
8-1-7: VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS:
A. No person, firm, group or company shall plant, install, erect or construct any object at or near the
intersection of one city street with another or with any drive used by the public in such a manner as
to obstruct the view of approaching motor vehicular traffic on one such intersecting street or drive
by the operator of a motor vehicle approaching such intersection on the other intersecting street or
drive. (1977 Code § 12.04.010)
B. Any object that is planted, installed, erected, or constructed at or near the intersection of two (2) city
streets or the intersection of a drive used by the public and one city street in such manner that the
operator of a motor vehicle is required to drive such motor vehicle or any part thereof beyond the
curb line of the street or drive intersecting the street upon which such vehicle is operated before
the operator thereof can obtain a clear view of approaching motor vehicular traffic on such
intersecting street or drive shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. (1977 Code §§ 12.04.020, 12.04.030)
8-1-8: METAL TIRED VEHICLES ON PUBLIC WAYS:
No metal tired vehicle, including tractors, motor trucks, traction engines and other similar vehicles,
shall be operated or driven upon or over any paved or hard surfaced public street within the city if
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 259/460
such vehicle has, on the periphery of any of the road wheels, any block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, lug
or any projection of metal or wood which projects radially beyond the tread of traffic surface of the tire;
except, that this section shall not apply to tractors or tractor engines equipped with what is known as
"caterpillar tractors" when such caterpillar does not contain any projections of any kind likely to injure
the surface of the road; provided, however, that tractors, traction engines and similar vehicles may be
operated upon the aforementioned public streets which have upon their road wheels V-shaped,
diagonal or other cleats arranged in such a manner as to be continuously in contact with the road
surface; further provided, that the gross weight upon such wheels per inch of such cleats in contact
with the road surface, when measured in the direction of the axle of the vehicle, does not exceed eight
hundred (800) pounds. (1977 Code § 12.12.010)
8-1-9: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject the violator to a fine
of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). For
instances in which the violation is continuous, each day shall be considered a separate violation.
(2013 Code)
Chapter 2
STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERS
8-2-1: NUMBERING STRUCTURES AND LOTS REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Structures:
1. The owner or occupant of each structure or building, be it residential, commercial, multi-family or
multi-business or otherwise, within the city shall display in a prominent place, clearly visible from
the street, the address number assigned to the lot or tract upon which such structure is situated.
Each address number shall be a minimum of three inches (3") in height and shall be of a color in
contrast to the color of the background against which the number is placed.
2. In a multi-family or multi-business complex, each unit in such complex shall have prominently
displayed thereon its assigned number or letter. Each assigned unit number or letter must be a
minimum of three inches (3") in height and shall be of a color in contrast to the color of the
background against which the number or letter is place. (Ord. 2180, 1-28-2008)
3. The developer or owner of any multi-family or multi-business complex shall coordinate with the
city water department office manager in determining and assigning identifying numbers in
conjunction with street address numbers for each unit of any such complex; each unit in such a
complex shall have prominently displayed thereon its assigned identifying number. (Ord. 1498,
4-4-1994)
B. Public Square: The public square shall be numbered consecutively, beginning at the northeast
corner thereof at the former city hall building, which shall be number 100, from thence proceeding
west across the north side of the public square to the northwest corner thereof, thence south to the
southwest corner thereof, thence east to the southeast corner thereof, thence north to the place of
beginning.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 260/460
C. Location Of Even And Odd Numbers: All of the even numbers shall be placed on the north and
west sides of the streets and the odd numbers on the south and east sides. (Ord. 12, 12-2-1929;
amd. 2013 Code)
8-2-2: STREET NAME REQUIREMENTS:
A. Determination Of Names: The streets running east, west, north and south from the public square,
known as East and West Main Streets and North and South Market Streets, respectively, shall be
considered as base lines, and all numbers shall begin from the public square along these streets
and from these streets east, west, north and south on all other streets. (Ord. 12, 12-2-1929)
B. Map And Alphabetical List:
1. The city clerk shall keep in the clerk's office a current map of the city designating the name of
each street within the city.
2. The city clerk shall prepare and maintain a list of all street names which will be arranged in
alphabetical order. (Ord. 1498, 4-4-1994)
8-2-3: STREET NAME SIGNS:
A. There shall be set up and maintained at the convenient corners of the street crossings within the
city good, substantial and suitable signs or markers designating the names of the streets. (Ord. 12,
12-2-1929)
B. The developer of a new subdivision or other real estate development within the city that includes
streets, whether or not dedicated to the city, shall erect at the intersection of any street with
another street a street name sign bearing the names of such streets, such signs to conform in
quality, color and lettering to street name signs erected by the city. (Ord. 1498, 4-4-1994)
8-2-4: ASSIGNMENT OF ADDRESSES:
The city water department office manager shall assign street address numbers to all platted lots within
the city in a manner that will be consistent with the orderly implementation and operation of the city's
enhanced 911 emergency service system. (Ord. 1498, 4-4-1994)
8-2-5: NAMING DEDICATED STREETS AND STREETS IN SUBDIVISIONS AND
ANNEXED AREAS:
A. The city council will not accept the dedication of a street or the plat of a subdivision or real estate
development containing streets if the name of any such street would duplicate the name or would
be likely to be confused with the name of an existing street either visually when printed or
phonetically when pronounced.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 261/460
B. Any unnamed street annexed to the city shall be named by the city council following the criteria set
forth in subsection A of this section; street address numbers for such a street will be assigned
pursuant to the provisions of section 8-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 1498, 4-4-1994)
8-2-6: AUTHORITY TO RENAME STREETS:
The city council may rename a street upon its own initiative or upon request, provided it is determined
the public interest will be best served thereby and the criteria set forth in subsection 8-2-5A of this
chapter is followed. (Ord. 1498, 4-4-1994)
8-2-7: ENFORCEMENT:
Failure to have address numbers properly displayed as prescribed will result in:
A. Notification to the owner by personal service or by U.S. postal service of noncompliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. The owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of notification to comply with the provisions of
this chapter.
C. If such compliance is not accomplished within such thirty (30) days, the owner shall be in violation
of the provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to a fine not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 2180, 1-28-2008)
8-2-8: NOTICE OF CHANGES TO PROVISIONS:
The city clerk shall notify the United States postal service and each emergency service department or
organization served by the city's enhanced 911 emergency service system of new street names,
change of street names, assigned street address numbers, and identifying numbers assigned to each
unit in a multi-family or multi-business complex. Such notification shall be given promptly. (Ord. 1498,
4-4-1994)
Chapter 3
CITY CEMETERIES
8-3-1: PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
The rules and regulations of this chapter for the orderly and efficient administration of the city
cemeteries are hereby adopted. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 262/460
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
CEMETERY OFFICE: The main office maintained east of Goddard Chapel.
CITY: The city of Marion.
CITY CEMETERY: A designated area set aside and controlled by the city for the burial of human
remains by earth interment or by interment in a mausoleum, crypt or urn, administered by the
cemetery superintendent.
DEED OF CONVEYANCE: The certificate of ownership issued by the city, executed by the mayor and
delivered to the original purchaser of a city cemetery plot or lot showing ownership thereof.
GRASS MARKER: A memorial flush with the ground.
INTERMENT: The permanent disposition of human remains by burial, entombment, or inurnment after
cremation.
LOT: Applies to numbered divisions as shown on the record plat which consists of one or more plots.
LOT MARKER: Any means or device used, erected or implanted by city cemetery personnel to
indicate the corners of a plot or lot.
MEMORIAL: Includes a monument, marker, tablet, headstone, private mausoleum or tomb for family
or individual use, tombstone, lot enclosure, urn and crypt and niche place.
MONUMENT: Includes a tombstone or memorial of granite or marble which shall extend above the
surface of the ground.
PLOT: Applies to a space of sufficient size to accommodate one adult. Interments are approximately
three feet by eight feet (3' x 8').
SUPERINTENDENT: The person duly appointed by the city of Marion for the purpose of conducting
and administering the city cemeteries in a manner consistent with city ordinances and state law. (Ord.
2355, 5-16-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
8-3-3: GENERAL RULES:
A. Hours: The cemetery office will be open from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until three o'clock (3:00)
P.M., Monday through Friday, except holidays (New Year's Day, Good Friday, nationally recognized
Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, Friday after Thanksgiving,
Christmas Eve and Christmas Day).
B. Employee Work Restrictions: City cemetery employees are not permitted to perform work for a lot
owner outside their regular responsibilities unless authorized to do so by the cemetery
superintendent for good cause.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 263/460
C. Payment Of Fees And Charges: All fees or charges for services shall be paid at the cemetery
office. Such payment shall be made to the cemetery superintendent or a city cemetery employee
authorized to receive such fees or charges.
D. Pedestrian Traffic: Pedestrians within a city cemetery shall use only the avenues, roads and
indicated walkways.
E. Damage To Property Prohibited: Persons visiting a city cemetery or attending funerals are
prohibited from picking flowers, wild or cultivated, breaking or injuring any tree, shrub or plant, or
from writing upon, defacing or injuring any memorials, fence, or other structure within city cemetery
grounds.
F. Vehicle Restrictions: All vehicles must be kept under complete control at all times. When meeting a
funeral procession, every vehicle must stop until the procession passes. Vehicles must not pass a
funeral procession going the same direction. Mufflers must not be opened nor the horn sounded
within a city cemetery.
G. Prohibitions: The following are prohibited:
1. The operation of a motor vehicle in a city cemetery at excessive speed. A speed greater than
twenty (20) miles per hour shall be considered excessive.
2. The operation of a motor vehicle in any part of a city cemetery not designated an avenue or
road.
3. The operation or parking of a motor vehicle within a city cemetery on any avenue or road in such
a manner as to prevent another vehicle from passing.
4. Making a complete or partial reverse turn of any motor car or vehicle on any road or driveway
within a city cemetery.
5. Loud or boisterous conduct.
6. Idling or loafing within a city cemetery or the buildings thereof.
7. Bringing into and consuming any food or beverage while in a city cemetery.
8. Peddling or soliciting the sale of any commodity.
9. Placing of signs, notices or advertisements of any kind within a city cemetery.
10. Bringing dogs into a city cemetery or any of the cemetery buildings. Exceptions are made for
specially trained dogs used by disabled persons.
11. The presence of children under the age of fifteen (15) years unless accompanied by a
responsible adult.
12. Any conduct unbecoming a sacred place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 264/460
H. Certain Items Prohibited: The placing of boxes, shells, toys, metal designs, wire figures, ornaments,
chairs, settees, vases and similar articles upon plots will not be permitted as they hinder
maintenance efforts and present a safety hazard. Items left on the ground (during mowing season,
April 1 through November 1, excluding the week of Memorial Day) and flowers not in approved
containers will be removed by city cemetery employees. Approved containers consist of vases
attached to the monument, hanging baskets, and monument saddles. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011; amd.
2013 Code)
8-3-4: LOTS AND LOT OWNERS:
A. Purchase Of Lots; Issuance Of Deed Of Conveyance:
1. City cemetery lots shall be purchased at the cemetery office. The cemetery superintendent or
his designated representative is authorized to conduct the sale of such lots. No burial will be
allowed on such lot until the purchase price is paid in full.
2. After the payment of the purchase price, the city will issue a deed of conveyance describing the
purchased lot.
B. Authority Of City Regarding Cemetery Property: A city cemetery is owned and maintained by the
city. Therefore, the city retains the right to enlarge, reduce, replat or change the boundaries or
grading of a city cemetery, or a section or sections, from time to time, including the right to modify
or change the locations of roads, drives, or walks, or any part thereof. The city retains the right to
lay, maintain and operate, or alter or change pipelines or gutters for sprinkling systems, drainage,
etc., as well as the right to use city cemetery property not sold to individual plot owners for city
cemetery purposes, including interment of the dead, or for anything necessary, incidental or
convenient thereto. The city reserves to itself and to those lawfully entitled thereto a perpetual right
of ingress and egress over plots and lots for the purpose of passing to and from other plots and
lots. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
C. Descriptions Of Lots: Descriptions of lots will be in accordance with city cemetery plats which are
kept on file in the superintendent's office.
D. Protection Of Lots And Owners; Disclaimer Of Liability: The city will provide all reasonable
precautions to protect plot and lot owners and the property rights of plot owners within a city
cemetery from loss or damage. However, the city disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage
from causes beyond its control. For example, damage caused by the elements, an act of nature
(ground cave in), common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers,
explosions, invasions, insurrections, riots, or order of any military or civil authority, whether the
damage be direct or collateral. Damages caused by private businesses such as monument or vault
companies shall be the responsibility of said company; the city shall be held harmless in such
situations.
E. Limitations Of General Care By City: The general care assumed by a city cemetery shall in no case
mean the maintenance, repair or replacement of any memorial, tomb, or mausoleum placed or
erected upon lots; nor the doing of any special or unusual work in a city cemetery; nor does it
mean the reconstruction of any marble or granite work on any section or lot, or any portion or
portions thereof, in a city cemetery caused by the elements, an act of nature, common enemy,
thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 265/460
invasions, insurrections, riots, or by the order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage
be direct or collateral, other than as herein provided. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
F. Agreement Between City And Lot Owner: The instrument of conveyance of these rules and
regulations and any amendments hereto constitute the sole agreement between the city and the lot
owner. The statement of any employee or agent, unless confirmed in writing by the superintendent,
shall in no way bind the city. All plots and lots conveyed by deed and owners of plots are subject to
these rules and regulations. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
8-3-5: CORRECTION OF ERRORS:
The city reserves and shall have the right to correct any errors that may be made thereby either in
making interments, disinterments or removals, or the description, transfer or conveyance of any
interment property, either by canceling such conveyance and substituting in lieu thereof a conveyance
of another lot for interment of equal value and similar location as far as possible, or as may be
selected by the superintendent, or, in the sole discretion of the superintendent, by refunding the
amount of money paid on account of said purchase. In the event such error shall involve the interment
of the remains of any person in such property, the city reserves and shall have the right to remove or
transfer such remains so interred to such other property of equal value and similar location as may be
substituted and conveyed in lieu thereof. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
8-3-6: DESCENT OF TITLES:
The laws of the state of Illinois govern the descent of title to city cemetery lots as well as other matters
pertaining to assignments, conveyances, devises, and trust deeds. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
8-3-7: INTERMENTS AND DISINTERMENTS:
A. General Requirements For Interments, Disinterments And Removals:
1. All interments, disinterments, and removals must be made at the time and in the manner
determined by the superintendent and for the fees established by the city.
2. Besides being subject to these rules and regulations, all interments, disinterments, and
removals are made subject to the orders and laws of the properly constituted public authorities.
3. The right is reserved by the city to insist upon at least twenty four (24) hours' notice prior to any
interment and at least a one week's notice prior to any disinterment or removal. Disinterments
will be done during times of favorable ground conditions only. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
B. Additional Interment Requirements:
1. Hours: A city cemetery will open for interments from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. until two thirty
o'clock (2:30) P.M., daily (an overtime fee will be charged for funerals arriving after 3:30 P.M.)
with the exception of Good Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, Christmas Day and New Year's Day. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 266/460
2. Burial Permit Required: Funeral directors, upon arrival at a city cemetery, must present the
necessary burial permit from the local health office.
3. Location: When an interment is to be made in a lot, the location of such interment shall be
designated by the lot owner. Should the lot owner fail or neglect to make such designation, the
city reserves the right to make the interment in a location agreed upon by the funeral director
and the cemetery superintendent.
4. Authority To Open Lots: The cemetery superintendent and the employees of a city cemetery are
the only persons permitted to open plots.
5. Payment Of Charges: All charges for interment or services in connection therewith shall be paid
to the cemetery superintendent who will issue a receipt. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
6. Prior Payment Required: Arrangements for the payment of any and all fees, costs or other
charges due the city must be made before interment will proceed. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011; amd.
2013 Code)
7. Grave Liners: All interments will require the use of a concrete, fiberglass or metal grave liner.
8. Disclaimer Of Liability:
a. The city will not be responsible for any order given by telephone or for any mistake occurring
from the want of precise and proper instructions as to the particular space, size of plot, and
location in a lot, where interment is desired.
b. A city cemetery will not be responsible for the interment permit nor for the identity of the
person sought to be interred. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
9. Rules Of Barham Cemetery:
a. There is an area to the south of Goddard Chapel in the Rose Hill area of the cemetery known
and designated as the "Barham Cemetery". After all of the lots in the Barham Cemetery had
been assigned to members of the Barham family, the cemetery was transferred to the city. The
city cannot sell or transfer any title to any plot or lot in the Barham Cemetery nor does the city
have the authority to determine ownership of any such plot or lot. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011; amd.
2013 Code)
b. All requests to open a plot for an interment in the Barham Cemetery must be in writing by an
individual who presumptively has authority to make such a request.
c. While the city will provide the same degree of maintenance and care in the Barham Cemetery
that is provided the rest of the cemetery, the Barham Cemetery and the owners of plots and
lots therein shall be subject to these rules and regulations (including mausoleum, monument
and marker restrictions) and any changes or modifications thereof. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
8-3-8: FEES:
The fees for excavation of graves in the cemetery shall be determined from time to time by the city
council, and a schedule thereof shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the city clerk and the
office of the cemetery superintendent. (1977 Code § 2.72.010; amd. 2013 Code)
8-3-9: LANDSCAPING AND MAINTENANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 267/460
A. The city will undertake to maintain, as may be practicable, the planting of trees and shrubs and to
preserve and maintain landscape features within city cemetery grounds. If a lot owner wishes to
plant an "in memory of" tree, the superintendent or his/her designee may provide a location for
such planting. All efforts will be made to place the planting as close as possible to the desired
location, but in most cases, the planting may not be allowed to be placed on the individual plot or
lot. If a memorial plaque or marker is to be placed at the base of such planting (at the owner's
expense), the cemetery or staff will not be responsible for said planting, plaque or marker. If an
unauthorized planting is made, the cemetery will have the right to remove said planting.
B. There shall be no individual beds of shrubbery or flowers or personalized landscaping allowed on
individual lots. This includes the installation of copings, rock, mulch, bark, trees, bushes, grasses,
toys, boxes, and metal or glass containers of any kind. If said landscaping material is discovered, it
will be removed by cemetery employees at the owner's expense. An attempt will be made to
contact the family in reference to the violation. A registered letter outlining the violation will be sent
to the last known address of a family member. If no response (from the family) is received within
five (5) working days of the letter being sent, the cemetery superintendent and the commissioner in
charge of the cemetery department will determine what action should be taken.
C. All landscaping on the grounds prior to the effective date hereof will be allowed to remain
(grandfathered) until such time the landscaping design becomes dilapidated and/or unsightly. At
that time, the landscaping will be removed by cemetery staff. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
8-3-10: DECORATIONS AND FLORAL ARRANGEMENTS:
A. Decorations are allowed in vases permanently attached to the monument, hanging baskets, and
monument saddles. A straight shepherd staff with a single hook approximately five feet (5') tall is
the only allowable shepherd staff within a city cemetery. This is in accordance with the rules and
regulations set forth by the city. One shepherd staff per single plot lot is allowed; a maximum of two
(2) shepherd staffs are allowed for multiple plot lots. All shepherd staffs not by monuments or
without flowers on them are subject to removal. No metal of any kind that protrudes aboveground
will be allowed to be set in concrete. This means shepherd staffs and metal set in the foundations
of monuments.
B. No floral decorations are allowed on the ground during mowing season, April 1 through November
1, excluding the week of Memorial Day. Memorial Day decorations that remain on the ground will
be removed after seven (7) calendar days.
C. There shall be no jars, glass, metal receptacles, or other containers used on the premises for the
holding of floral bouquets. All such forms of decoration shall be in approved containers. Approved
containers are described as vases attached to the monument, hanging baskets, and monument
saddles.
D. The city shall not be responsible for any kind of plantings damaged by the elements, vandals,
thieves or other causes beyond its control. The superintendent shall have the authority to remove
all floral designs, flowers, weeds, and trees as, in his judgment, they become unsightly, dangerous,
detrimental, or diseased, or when they do not conform to the rules and regulations as stated
herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 268/460
E. A city cemetery shall not be liable for floral pieces, baskets, or frames placed on or near gravesites
that are damaged or stolen. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
8-3-11: MEMORIALS; MONUMENT COMPANIES REGULATED:
Specifications are necessary to permit the sound operation of a city cemetery in the interest of all lot
owners and the community the cemetery serves. These specifications are the result of careful study,
and reasonable application of the memorial violators will be notified promptly and a remedy of the
situation will be expected as soon as practicable.
A. Family Monuments:
1. To avoid the appearance of congestion, only one central or family memorial should be placed on
a family lot (a family lot will constitute 4 or more plots).
2. Anything above grass level will be considered a monument (with reference to placement on the
plot/lot).
3. All information panels (on monuments) will be placed on the side of the monument where the
interment will be made. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
B. Mausoleums:
1. Mausoleums or tombs, either wholly or partially aboveground, will be constructed only in lots
designated by the city council. No mausoleum will be erected on any city cemetery lot purchased
after August 3, 1992, other than in the Rose Hill 8th Addition, unless the city council specifically
designates additional mausoleum sites by city ordinance. Mausoleums are limited to six feet (6')
in height. Any structure higher than six feet (6') must be approved by the cemetery
superintendent.
2. Plans, specifications and location of the mausoleum or tomb on the lot are subject to approval of
the cemetery superintendent. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Materials And Specifications:
1. Quality Materials: To properly perpetuate memory, all monuments, markers, mausoleums and
tombs shall be of quality granite, marble or other natural stone.
2. Responsibility Of Monument Retailers: Monument retailers and independent stone setters shall
set monuments and markers in conformity with city cemetery requirements and in accordance
with the trade standards of proper methods of handling and settings.
3. Monument Specifications (Maximum Sizes Indicated):
a.
Lot Size
Lot Dimensions,
Length And Width
Length And Width Of
Foundation
Height
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 269/460
1 grave Rose Hill 9th
10.0' x 4.0' 3'6" x 20" 3'
1 grave Elsewhere in the cemetery not allowed None
2 grave Rose Hill 7th
10'0" x 6'5" 5'0" x 20" 4'
4 grave 20'0" x 10'0" 5'8" x 22" 5'
2 grave elsewhere 10'0" x 8'0" 5'8" x 22" 4'
4 grave Rose Hill 9th
16'0" x 10'0" 7'8" x 22" 6'
6 grave Rose Hill 9th
24'0" x 10'0" 10'8" x 22" 6'
8 grave Rose Hill 9th
32'0" x 10'0" 12'8" x 22" 6'
8 grave 20'0" x 20'0"
Written approval
required
8'0" x 24" 6'
Lot Size
Monument Base Sizes Allowed
(Maximum Sizes Indicated)
1 grave Rose Hill 9th 2'10" x 6" x 12"
1 grave Elsewhere in cemetery not allowed (grass marker only)
2 grave Rose Hill 7th 4'4" x 6" x 12"
4 grave 5'0" x 6" x 14"
2 grave elsewhere 5'0" x 6" x 14"
4 grave Rose Hill 9th 7'0" x 6" x 14"
6 grave Rose Hill 9th 10'0" x 6" x 14"
8 grave Rose Hill 9th 12'0" x 6" x 14"
8 grave elsewhere 12'0" x 8" x 16" with written approval
Note: Due to inexact cutting by the granite manufacturer, a 1 inch variance in base length and width
will be allowed. Anything over 1 inch will be considered oversize, and penalties outlined in subsection
C3e of this section will be instated.
b. All monuments and markers will have a four inch (4") border around the monument base.
(Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
c. The city has the right, at the expense of the monument company or lot owner, to correct or
remove any memorial if it is deemed unsightly. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 270/460
d. A minimum of six (6) hours' notice for the flagging of a lot for the purpose of installing a
monument, grass marker, or mausoleum is required. If for any reason the lot must be
reflagged, fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged to the monument company, payable in
advance.
e. If a monument company is advised of an infraction of these rules and regulations, the
monument company will have thirty (30) calendar days to correct said infraction. If not
corrected within the thirty (30) calendar day period, a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day may
(at the superintendent's discretion) be imposed upon the monument company until said
infraction(s) is resolved. Vendors found to be in violation of the rules and regulations of a city
cemetery shall be prohibited from performing any further work at a city cemetery for a period
of six (6) months.
f. All foundations that extend above grass level will have dirt feathered out from the edge. (Ord.
2355, 5-16-2011)
4. Lot Markers: The corners of each lot will be marked with stone or metal posts set at ground
level. All corner posts shall be set by the cemetery superintendent. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011; amd.
2013 Code)
5. Foundations: All foundations will be set back two inches (2") from the length side of the
foundation to the lot line (7th Addition only).
D. Approval Of Design By Cemetery Superintendent:
1. So that all memorials shall be in customary good taste adding to the beauty of a city cemetery, it
is necessary that cemetery officials retain authority to reject any plan or design for a memorial
which, on account of size, design or inscription, is unsuitable to the lot on which it is to be
placed. A plan (drawing) outlining all lengths, widths, monument heights and design will be
required. If the plan for the memorial is rejected, such rejection shall be made within ten (10)
days and explanation given. Upon request, any rejected application shall be promptly reviewed
by the superintendent.
2. All monuments will be approved for setting by the superintendent or his designee. Upon arrival
at a city cemetery, all monuments will be inspected for proper size by the superintendent or his
designee. If rejected, the monument will not be allowed to be set. If a monument needs to be
installed on a Saturday, approval must be obtained on Friday. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
E. Right To Remove: Should any monument, mausoleum, tomb, or personalized landscaping become
unsightly, dilapidated, or a safety hazard to visitors or the cemetery staff, the cemetery
superintendent will have the right to remove the same. An effort will be made to locate the owners.
(Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
F. Advertisements Prohibited: Striving for surroundings of peace and beauty as a setting for
monuments prohibits advertising of any description within a city cemetery, such as "For Sale" signs
on any lot or plot. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
G. Dirt Removal: All excess dirt will be disposed of in a proper manner. Excess dirt can be put in low
plots or holes. All sod and clods will be chopped up and spread out. Excess dirt will not be allowed
to be spread out randomly. If available, the cemetery superintendent will allow the use of a dirt
trailer for excess dirt removal. If excess is not properly disposed of, the monument company will be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 271/460
required to return and remove said excess dirt. If not removed within five (5) working days of
notification, the monument company's privileges may be revoked for a period of six (6) months,
and the cost of removal ($50.00) will be billed to the offending monument company. (Ord. 2355, 5-
16-2011; amd. 2013 Code)
H. Restrictions On Workers:
1. When Work Should Stop: Out of respect for the deceased and the family of the deceased, all
work of any description will cease while a funeral or interment is being conducted nearby. It is
also required that trucks and workers withdraw to a reasonable distance from the location of the
funeral service.
2. Outside Workers: All workers employed by outside firms while within a city cemetery are subject
to cemetery regulations. All workers employed by outside firms, while in a city cemetery, will be
under the direct authority of the superintendent. No work within a city cemetery grounds will be
allowed on Sundays or nationally recognized Memorial Day.
I. Soliciting Prohibited: Approaching the bereaved for the purpose of soliciting any business within a
city cemetery is prohibited.
J. Violations: If a monument company is found to be in violation of any of these rules and regulations,
its privileges may be revoked for a period of six (6) months to one year. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
8-3-12: EXEMPTIONS, SUSPENSIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
A. Special cases may arise in which the literal enforcement of a rule may impose unnecessary
hardship. The city cemetery superintendent, therefore, reserves the right to make exceptions,
suspensions, or modifications to any of these rules and regulations, without notice, and such
temporary exception, suspension or modification shall in no way be construed as affecting the
general application of such rules and regulations.
B. The city hereby expressly reserves the right to adopt additional rules and regulations or to amend,
alter or repeal any rule, regulation, section, paragraph or sentence in these rules and regulations at
any time. Sufficient notice will be given by the city of any rule change that will create expense,
hardship, or inconvenience to lot owners or other individuals having business with a city cemetery.
(Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
8-3-13: ENFORCEMENT:
The superintendent is hereby empowered to enforce all rules and regulations and to exclude from a
city cemetery any person or persons violating the same. The superintendent shall have charge of the
grounds and buildings including the conduct of funerals, traffic, employees, plot or lot owners, visitors
and private vendors conducting business at a city cemetery. (Ord. 2355, 5-16-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 272/460
Chapter 4
PUBLIC LIBRARY
8-4-1: ESTABLISHED; TAX LEVIED:
There shall be established in the city a public library for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of the
city, and the city council may levy a tax annually not to exceed the maximum allowed by law on all
taxable property in the city to maintain the library. (Ord. 13, 12-2-1929; amd. 2013 Code)
8-4-2: BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
A. Appointment And Composition: The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall
appoint a board of nine (9) directors for the library, none of whom shall be a member of the city
council.
B. Term Of Office; Removals: The directors shall hold office one-third (1/3) for one year, one-third (1/3)
for two (2) years and one-third (1/3) for three (3) years from July 1 following their appointment and,
at their first regular meeting, shall cast lots for their respective terms, and annually thereafter, the
council shall, before July 1 in every year, appoint three (3) directors to take the place of the retiring
directors, who shall hold office for three (3) years, and until their successors are appointed and
qualified. The mayor may remove any director for misconduct of any duty.
C. Vacancies: Vacancies in the board of directors occasioned by removal, resignation or otherwise
shall be reported to the mayor and shall be filled in like manner as in original appointments. (Ord.
13, 12-2-1929; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Compensation: No director shall receive any compensation for his services.
E. Organization: The directors shall, immediately after their appointment, meet and organize by
electing one of their number president and one secretary, and by the election of such other officers
as they may deem necessary. They shall meet and adopt such rules and regulations for the
government of the library and reading room as will be expedient and not inconsistent with this
chapter. (Ord. 13, 12-2-1929)
F. Powers And Duties:
1. The board shall control the expenditure of the monies appropriated for the operation and
maintenance of the library as well as those funds donated as memorials or as gifts for the library.
The city and finance director-treasurer shall maintain an account from which funds shall be
disbursed to the library board.
2. The board shall have the power to appoint a suitable librarian and necessary assistants, to fix
their compensations, to remove said appointees and to, in general, carry out the spirit and letter
of this chapter in maintaining a public library.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 273/460
G. Annual Report: Within sixty (60) days after the expiration of each fiscal year of the city, the library
board shall make a report of the condition of their trust on the last day of the fiscal year to the city
council. This report shall be made in writing and shall be verified under oath by the secretary or
some other responsible officer of the board. It shall contain: 1) an itemized statement of the various
sums of money received from the library fund and from other sources; 2) an itemized statement of
the objects and purposes for which those sums of money have been expended; 3) a statement of
the number of books and periodicals available for use, and the number and character thereof
circulated; 4) a statement of the real and personal property acquired by legacy, purchase, gift or
otherwise; 5) a statement of the character of any extensions of library service which have been
undertaken; 6) a statement of the financial requirements of the library for the ensuing fiscal year for
inclusion in the appropriation of the corporate authority; 7) a statement as to the amount of
accumulations and the reasons therefor; 8) any other statistics, information and suggestions that
may be of interest. A report shall also be filed, at the same time, with the Illinois state library. (2013
Code)
8-4-3: NO CHARGE FOR USE; AUTHORITY TO EXCLUDE AND INCLUDE CERTAIN
PERSONS:
The library shall be forever free to the use by the inhabitants of the city, subject to such rules and
regulations as the library board may adopt. The board may exclude from the use of the library any and
all persons who shall wilfully violate the rules, and the board may extend the privileges of the use of
the library to the people residing outside of the city as the library board may deem expedient. (Ord. 13,
12-2-1929; amd. 2013 Code)
8-4-4: PENALTIES:
Whoever shall commit injury upon or destroy the property of the library shall forfeit and pay to the
library fund a sum of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00); or whoever shall fail to return any books belonging to the library shall forfeit and pay to the
library fund a sum of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00); such sums
to be collected as a fine the same as for the infraction of the other ordinances of the city. (Ord. 13, 12-
2-1929; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 5
BOYTON STREET COMMUNITY CENTER
8-5-1: BOYTON STREET COMMUNITY CENTER BOARD:
A. Created; Purpose: There is created the Boyton Street community center board. The primary
purpose of the board is to encourage and promote a continuing program for the development of
programs and activities for the enhancement of the condition of life that will inure to the benefit of
all citizens of the city. (2013 Code)
B. Appointment And Terms; Officers: The Boyton Street community center board shall consist of
eleven (11) members. Each member shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 274/460
of the city council, to a term of three (3) years. The chair of the board shall be appointed by the
mayor to a term of one year from among the members of the board. A vice chair, secretary and
treasurer will be selected by the members of the board to serve a term of one year. All
appointments may be extended in the same fashion as the original appointments. (2013 Code;
amd. Ord. 3175, 4-28-2014)
C. Vacancies And Removals: Board members shall hold office until their respective successors are
appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled in like manner as original appointments. The
mayor, with the approval of the city council, may remove any board member for misconduct in
office or neglect of duty.
D. Powers And Duties: The board shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To adopt suitable rules governing their meetings and methods of procedure.
2. To recommend to the city council for approval a person as director of the center; to recommend
to the city council for approval the employment of such additional personnel as may be deemed
necessary for efficient operation of the center.
3. To maintain the center building and equipment in a state of good repair.
4. To conduct the operation of the center on sound economic principles consistent with the primary
purpose for its establishment and within the funding authority of the city council. (2013 Code)
8-5-2: DIRECTOR:
A. Appointment And Term: The director shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent
of the city council, for a term of one year, which may be extended from time to time.
B. Duties:
1. The director shall administer the center and its operation in a manner consistent with the policies
and direction established by the board.
2. The director shall prepare an annual budget to propose to the board, upon adoption of which
shall be submitted to the city council on or before the first Monday in May.
3. The director shall manage the fiscal operation of the center prudently and within the limits of
funds available. (2013 Code)
8-5-3: ETHICS:
No person connected with the management of the community center at any time, either directly or
indirectly, shall be interested in any contract for the purchase or sale of any supplies or materials used
in the construction, repair, operation or maintenance of the center. (2013 Code)
8-5-4: ALCOHOL, DRUGS AND INTOXICATED PERSONS PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 275/460
No alcohol, drugs or controlled substances of any nature shall be permitted upon the premises of the
center at any time, nor shall anyone in a state of intoxication be allowed to remain therein. (Ord. 1137,
1-19-1987)
8-5-5: FEES AND CHARGES:
Admission to the center building and facilities shall be free to all citizens of the city, although moderate
and reasonable fees may be charged for meals provided, if any, materials used in handicraft projects,
and for other programs or activities of a special nature. (Ord. 1137, 1-19-1987)
Chapter 6
TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS
8-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs,
and other plants within the city.
B. This chapter provides full power and authority over all trees, plants and shrubs located within street
rights of way, parks and public places of the city; and to trees, plants and shrubs located on private
property that constitute a hazard or threat as described herein. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, phrases, terms and their derivations shall have
the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any
kind.
TREE: A tree in a public place, except where otherwise indicated. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992)
8-6-3: CITY JURISDICTION AND SUPERVISION:
A. The mayor, or his designee, shall have exclusive jurisdiction and supervision over all trees, other
plants, and grassy areas planted or growing in public places. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992)
B. The mayor, or his designee, shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty, to issue orders to
plant, trim, spray, preserve and remove trees, other plants and grassy areas in public places to
ensure safety or preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public places. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992;
amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 276/460
C. The mayor, or his designee, shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty, to order the trimming,
preservation or removal of trees or plants upon private property when he shall find such action is
necessary to public safety or to prevent the spread of disease or insects to public trees and places.
(Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992)
D. The mayor, or his designee, shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty, to supervise or direct
another to supervise all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this
chapter. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992; amd. 2013 Code)
E. It shall be public policy of the city to plant trees in accordance with a uniform plan to be determined
by the mayor, or his designee, along rights of way of all new or reconstructed streets, and where
other public improvements cause trees to be removed.
F. The mayor, or his designee, shall have the authority to affix reasonable conditions to the grant of a
permit hereunder. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992)
8-6-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Duty To Remove Debris: No person shall plant, set out, trim, spray, preserve or
remove trees or other plants in public places without first filing an application and procuring a
permit from the mayor, or his designee. Any person granted a permit to cut down or trim a tree in a
public place shall remove all the debris at his own expense.
B. Standards For Issuance; Contents: The mayor, or his designee, shall issue the permit provided
herein when he finds that the desired action or treatment is necessary and that the proposed
method and workmanship are satisfactory. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of
expiration, and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner
therein described. Any permit shall be void if the terms are violated.
C. Conditions: Work done under a permit issued hereunder shall be performed in strict accordance
with the terms hereof and with the following regulations established for the planting, trimming and
care of trees in public places:
1. Trees must not be less than one inch (1") in diameter of a trunk one foot (1') above the ground.
2. All trees from one to three inches (3") in diameter of a trunk one foot (1') above the ground must
be protected and supported by tree guards.
3. No tree shall be placed so as, in the opinion of the mayor, or his designee, to cause a traffic
hazard.
4. In felling trees, the same must be removed with the root stump grubbed out when so required by
the mayor, or his designee.
5. All cuts above one inch (1") in diameter must be waterproofed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 277/460
6. Trees shall be planted at least thirty feet (30') apart except where a special permit is obtained
from the mayor, or his designee.
7. No tree shall be planted where the clear space between the curb and the sidewalk is less than
three feet (3').
8. No tree or shrub shall be planted nearer than one foot (1') from the curb line or the sidewalk
unless a special permit is granted by the mayor, or his designee. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992)
9. No tree, bush or shrub shall be planted or be allowed to remain untrimmed so as to be an
obstruction to vision at a street or alley corner.
10. No tree shall be planted on any public way except of the variety approved by the mayor, or his
designee. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992; amd. 2013 Code)
8-6-5: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS PLANTING TREES:
A. It shall be the duty of any person growing a tree within the public highway, or responsible for trees
growing on property abutting on public places supporting trees or plants, or on private property:
(Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992)
1. To trim his trees so as not to cause a hazard to public places or interfere with the proper lighting
of public highways by the streetlights and so that the minimum clearance of any portion
overhanging a public way shall be at least eight feet (8'). (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992; amd. 2013
Code)
2. To treat or remove any tree or plant so diseased or insect ridden as to constitute a hazard to
trees or plants in public places.
3. To remove any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall.
4. To trim bushes and shrubs so that they do not obstruct passage on any portion of any sidewalk.
(Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992)
B. The mayor, or his designee, may cause to be trimmed or removed any tree or shrub so that any
obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be eliminated. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992; amd. 2013
Code)
8-6-6: PROCEDURE UPON ORDER TO REMOVE:
A. Notice To Remove: When the mayor, or his designee, shall find it necessary to order the trimming,
preservation or removal of trees or plants upon private property as authorized in subsection 8-6-1B
of this chapter, he shall serve a written order to correct the dangerous condition upon the owner,
operator, occupant or other person responsible for its existence. The order required herein shall be
served in one of the following ways:
1. By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible.
2. By leaving the order with some person of suitable age and discretion upon the premises.
3. By affixing a copy of the order to the door at the entrance of the premises in violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 278/460
4. By mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the owner of the premises, by
registered mail.
B. Time For Compliance: The order required herein shall set forth a time limit for compliance,
dependent upon the hazard and danger created by the violation.
C. Appeal From Order: A person to whom an order hereunder is directed shall have the right, within
twenty four (24) hours of the service of such order, to appeal to the city council by filing written
notice of such appeal to the city clerk. The city council shall review such order and appeal at its
next regularly scheduled meeting and render its decision thereon. Unless the order is revoked or
modified, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the person to whom directed.
D. Failure To Comply; Removal By City: When a person to whom an order is directed fails to comply
within the specified time, the mayor, or his designee, shall remedy the condition or contract with
others for such purpose and charge the cost thereof to the person to whom the order is directed.
The person remedying a condition under a contract made hereunder shall be authorized to enter
the premises for that purpose. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992)
8-6-7: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC TREES PROHIBITED:
Unless specifically authorized by permit, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant,
or remove any tree on public property; attach any wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance
to any tree; allow any liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with
them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat from such fire might injure any
portion of any tree. (Ord. 1432, 2-24-1992; amd. 2013 Code)
8-6-8: PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall result in a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (2013 Code)
Chapter 7
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
8-7-1: CITY OF MARION LAKE HOURS:
The city of Marion Lake will be open to visitors from four thirty o'clock (4:30) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. daily. Anyone found trespassing on lake property after closing will be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2214, 7-14-2008)
8-7-2: ADVERTISING RESTRICTIONS ON CLOCK TOWER PROPERTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 279/460
The placement of banners, placards, signs and other such material on the grounds surrounding the
clock tower on the Tower Square is prohibited. Upon application to the mayor, an exception may be
approved. (Ord. 2238, 12-8-2008)
Title 9
WATER AND SEWER
Chapter 1
GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS
9-1-1: FISCAL YEAR FOR WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENTS:
The "fiscal year" for the water department and sewer department of the city shall hereafter commence
on May 1 of each year and end on April 30 of each succeeding year. (Ord. 1472, 3-22-1993, eff. 4-30-
1993)
9-1-2: IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM:
A. Program Adopted: The identity theft prevention program has been adopted by the city in
compliance with the fair and accurate credit transactions act of 2003. The program is designed to
detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening of or access to any water
or sewer services account.
B. Implementation And Administration: The identity theft prevention program shall be implemented
and administered by the city finance director-treasurer as the program administrator. (Ord. 2231,
10-27-2008; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Changes To Program: Changes to the identity theft prevention program of a day to day operational
character and decisions relating to the interpretation and implementation of the program may be
made by the program administrator. However, major changes or shifts of policy positions under the
program shall only be made by the city council. (Ord. 2231, 10-27-2008)
9-1-3: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS:
A. Duty To Connect: It is made the duty of the owners of all real estate abutting upon or touching the
line of any proposed improvements to make all contemplated private connections with public
sewers and water mains before the work on any such streets or alleys is completed by the
contractor; which connections shall be made under the inspection and with the approval of the
sewer and water superintendents. (1977 Code § 13.04.010; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 280/460
B. Permit Required; Bond: All persons, firms and corporations shall, after the completion of said
improvement, be debarred from making any opening or excavation on said street or alley, upon or
along the line of said improvement, without first obtaining the permission of the city code
enforcement officer, and no permission shall be granted until the person, firm or corporation
applying therefor shall give bond to the city in such sum as may be fixed by the city council, to be
approved by the mayor, conditioned for the filling up and restoration of any part of such
improvement or pavement in as good condition as before such openings or excavations were
made, and pay the expenses of inspecting the work and making connections.
C. Plans And Specifications:
1. All such work shall be done in accordance with the plans and specifications for any such
improvement, which shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk.
2. All of said private connections with said public water mains shall be of material approved by the
water superintendent extending from the water main to property line.
D. Approval And Acceptance: All such work thus done shall be subject to the approval and
acceptance of the code enforcement officer or other authorized officer. (1977 Code § 13.04.020;
amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE1
9-2-1: DEFINITION OF PREMISES:
A "premises", as contemplated in this chapter, is defined as follows:
A. A building under one roof owned by one party and occupied as one business or residence; or
B. A combination of buildings owned by one party in one common enclosure occupied by one family or
business; or
C. The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall; or
D. Each floor of a house where each such floor is tenanted as a separate residence; or
E. A building owned by one party having a number of apartments or offices and using halls and
entrances in common. (1977 Code § 13.60.120)
9-2-2: WATER TAPS AND FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 281/460
A. Tap Fees Established: There are hereby established the following fees for tapping into the water
mains of the city of Marion, Illinois, where its mains are now or may hereafter be laid in a street or
alley adjoining property where water service is desired, and a service pipe is required for
immediate and continuous service:
1. For a fee of eight hundred dollars ($800.00), paid in advance, the water department will make a
tap three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter into the main, extend the service pipe from such tap sixty
feet (60') or to the property line of the consumer, if not more than sixty feet (60'), and install a
meter box ready for a meter to be set. For a distance of more than sixty feet (60'), the consumer
will be obligated for the additional cost per foot.
2. For a fee of nine hundred dollars ($900.00), paid in advance, the water department will make a
tap one inch (1") in diameter into the main, extend the service pipe from such tap sixty feet (60')
or to the property line of the consumer, if not more than sixty feet (60'), and install a meter box
ready for meter to be set. For a distance of more than sixty feet (60'), the consumer will be
obligated for the additional cost per foot.
3. For a fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), paid in advance, the water department will make
a tap two inches (2") in diameter into the main, extend the service pipe from such tap sixty feet
(60') or to the property line of the consumer, if not more than sixty feet (60'), and install a valve
and valve box. For a distance of more than sixty feet (60'), the consumer will be obligated for the
additional cost per foot.
4. For a fee of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00), paid in advance, the water department will grant
permission to make a tap in excess of two inches (2") in diameter, provided any person receiving
permission to make such tap will make the tap, furnish all materials necessary in connection
therewith and provide a meter approved by the water department superintendent.
5. Persons desiring a lateral line from a main line will pay four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) in
advance for a connection at the main and such persons will extend the lateral line from the main
line at their expense. Taps made off lateral lines will come under the provisions set out in
subsections A1, A2 and A3 of this section. All lateral lines must meet the approval of the water
department superintendent as to size and other specifications.
6. The water department will furnish meters for one inch (1") and three-fourths inch (3/4") taps as
hereinabove indicated. The property owner will furnish all meters of larger dimensions.
7. Any tap made by a contractor or developer on a water main subject to a rebate agreement
entered into by the city must make the payment required by such agreement in addition to such
other regular charges as may be required.
8. In the event a property owner or contractor desires to make a tap of the dimensions set out in
subsection A1, A2 or A3 of this section, such owner or contractor may make such tap upon
payment of one-half (1/2) the fee indicated and after receiving permission from the
superintendent of the water department. (Ord. 3202, 8-11-2014, eff. 9-1-2014)
9-2-3: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OCCUPANCY:
A. Application For Service: All persons, firms or corporations desiring water service must make written
application at the office of the water department on printed forms provided therefor, setting forth in
said application all purposes for which water may be used upon their premises in order that proper
rates and assessments can be made. (1977 Code § 13.60.010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 282/460
B. Change Of Ownership Or Occupancy; Liability For Service: In the event of a change in ownership
or occupancy of any premises, each subsequent owner or occupant of said premises must make
application for service at the office of the water department, but the former applicant or consumer
of water shall remain liable for water furnished to said premises until he has given notice in writing
to the department to discontinue the supply. (1977 Code § 13.60.070)
9-2-4: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE:
A. Available Mains: Where its mains are now or may hereafter be laid, the water department will install
the service pipe and appurtenances between the water main and the property line; provided,
however, that the water main is in a street or alley adjoining property where water service is
desired, and provided also, that the service pipe is required for immediate and continuous service.
The water department will, at its expense, furnish all labor necessary to install service. However, all
persons, firms, corporations, etc., for whom a service pipe is laid must pay the water department
for all material used in the connection of service, including street repair.
B. No Mains Available: Where there are no mains adjoining property where water service is required,
the property owner shall dig all the ditch from the street or alley where the water main is located to
said property where service is required. The ditch shall be a minimum of thirty inches (30") deep.
The water department will tap the main and run the service up to the street or alley property line
and install a curb stop and curb box.
C. Responsibility For Costs: All material used in said service shall be paid for by the property owner.
However, the water department will furnish up to fifty feet (50') of pipe on a private service where
said service is laid in the street or alley, and the property owner or consumer shall furnish the
balance of pipe required to run service from the curb stop to the property where service is desired.
D. Maintenance: The water department will maintain such service pipes and appurtenances laid
thereby; except, however, the water department will not install at its expense nor maintain service
pipes to supply water for the extinguishment of fire. (1977 Code § 13.60.020)
E. Water Main Requirements:
1. Purpose:
a. The purpose of this subsection E is to establish the size of water mains to be installed in the
city forward from the date hereof. Such water mains shall be of sufficient size to promote the
volume of water required to meet the expected needs of the area to be served whether it be
for residential, commercial or industrial purposes.
b. Regardless of the area it is expected water mains will have the capacity to transmit sufficient
volumes of water to provide reasonable fire protection.
2. Size: The minimum size water mains to be installed in proposed residential areas shall be six
inches (6"). The minimum size water mains to be installed in proposed or existing commercial or
industrial areas shall be eight inches (8").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 283/460
3. Backflow Prevention: When installation of a backflow prevention device is required the device
and the installation thereof shall meet the standards prescribed by the Illinois plumbing code.
4. Approval Of Size And Location: The chief of the fire department shall approve the size of any
proposed water main before installation and assure the location for such water main has been
approved.
5. Fire Hydrants: The chief of the fire department shall determine the number and location of fire
hydrants required to be installed in any area proposed for development. In addition, the chief of
the fire department shall approve before installation in any structure the proposed fire prevention
system to assure compliance with the requirements of the Illinois plumbing code. (Ord. 3229, 1-
12-2015)
6. Building Permit: No commercial building permit may be issued until the chief of the fire
department has certified compliance with the provisions of this subsection E. (Ord. 3229, 1-12-
2015; amd. Ord. 3249, 4-13-2015)
7. Violation: Any violation of the provisions of this subsection E may subject the violator to a fine of
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. (Ord. 3229, 1-12-2015)
9-2-5: SERVICE REGULATIONS:
A. All taps and connections to distributing mains of the water department shall be made by and under
the direction of the water superintendent or other authorized employee of the water department
and not otherwise.
B. No premises will be supplied by more than one service pipe, except in cases where water is taken
for the extinguishment of fire, in which event, water must be taken through a separate service pipe
and used solely for firefighting purposes. This subsection applies only to places of business.
C. All service pipes must have placed thereon a stop and waste cock immediately inside the building
or foundation wall at a place where the pipeline enters. All service pipe shall be laid at a minimum
depth of two and one-half feet (21/2') and shall not be laid in sewer ditches, nor driveways, nor
pass through premises other than that to be supplied. The property owner may be required to lay
his service pipe to the property line at a point designated by the superintendent or other authorized
employee of the water department before the water department shall be required to connect such
service pipe with the water main. Where two (2) pieces of property join and both property owners
desire service, one service pipe may be laid and a meter and cover installed on the property line
dividing the properties with two (2) meter yokes in meter tile, one for each property. In the event a
meter tile or cover is broken, or lid is missing, the property owner must bear the expense of
replacing same.
D. The water department reserves the right to determine the size of each connection to its mains, also
the size and kind of service pipe to be laid to each premises, and the location of its water meter.
Where the water meter is inside a building and hard to read, the water department shall have the
right to move its water meter into the yard and charge the property owner for the meter box and
cover. The water department is to bear the expense of labor and material necessary to move the
meter into the yard, except for the meter box and cover. (1977 Code § 13.60.030)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 284/460
9-2-6: SERVICE LINES OWNED BY PROPERTY OWNER:
A. Service pipe installed and owned by the property owner must, at the property owner's expense, be
kept and maintained in good condition and free from all leaks; and for failure to do so, the water
supply may be discontinued.
B. The water department shall in no event be responsible for damage done by water escaping from a
service pipe or fixtures on the premises of the owner or consumer. The owner of a service pipe
must, at his own expense, make additions thereto or changes therein which may be required on
account of change in street grade.
C. A service pipe, as referred to in this chapter, consists of all pipes, fittings, valves, stop and waste
cocks, etc., installed past the first stop valve from the main. (1977 Code § 13.60.040)
9-2-7: METERS:
A. Authority To Place Meters: The water department has the right to place a meter upon any service
pipe and charge for water service by meter measurement. (1977 Code § 13.64.010)
B. Installation And Maintenance; Size And Location:
1. All meters, except detector devices, shall be installed, maintained and renewed by and at the
expense of the water department, but in case of damage to such meters by reason of any act,
neglect or omission on the part of the consumer, such as damages occasioned by fire, frost, hot
water, accident or misuse, the consumer shall pay to the water department the cost of its repair
on presentation of a bill therefor.
2. The water department reserves the right to determine the size of meter that shall be placed on
any service pipe and the location of said meter. (1977 Code § 13.64.020)
C. Pit Specifications:
1. Established: There are hereby established specifications for the construction of water meter pits
for one and one-fourth inch (11/4") to eight inch (8") meters.
a. Size:
4 feet long
3 feet wide - inside dimensions
3 feet deep
b. Material:
Mortared concrete block walls (6 inch hollow block) or
6 inch poured concrete walls
4 inch poured concrete floor with sump hole
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 285/460
c. Sump Hole:
8 inches x 8 inches square or 8 inch diameter round hole located in the corner of meter pit
floor
d. Lids:
(1) Large lid: Removable lid - recessed or angle-iron reinforced lid, sized to cover the outside
dimensions of the box and fitted to prevent the large lid from slipping off
Lid to be constructed of:
1/4 inch steel (no traffic)
1/2 inch steel (with traffic)
(2) Small lid:
Hinged onto the large lid
11/2 feet square lid
Positioned directly over meter registers
e. Bypass: To be located inside the meter pit if the meter size is 11/4 inches, 11/2 inches or 2
inches
To be located outside the meter pit if meter size is 4 inches, 6 inches or 8 inches
f. Valves: If the bypass is inside the box, a hand operated gate valve is acceptable
If the bypass is outside the box, 2 inch square nut valves with 51/4 inch valve box is
acceptable
g. Compound Meters: Compound meters only on 2 inches and up
2. Exceptions: Any changes to any part of the specifications set out in subsection C1 of this section
must be approved by the superintendent of the city water department prior to construction. (Ord.
1146, 4-13-1987)
D. Meter Deposits:
1. All consumers taking or desiring to take water by meter measurement must keep on deposit with
the water department at all times the following sum or sums for each single premises:
a. For laundromats, factories, department stores, bottling plants, car wash establishments,
hospitals, hotels/motels/inns, nursing homes, retirement homes and mobile home parks:
Three hundred dollars ($300.00).
b. For apartment houses with more than three (3) apartments, restaurants, service stations, or
body shops with car washing facilities: Three hundred dollars ($300.00).
c. For rental units in which landlord pays for the water service, the deposit for every fifty (50)
units: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 286/460
d. For single-family homes, apartments or businesses (containing only 2 bathroom facilities):
One hundred dollars ($100.00).
2. Provided, however, where the amount set forth in this subsection is not sufficient to protect the
water department, an amount may be required based on the consumer's estimated bill figured
for that service for a billing period plus ninety (90) days.
3. The consumer's deposit must be kept intact and the water department shall not be required to
apply it to payment of current water bills or any other charges incurred by the consumer.
4. There will be a thirty dollar ($30.00) fee for any return checks.
5. In the event service is scheduled to be disconnected due to nonpayment, the consumer will be
charged a reconnect fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) with an additional five dollars ($5.00) for each
occurrence thereafter, capped at sixty dollars ($60.00) per calendar year. (Ord. 3202, 8-11-2014,
eff. 9-1-2014)
E. Testing Meters; Defective Meters:
1. Meter Tests: Upon request or complaint of the consumer or by the city, any water meter shall be
tested for accuracy. If, upon testing, the meter is found to be over three percent (3%) off in
accuracy, the meter shall be replaced or repaired at no cost to the consumer if less than one
inch (1") in diameter. If the meter is found to be three percent (3%) or less in accuracy, then the
consumer who made the request shall pay a testing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a
meter one inch (1") or less. For meters one inch (1") or larger, the testing fee can range from two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for the consumer if
accuracy is greater than three percent (3%). If accuracy is less than three percent (3%), the city
will bear the costs. If the meter is greater than one inch (1") in diameter, then the replacement
cost shall be borne by the consumer. (2013 Code)
2. Defective Meters: Where a meter has ceased to register, an estimate of the quantity of water
consumed will be based upon an average of the previous six (6) months' consumption and the
condition of service prevailing. (1977 Code § 13.64.040)
9-2-8: WATER SERVICE RATES:
A. Basis For Water Service Rate: The water service rate for the use of and for service supplied by the
water facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user rate, a debt service rate, and a capital
improvement rate.
1. Basic User Rate: The basic user rate is levied on all users to recover the operation,
maintenance plus replacement (OM&R) costs and shall be based on water usage as recorded
by water meters. The basic user rate shall be computed as follows:
a. Estimate the annual water volume.
b. Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the water facilities,
including a replacement fund for the year, for all works categories.
c. Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
2. Debt Service Rate: The debt service rate is computed by apportioning the annual debt service
as a fixed charge per billing period.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 287/460
3. Capital Improvement Rate: The capital improvement rate is levied on users to provide for capital
improvements, extensions or reconstruction of the waterworks. The capital improvement rate is
computed by apportioning the annual amount to be accrued as a fixed rate per billing period.
4. Review Of Rates: The adequacy of the water service rate shall be reviewed, not less often than
annually, by a certified public accountant for the city in its annual audit report. The water service
rate shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or OM&R costs.
B. Measurement Of Flow:
1. The volume of flow used for computing basic user rates shall be the metered water consumption
read to the lowest even increments of one gallon.
2. If the person procures any part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public
waterworks system, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type
approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these
other sources.
3. Devices for measuring the volume of water may be required by the city if these volumes cannot
otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records.
4. Metering devices for determining the volume shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the
person. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is
canceled, without the consent of the city. (Ord. 2267, 6-10-2009)
C. Rates Established: Effective July 1, 2011, water usage rates of the city shall be as follows:
1. Water Usage Rates:
Gallons Of Water
Used Per Month Rate
Minimum up to 2,000 $8.60
Over minimum to 5,000, all usage $5.00 per 1,000 gallons
5,000 - 10,000 $4.60 per 1,000 gallons
10,000 - 100,000 $4.50 per 1,000 gallons
100,000 - 500,000 $4.40 per 1,000 gallons
500,000 - 1,500,000 $4.00 per 1,000 gallons
1,500,000 - 2,500,000 $3.75 per 1,000 gallons
2,500,000 - 4,000,000 $3.25 per 1,000 gallons
Over 4,000,000 $3.00 per 1,000 gallons
2. Debt Service Rate: A monthly debt service rate of two dollars thirty cents ($2.30) will be added
for all water customers within the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 288/460
3. Capital Improvement Rate: A monthly capital improvement rate of thirty cents ($0.30) will be
added for all water customers within the city.
4. Annual Increase: Water rates will be increased by three percent (3%) per fiscal year, excluding
debt service and capital improvement. (Ord. 2362, 6-13-2011)
D. Minimum Rate: A minimum rate of ten dollars ninety cents ($10.90) per month shall be applied to
all users whose water consumption does not exceed two thousand (2,000) gallons per month. This
minimum charge consists of eight dollars thirty cents ($8.30) for OM&R costs, two dollars thirty
cents ($2.30) for debt service costs and thirty cents ($0.30) for capital improvement costs.
E. Metered Water Required: All industrial, commercial and residential users of the water facilities shall
be metered.
F. Computation Of Water Service Rate: The water service rate shall be computed by the following
formula:
CW = CC + CD + CM + (Vu-X)CU
Where:
CW
=
Amount of water service rate ($) per billing period.
CC =
Capital improvement rate (subsection C3 of this section).
CD =
Debt service rate (subsection C2 of this section).
CM =
Minimum rate for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection D of this
section).
Vu =
Water volume for the billing period.
X =
Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum rate (subsection D of this
section).
CU =
Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection C1 of
this section).
G. Appeals: The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user charges in
this section shall be made available to a user within thirty (30) days of receipt of a written request
for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the computations thereof shall be
remedied by mediation between user and water department within thirty (30) days after notification
of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies. (Ord. 2267, 6-10-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 289/460
9-2-9: BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENT PAYMENTS; REVENUES AND
ACCOUNTING:
A. Monthly Bills; Liability For Payment: Rates or charges for service of the premises shall be payable
monthly for services rendered. The occupant and the user of the service shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to the
premises by the city only upon the condition that the occupant and users of the services are jointly
and severally liable therefor to the city.
B. Rendition Of Bills; Due Date; Late Payment Penalty:
1. Bills for service shall be sent out by the city water department on the last working day of the
month succeeding the period for which the service is billed.
2. All bills are due and payable on the sixteenth day of the following month after being sent out. A
penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by the sixteenth day after they
have been sent out.
C. Delinquent Payments; Discontinuance Of Service: If the charges for such services are not paid by
the twenty fifth of the month hereinabove mentioned after the rendition of the bill for such services,
such services shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be reinstated until all claims
are settled.
D. Lien Provisions:
1. Lien Claim And Notice: Whenever a bill for service remains unpaid by the owner/user for ninety
(90) days for monthly service after it has been rendered, the city clerk shall file with the county
recorder of deeds a statement of claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the
premises served, the amount of unpaid bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this
amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. (Ord. 2281, 8-24-
2009)
2. Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment
of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting
costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in
equity in the name of the city.
3. Suit For Foreclosure: The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings in the name of the city of Marion in any court having jurisdiction over such matters
against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid forty five (45) days in the case of a
monthly bill after it has been rendered. (Ord. 2267, 6-10-2009)
E. Revenues:
1. All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water system shall be deposited in
the water account of the water fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the city
finance director-treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from
all other funds of the city finance director-treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of
the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the mayor
and council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 290/460
2. The city finance director-treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water system and all
other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered
to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the "water fund of the city
of Marion". Said finance director-treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner provided by statute of the "revised cities and villages act", effective January 1942.
F. Accounting:
1. System Of Accounts: The city finance director-treasurer shall establish a proper system of
accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water system, and at regular annual
intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to
show the receipts and disbursements of the water system. (Ord. 2267, 6-10-2009; amd. 2013
Code)
2. Annual Audit Report: In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water facilities, including a
replacement cost. The financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the
following:
a. Flow data showing total gallons purchased from wholesale supplier for the current fiscal year.
b. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
c. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
d. Capital improvement charges.
e. Number of users connected to the system.
f. Number of nonmetered users.
G. Access To Records: The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the city system of user charges
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state grant (loan agreement
and rules or any state loan).
H. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense. (Ord. 2267, 6-10-2009)
9-2-10: BOILER SUPPLY:
Consumers having boilers connected with mains of the water department must have a check valve in
the supply pipe to the boiler and a vacuum valve in the steam line to prevent collapse in case the
water supply is interrupted for any reason. All consumers are cautioned against the danger of collapse
of boilers, since it is sometimes necessary to shut off the supply of water without notice. (1977 Code
§ 13.60.090)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 291/460
9-2-11: FLUSH VALVE OR DIRECT FLUSHING CLOSETS:
Flush valve or direct flushing closets should not be installed in premises where the service pipe
supplying such premises is connected to a two inch (2") or smaller main; nor should they be installed
on premises where the service pipe supplying such premises is connected to a main larger than two
inches (2") unless an elevated tank or a closed airtight pressure tank has been installed to supply
such closets. If the consumer insists on installing such fixtures in violation of this section, he shall do
so at his own risk, and in determining the size of the service pipe to be installed for such consumer,
the water department will consider only the average normal use of water, without any regard whatever
to peak demand required to operate the flush valve or direct flushing closets. (1977 Code § 13.60.100)
9-2-12: FIRE CONNECTIONS:
A. Service connection for water to be taken for the extinguishment of fire shall be made only upon
terms approved in writing by the superintendent of the water department and the city council.
These terms shall include pipe size, rates and any other information needed for a mutual
understanding agreement. (1977 Code § 13.60.050)
B. The following fee shall be collected monthly for fire connections to the water system of the city of
Marion:
Automatic sprinkler systems: Twenty seven dollars ($27.00). (Ord. 3202, 8-11-2014, eff. 9-1-2014)
C. A separate line (tap) shall be extended for fire line and potable water. Calculations shall be
submitted to determine the size of line prior to construction. (2013 Code)
9-2-13: USE OF HYDRANTS:
A. When it is necessary for any person to use a city fire hydrant as a source of water for any type
construction, or any other purpose, because no other source of water is available for use, such
person shall apply to the water department for a permit to use water from a city fire hydrant.
B. The person to whom a permit is issued shall be entitled to use water from a designated city fire
hydrant provided:
1. A fee in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) is paid to the water office
at the time a permit is applied for. If the water being used is for a project being paid for by the
city and the hydrant meter and backflow preventer are returned in good condition, one thousand
four hundred dollars ($1,400.00) shall be returned to the applicant.
2. The water department superintendent is promptly advised a permit has been applied for and the
name of the applicant.
3. No water will be withdrawn from a fire hydrant unless a hydrant meter and backflow prevention
have been put in place by city water department personnel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 292/460
4. No person other than city water department personnel or Marion fire department personnel may
connect any apparatus or attach any wrench or tool to the operating stem or cap of an existing
city fire hydrant. This does not apply to new fire hydrants on proposed water main extensions
that are being used for flushing purposes and said hydrant has not been accepted by the city for
ownership.
5. Any person to whom the permit is issued shall be charged at the usual and customary rate for
the water used from the fire hydrant.
C. Any person using a city fire hydrant contrary to the provisions of this section may be fined not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 3203, 8-14-2014)
9-2-14: EXTENSION OF MAINS:
A. State Approval Required: Where an extension of a main is necessary to serve a prospective
consumer or consumers, the water department will have plans and specifications drawn up in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the state department of public health pertaining to the
preparation and submission of plans and specifications for all public water supply improvements,
installations, changes, and additions. Said plans and specifications shall be submitted to the state
department of public health and written approval received from the department before work is
begun on the main extension. (1977 Code § 13.80.010)
B. Outside Of Subdivisions:
1. When a water main extension is necessary on city streets or alleys not in a new subdivision to
supply a consumer or consumers, the water department will extend the main, supplying all
materials and labor necessary, after a contract has been signed by the consumer or consumers,
and the water department superintendent. (1977 Code § 13.80.020; amd. 2013 Code)
2. Before the work is begun on the main extension, the ones desiring water service shall pay, in
advance at the water office, the estimated cost of extension. If the estimated cost is more or less
than the total cost, cash adjustment shall be made upon completion of the main extension.
3. The water department shall have the right to determine the size and kind of pipe, valves and
hydrants.
4. No cash allowance shall be given on any main unless the water department requires a larger
size pipe than necessary to serve consumers who will be presently served thereby, nor will there
be any reimbursement for taps for service.
5. The completed main will become the property of the city and, as such, will be maintained by the
water department. (1977 Code § 13.80.020)
C. Within Subdivisions:
1. Where water main extensions are for a new subdivision, the individual or individuals developing
said subdivision shall install and lay the mains, valves, hydrants and appurtenances which are
necessary to reach to and are within said subdivision at his or their expense. These mains,
valves, hydrants and appurtenances shall be laid and installed by or under the supervision of a
person or persons whose competence to supervise the work has been approved by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 293/460
superintendent of the water department, and said superintendent shall have the right to inspect
the installations as they are made.
2. The water department shall have the right to determine the size and kind of pipe, valves,
hydrants and appurtenances to be used and the location of the water main, valves, hydrants and
appurtenances.
3. The water department shall have the right to refuse to connect any new water mains to existing
mains if material or manner of construction is not approved by the superintendent of the water
department.
4. No cash allowances will be given on any main unless the water department requires larger size
mains than necessary to serve the consumers who will be presently served thereby, and there
will be no reimbursements for taps for service.
5. Upon completion of the water main or mains, the city will accept said new main or mains for
maintenance if the main or mains have been approved by the superintendent of the water
department. (1977 Code § 13.80.030)
9-2-15: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Giving Away, Resale Of Water: Applications for water, when accepted by the water department,
shall cover only the premises and uses for which applied, and consumers are prohibited from
selling or giving away water or granting privileges to anyone to use water not specifically included
in the accepted application under penalty of a discontinuance of the supply and of a forfeiture of
water rent that may have been paid in advance. (1977 Code § 13.60.080)
B. Use Of Groundwater As Potable Water:
1. Definitions:
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other
legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption including, but not
limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes, or preparing foods.
2. Use Prohibited: Except for such uses or methods in existence before the effective date hereof,
the use or attempt to use as a potable water supply groundwater from within the corporate limits
of the city by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other methods is hereby prohibited. This
prohibition applies to the city. (Ord. 1949, 5-3-2004)
3. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 1949, 5-3-2004; amd. 2013 Code)
9-2-16: INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE:
A. The water department shall make all reasonable efforts to eliminate interruption of service, and
when such interruption does occur, will endeavor to reestablish service with the shortest possible
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 294/460
delay. Whenever the service is interrupted for the purpose of working on the distribution system or
the pumping station equipment, all consumers affected by such interruption will be notified in
advance whenever it is possible to do so.
B. The water department shall in no event be held responsible for claims made against the
department by reason of the breaking of any mains or service pipes, or by reason of any other
interruption of the supply of water caused by the breaking of machinery or stoppage for necessary
repairs, and no person shall be entitled to damages, nor have any portion of a payment refunded
for any interruption of service which, in the opinion of the water department, may be deemed
necessary. (1977 Code § 13.76.080)
9-2-17: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY CONSUMER:
Any consumer desiring to discontinue, for any reason, the use of water to his premises must give
written notice at the water department office to that effect, whereupon the water will be shut off from
such premises at the curb stop or meter yoke. No charge for water rents will be stopped nor any
reduction made in the charge unless the water has been shut off by the water department, and such
stoppage or reduction in charge will be made only from date of receipt of the written notice from the
consumer, and then not for a period less than fifteen (15) days. (1977 Code § 13.76.060; amd. 2013
Code)
9-2-18: INSPECTIONS:
All premises receiving a supply of water and all service pipes, meters and fixtures, including any and
all fixtures within the premises, shall at all reasonable hours be subject to inspection by any duly
authorized employee of the water department. (1977 Code § 13.60.110)
9-2-19: VIOLATIONS; CANCELLATION OF SERVICE:
Application may be canceled or service discontinued by the water department after five (5) days'
written notice served at the premises supplied for violation of any of the water department rules and
regulations or any amendments that may be made thereto and especially for any of the following:
A. For misrepresentation in the application for water as to the property or fixtures to be supplied or the
use to be made of water.
B. For allowing any waste or misuse of water on account of improper line, fixtures or openings, and for
any failure on the part of the consumer to keep the same in suitable condition of repair so as to
prevent the waste of water.
C. For failure to pay water bills when due.
D. For any tampering with any meter or the seal thereof, or with any service pipe, curb or curb stop
cock or box owned by the water department, except in cases where it is necessary to shut off
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 295/460
water at the stop valve for repair between the stop valve owned by the water department and the
stop and waste valve owned by the property owner. All stop and waste valves on private property
shall be kept in good working condition. In the event a leak develops past a stop and waste valve
and the stop and waste valve cannot be shut off, and if the water department is called to shut off
the service at its stop valve, service will not be restored until the stop and waste valve has been
put in working condition and all leaks repaired.
E. For failure to adjust the service pipe to street grade as required by section 9-2-6 of this chapter.
F. For refusal to permit inspectors, meter reader, or other authorized employees of the water
department to enter the premises for the purposes specified in section 9-2-18 of this chapter.
G. For failure of the property owner or the occupant of the premises whose credit standing has been
impaired to make a cash deposit as provided in subsection 9-2-7D of this chapter.
H. For failure of a consumer to make a cash deposit or to give a satisfactory guarantee as provided in
subsection 9-2-7D of this chapter. (1977 Code § 13.60.130)
ARTICLE A. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
9-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
In the context of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed by this
section:
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation For
Cross Connection Control of the University Of Southern California (USC), the American Water Works
Association, the American National Standards Institute, and the American Society Of Sanitation
Engineers (ASSE) and certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER: A backflow prevention device used as protection against cross
connection where the device is not subjected to back pressure due to pumps or any other conditions
which may cause back pressure. This device may never have a downstream shutoff valve or be
installed where it will be in continuous operation for more than twelve (12) hours.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the premises other than
the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters
may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system, water from a source such as
wells, lakes, or streams, process fluids, or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated
or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have
control.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flowing back of used, contaminated or polluted water due to a negative
gauge or subatmospheric pressure in that pipe.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 296/460
BACKFLOW: The flow of water, foreign liquids, gases or other substances back into the distribution
pipes of the potable water system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction intended to prevent
backflow into a potable water system in accordance with the standards of the Illinois plumbing code
and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
CITY: City of Marion.
COMMISSIONER: The city of Marion commissioner of the water department for the city of Marion, or
his designee.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by the presence of any substance to a
degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate
piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other a substance of unknown or
questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other.
Direct Cross Connection: A cross connection formed when a water system is physically joined to
a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
Indirect Cross Connection: A cross connection through which an unknown substance can be
forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe potable water system.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTION (CCCDI): A plumber who holds an Illinois
plumbing license issued in accordance with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3(1) and who has
successfully completed both the written and performance examinations offered by the agency. These
examinations demonstrate an understanding of the principles of backflow and back siphonage and the
hazard presented to a potable water system; identifying locations which require installation of cross
connection control devices; identifying, locating, inspecting, testing, maintaining and repairing cross
connection control methods and devices in line, as located throughout each system which connects to
a community public water supply. These requirements are described in 35 Illinois administrative code
653.802(d)(1)(D) through (F).
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of public health.
DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR ASSEMBLY: An assembly designed to prevent contamination of the
potable water system due to backflow from the fire protection system containing nontoxic substances.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly which is effective against backflow caused by
back pressure and back siphonage, which is used to protect the potable system from pollutants that
would not constitute an actual health hazard, but might be objectionable to the water supply system.
The double check valve assembly is used to isolate nonhealth hazards.
DRAIN: Any pipe that carries wastewater or waterborne wastes in a building drainage system.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between
the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device, practice or substance in a water system or its operation
resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well being of consumers. The word "severe",
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 297/460
as used to qualify "health hazard", means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to
result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to carefully and critically examine all materials, fixtures, piping
and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system to maintain compliance with
requirements of the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for consumption or personal or culinary use.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system
by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of
water for all purposes, including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of private
water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about
any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all
piping, from the discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems.
Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building or buildings where
a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the
building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in
water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute, reduce or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water for consumption, culinary and domestic purposes that meets all current
IEPA standards.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise
contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, pollution or
system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is
not limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters.
B. Process waters.
C. Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in
sanitary quality.
D. Cooling waters.
E. Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation
systems.
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension.
G. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other
processes, or for firefighting purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 298/460
PROPERTY OWNER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, tenant, occupant, official custodian or person in
control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
PROPERTY OWNER'S SYSTEM: Any water system located upon a customer's premises. A building
water plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes, and structures through which water is obtained and
distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations,
treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used
or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which
serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which regularly serve at least twenty five (25)
persons at least sixty (60) days per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or
a "noncommunity water supply".
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves, together with an automatically operated
pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE
standard 1013 and USC manual for RPZ devices. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal
flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of
leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly
closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly
located test cocks.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE (RPZ): A reduced pressure principle backflow preventer.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main
through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location
of all connections to the public water supply and must include the location, type and most recent
inspection and testing date of all cross connection control devices and methods located within that
customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing
inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material,
not dangerous to health, may enter the public water supply system or a consumer's potable water
system.
USEPA: The United States environmental protection agency.
USFDA: The United States food and drug administration.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system
after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water
supply official custodian.
VACUUM: Any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
9-2A-2: COMPONENTS OF CITY WATER SYSTEM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 299/460
The components of the city water system shall include the public water supply system and the
property owner's water system.
A. Public Water Supply: The public water supply system shall consist of the water source facilities and
the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water system under the
control of the city water department up to the point where the property owner's water system
begins. This is generally at the meter.
B. Property Owner's Water Supply: The property owner's water system shall include all of the facilities
beyond the customer's side of the property line service connection (curb stop/shutoff) used to
convey water from the public water supply distribution system to the customer's points of use.
(Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
9-2A-3: CROSS CONNECTIONS RESTRICTED:
A. Connections between potable water systems and other systems, devices or equipment containing
water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and
where approved cross connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained
to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis.
B. There shall be no facility, arrangement, device or connection by which an unsafe substance may
enter a potable water supply.
C. All property owners shall prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:
1. All cross connections are eliminated or approved cross connection control devices are installed
by a CCCDI in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for control of backflow and
back siphonage.
2. All cross connection control devices shall be inspected at least annually by a person approved
by the agency as a cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of
mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and shall be at the property owner's expense. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
9-2A-4: SURVEY, INVESTIGATION AND RECORDS CONTROL PROGRAM:
This section establishes an active cross connection survey, investigation and records control program
which includes, without limitation:
A. 1. A cross connection control survey of the distribution system shall be conducted by the city water
department superintendent, or his designee, at least every two (2) years. The purpose of this
survey is to compile and update an inventory of devices and to determine if potential or actual
cross connections exist.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 300/460
2. The survey shall consist of a pencil and paper collection of information conducted by telephone,
mail or personal visit to the owner, tenant, occupant or manager of a specific property. The
survey shall be completed, mailed or delivered back to the city water department office within
seven (7) days of receipt.
B. All premises of property owners shall, upon reasonable notice and at reasonable times, be open to
the water department superintendent for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross
connections and testing, repair and maintenance of cross connection control devices within the
premises of the property owners.
C. All property owners shall arrange on site inspection by a licensed plumber of water use practices
on the premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections to the water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the private or public potable
water system. These surveys shall be at the property owner's expense. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
9-2A-5: APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
A. Required: An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a
property owner's water system where, in the judgment of an agency certified CCCDI, an actual or
potential hazard to the public water supply system may exist, including, without limitation:
1. Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an
additional source by the city water department, and the source is approved by the Illinois
environmental protection agency;
2. Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual or potential hazard to
the public water supply system including, without limitation, premises having sources or systems
containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no
longer under the city water department sanitary control;
3. Premises having internal plumbing connections that, in the city water department's judgment,
are too intricate to determine whether or not cross connections exist;
4. Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is
impossible or impractical to make a complete cross connection survey; and
5. Premises where cross connections have been previously established or reestablished.
B. Installation: Unless an agency certified CCCDI determines that no actual or potential hazard to the
public water supply system exists, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed in
accordance with the specifications of this article on each service line to a property owner's water
system serving, without limitation, facilities including:
1. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, and nursing homes;
2. Laboratories;
3. Piers, docks and waterfront facilities;
4. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or water pumping stations;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 301/460
5. Food or beverage processing and/or dispensing equipment;
6. Chemical plants;
7. Metal plating industries;
8. Petroleum processing or storage plants;
9. Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
10. Car washes; and
11. Microbreweries. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
9-2A-6: LEVEL OF PROTECTION:
Based on the degree of hazard to the water system, an appropriate level of protection shall be
required, including, without limitation:
A. An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public water supply
system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe health hazard.
B. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated
with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard.
C. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved double detector check valve assembly
backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health. (Ord. 1719,
3-1-1999)
9-2A-7: FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS:
A. Fire safety systems shall be equipped with a double detector check valve assembly or RPZ valve
located at the point of connection between the fire safety system and the water supply line to
protect the water supply against backflow and back siphonage.
B. A fixed proper air gap with a break tank or other storage vessel or a reduced pressure principle
backflow preventer shall be installed at the point of connection between the fire safety system and
the water supply service line to protect the water supply against backflow and back siphonage
when the fire safety system contains additives such as antifreeze, fire retardant or other chemicals.
The RPZ assembly may be located at the point of connection to the section of the system
containing such additives when the connection to the water supply is protected by a double
detector valve assembly. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
9-2A-8: APPROVED CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 302/460
A. Approved Devices Required:
1. Only approved cross connection control devices found to be in compliance with applicable
industry specifications shall meet the requirements of this article. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999; amd.
2013 Code)
2. In addition to the requirements contained in this section, only cross connection control devices
which meet the Illinois plumbing code for cross connection control devices shall be approved for
use.
B. Types Of Approved Devices: Approved cross connection control devices include:
1. A fixed proper air gap which shall be used whenever technically possible.
2. Atmospheric vacuum breakers which may be installed subject to the following conditions:
a. An atmospheric vacuum breaker shall not be installed where back pressure may occur;
b. An atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be installed at the highest point in the water line and
after the last control valve before the point of discharge and a minimum of six inches (6")
above the flood level rim of the receptacle;
c. An atmospheric vacuum breaker shall not be used for installations where the substance in the
container receiving water is lethal or toxic. Examples of acceptable installations include,
without limitation:
(1) Surface wash piping for a gravity filter;
(2) Solution tanks of gravimetric dry chemical feeders;
(3) Outlets with hose attachments; or
(4) Receptacles with a low level inlet where the substance contained is nontoxic such as food
or beverages.
3. Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers (RPZ) may be installed in accordance with the
specifications of this article, subject to the following conditions:
a. Installation:
(1) Units shall be accessible for maintenance and testing;
(2) Minimum clearances recommended by the manufacturer shall be used;
(3) Relief ports shall not be plugged. A drain of sufficient size to accommodate the RPZ water
discharge rate of flow shall be provided and shall remain free flowing under all conditions;
(4) A collection system with an air gap under the relief port drain shall be installed with ceiling
level units; and
(5) No reduction shall be made in the size of the relief port drain.
b. Bypasses: A second backflow preventer shall be installed parallel to the first if there is only
one service line and the water service cannot be interrupted. Bypass lines without approved
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 303/460
backflow preventers shall not be installed.
c. Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventers: Reduced pressure principle backflow
preventers shall be used for installations where a fixed proper air gap is not possible,
including, without limitation:
(1) The water line used to provide makeup water for chemical feeders in a water treatment
plant;
(2) Receptacles with a low level inlet where the contents are nontoxic such as food or
beverages; and
(3) Receptacles or vessels which can subject the water supply line to back pressure.
d. Water Service Lines: Water service lines which connect a community water supply to
industrial or commercial establishments shall include either a reduced pressure principle
backflow preventer or a fixed proper air gap with repumping if those establishments constitute
a hazard to the water supply due to the nature of chemicals or other material handled within
the facility. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
C. Installation: Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35 Illinois
administrative code 653.802 and only as specified by the Research Foundation For Cross
Connection Control of the University Of Southern California or applicable industry specifications.
(Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Maintenance: Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed.
The manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on the premises. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
9-2A-9: INSTANTANEOUS WATER HEATERS AND WATER STORAGE HEATERS:
Instantaneous water heaters and water storage heaters using shell and tube design hot water boilerfire
heat exchangers shall be acceptable for heating water for domestic use under the following
conditions:
A. Chemical Additives:
1. Chemical additives to control corrosion and scale of the hot water boiler system shall not contain
toxic chemicals (e.g., chromate or nitrite based inhibitors).
2. Chemicals approved by the USEPA or USFDA which will not break down to harmful substances
in the system may be applied for scale and corrosion control in public water supplies (e.g., food
grade caustic soda, sodium silicate, sodium polyphosphate).
3. The addition of sodium sulfite as an oxygen scavenger in hot water boilers is acceptable when
approved double check valves in compliance with 35 Illinois administrative code 653.801(d) are
installed.
B. Double Check Valve Assembly:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 304/460
1. A double check valve assembly in compliance with 35 Illinois administrative code 653.801(d)
shall be installed in the cold water inlet piping of the heat exchanger;
2. The unit shall be tested annually and required service performed within fifteen (15) days; and
3. A maintenance log shall be maintained and a copy submitted to the city water department office
within seven (7) days of inspection, repair, testing or change to include information specified in
35 Illinois administrative code 653.802(e)(4). (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
9-2A-10: RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER, TENANT OR OCCUPANT:
A. The property owner, tenant or occupant of any premises where backflow prevention devices
required by this article are installed shall have all devices inspected, tested, maintained and
repaired in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a
need or are specified in the manufacturer's instructions. All such inspections, maintenance, repairs
and replacement costs shall be the sole expense of the property owner.
1. Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least
annually thereafter.
2. Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at the time of installation and at
least annually thereafter, and any required services shall be performed within fifteen (15) days.
3. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be tested upon installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer. Any required service
shall be performed within five (5) days.
B. Testing shall be performed by a CCCDI certified by the agency as competent to service the device.
Proof of the CCCDI's certification shall be in writing and filed with the city water department prior to
testing.
C. Each device shall have a legible tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual
inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
D. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
1. The date of each test or visual inspection;
2. The name and approval number of the person performing the test or visual inspection;
3. The repairs of servicing required;
4. The repairs and date completed;
5. The service performed and date completed; and
6. The test results.
E. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or otherwise made
ineffective without the specific authorization of the city water department superintendent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 305/460
F. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump
shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device designed to shut off the booster pump when
the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
The property owner, the tenant or the occupant shall maintain the low pressure cutoff device in
proper working order and shall certify to the superintendent of the city water department, or his
designee, at least once a year, that the device is operable. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
9-2A-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Notice Of Violation: The city water department shall notify the owner, tenant or occupant of a
building or premises where a violation of this article is determined to exist.
B. Correction Of Violation: The city water department shall set a reasonable time, based on the level
of hazard to health, for the owner, tenant or occupant to have the violation removed or corrected.
C. Failure To Correct; Discontinuance Of Water Service: Upon the failure of the property owner, tenant
or occupant to have the defect corrected by the end of the specified time period, the city water
department may order water service to the building or premises to be disconnected.
D. Reinstatement Of Water Service: Water service shall not be reinstated until all violations of this
article have been removed or corrected and fees for reinstatement of service have been paid to the
city water department. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
E. Penalty: The property owner, tenant or occupant of any property or premises who knowingly
permits a violation to remain in place or uncorrected after the expiration of time set by the city
water department office shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be required to
pay a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day a violation continues to exist shall be
considered a separate offense. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
9-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
In the context of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed by this
section:
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation For
Cross Connection Control of the University Of Southern California (USC), the American Water Works
Association, the American National Standards Institute, and the American Society Of Sanitation
Engineers (ASSE) and certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 306/460
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER: A backflow prevention device used as protection against cross
connection where the device is not subjected to back pressure due to pumps or any other conditions
which may cause back pressure. This device may never have a downstream shutoff valve or be
installed where it will be in continuous operation for more than twelve (12) hours.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the premises other than
the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters
may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system, water from a source such as
wells, lakes, or streams, process fluids, or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated
or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have
control.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flowing back of used, contaminated or polluted water due to a negative
gauge or subatmospheric pressure in that pipe.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water, foreign liquids, gases or other substances back into the distribution
pipes of the potable water system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction intended to prevent
backflow into a potable water system in accordance with the standards of the Illinois plumbing code
and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
CITY: City of Marion.
COMMISSIONER: The city of Marion commissioner of the water department for the city of Marion, or
his designee.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by the presence of any substance to a
degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate
piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other a substance of unknown or
questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other.
Direct Cross Connection: A cross connection formed when a water system is physically joined to
a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
Indirect Cross Connection: A cross connection through which an unknown substance can be
forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe potable water system.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTION (CCCDI): A plumber who holds an Illinois
plumbing license issued in accordance with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3(1) and who has
successfully completed both the written and performance examinations offered by the agency. These
examinations demonstrate an understanding of the principles of backflow and back siphonage and the
hazard presented to a potable water system; identifying locations which require installation of cross
connection control devices; identifying, locating, inspecting, testing, maintaining and repairing cross
connection control methods and devices in line, as located throughout each system which connects to
a community public water supply. These requirements are described in 35 Illinois administrative code
653.802(d)(1)(D) through (F).
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of public health.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 307/460
DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR ASSEMBLY: An assembly designed to prevent contamination of the
potable water system due to backflow from the fire protection system containing nontoxic substances.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly which is effective against backflow caused by
back pressure and back siphonage, which is used to protect the potable system from pollutants that
would not constitute an actual health hazard, but might be objectionable to the water supply system.
The double check valve assembly is used to isolate nonhealth hazards.
DRAIN: Any pipe that carries wastewater or waterborne wastes in a building drainage system.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between
the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device, practice or substance in a water system or its operation
resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well being of consumers. The word "severe",
as used to qualify "health hazard", means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to
result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to carefully and critically examine all materials, fixtures, piping
and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system to maintain compliance with
requirements of the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for consumption or personal or culinary use.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system
by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of
water for all purposes, including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of private
water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about
any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all
piping, from the discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems.
Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building or buildings where
a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the
building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in
water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute, reduce or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water for consumption, culinary and domestic purposes that meets all current
IEPA standards.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise
contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, pollution or
system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is
not limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters.
B. Process waters.
C. Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in
sanitary quality.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 308/460
D. Cooling waters.
E. Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation
systems.
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension.
G. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other
processes, or for firefighting purposes.
PROPERTY OWNER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, tenant, occupant, official custodian or
person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water
system.
PROPERTY OWNER'S SYSTEM: Any water system located upon a customer's premises. A building
water plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes, and structures through which water is obtained and
distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations,
treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used
or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which
serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which regularly serve at least twenty five (25)
persons at least sixty (60) days per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or
a "noncommunity water supply".
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves, together with an automatically operated
pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE
standard 1013 and USC manual for RPZ devices. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal
flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of
leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly
closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly
located test cocks.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE (RPZ): A reduced pressure principle backflow preventer.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main
through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location
of all connections to the public water supply and must include the location, type and most recent
inspection and testing date of all cross connection control devices and methods located within that
customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing
inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material,
not dangerous to health, may enter the public water supply system or a consumer's potable water
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 309/460
system.
USEPA: The United States environmental protection agency.
USFDA: The United States food and drug administration.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system
after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water
supply official custodian.
VACUUM: Any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord. 1719, 3-1-1999)
9-3-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Discharge Of Wastes: It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction
of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (1977 Code
§ 13.30.010)
B. Discharges To Natural Outlets: It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1977 Code
§ 13.30.020)
C. Private Systems: Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(1977 Code § 13.30.030)
D. Connection To Public Sewer System Required: The owners of all the houses, buildings or
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within
the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is now located or may in the
future be located any public sanitary or combined sewer of the city is hereby required, at their
expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after
date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within three hundred feet (300') of
the property line. (1977 Code § 13.30.040; amd. 2013 Code)
9-3-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
A. Private Systems Permitted: Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer is not available under the
provisions of subsection 9-3-2D of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. (1977 Code § 13.32.010)
B. Permit Requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 310/460
1. Permit Required: Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system
within the city limits, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city and the
Franklin and Williamson bi-county health agency.
2. Application For Permit: The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
Franklin and Williamson bi-county health agency which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city and the
Franklin and Williamson bi-county health agency. (1977 Code § 13.32.020)
C. Maintenance: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a
sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the city. (1977 Code § 13.32.040)
D. Availability Of Public Sewer; Connection Required:
1. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private sewage
disposal system, as provided in subsection 9-3-2D of this chapter, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and
similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(1977 Code § 13.32.030)
2. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to such sewer
within sixty (60) days, and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and
filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt. (1977 Code § 13.32.060)
E. Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Franklin and Williamson bi-county health
agency. (1977 Code § 13.32.050)
9-3-4: CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC FACILITIES; FEES:
A. Application For Connection; Fee: Any person, firm or corporation desiring to make a service
connection with any portion of the city sewer system which does not come under any special
ordinance or contract of the city shall first make application to the city sewer department collector
for a permit to connect to the sewer system. Such application shall state the address or location of
the connection for which a permit is requested. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each service
connection shall be paid at the time of application for each connection. (1977 Code § 13.28.010)
B. Construction Fee: In addition to the service connection fee, there shall be paid a construction fee of
five dollars ($5.00) per front foot for each lot for which application is made for a service connection
with any sewer line constructed by the city sewer department after January 1, 1959. (1977 Code
§ 13.28.020)
C. Connection Of Subdivision Or Mobile Home Park: Any applicant for connection into the city sewer
system by a sewer extension, from an existing trunk line, for a subdivision or mobile home park
shall pay a fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00), rather than the construction fee, for each such
sewer extension connection and a lot fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per lot for each lot to be served by
such sewer extension, which lot fee shall be in addition to the service connection fee. (1977 Code
§ 13.28.030; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 311/460
D. Deposit Of Fees: All of the fees set forth in this section, as they are collected, shall be deposited in
the sewer department fund. (1977 Code § 13.28.040; amd. 2013 Code)
E. Compliance With Provisions: The construction of any sewer line for which the city issues a permit
shall be performed in accordance with the application for such permit and the provisions of the
ordinances of the city and subject to the approval of the superintendent of the sewer department.
(1977 Code § 13.28.050)
9-3-5: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit To Connect:
1. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a
written permit from the city. (1977 Code § 13.36.010)
2. Classes Of Permits; Applications: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: a) for
residential and commercial service; and b) for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by the city (see appendix 2 of ordinance 905 on file in the office of the city clerk). The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the city.
3. Permit And Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a
residential or commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information
describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity. (1977 Code
§ 13.36.030)
4. Conditions Of Permit: A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall
only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including
sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to
adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. (1977 Code § 13.36.040)
B. Separate Building Sewers: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except, that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no
private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley,
courtyard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer. (1977 Code § 13.36.060)
C. Use Of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this
chapter. (1977 Code § 13.36.070)
D. Installation And Connection Requirements:
1. The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to
be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 312/460
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials
and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society Of Testing
Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation "Manual Of Practice No. 9" and "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" shall apply. (1977 Code
§ 13.36.080)
2. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved in accordance with subsection E1 of this section and discharged to the building sewer.
(1977 Code § 13.36.090)
3. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing codes, or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society Of Testing Materials,
"Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All such connections shall be made gastight
and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved
by the city before installation. (1977 Code § 13.36.110)
4. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(1977 Code § 13.36.130)
E. Prohibited Discharges:
1. All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in
compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the federal act and more stringent
state and local standards. (1977 Code § 13.36.020)
2. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain
which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (1977 Code
§ 13.36.100)
F. Inspections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the city. (1977 Code § 13.36.120; amd. 2013 Code)
G. Liability For Costs And Expenses: All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer. (1977 Code § 13.36.050)
9-3-6: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
9-3-6-1: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 313/460
A. Stormwater And Surface Waters:
1. No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (1977 Code § 13.40.010)
2. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by
the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of
the city, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. (1977 Code § 13.40.020)
B. Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. (1977
Code § 13.40.030)
C. Restricted Discharges:
1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the city, that such wastes can
harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances
prohibited are:
a. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (65°C).
b. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified or
not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing substances which
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0 and 65°C).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 314/460
c. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or
greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city.
d. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating
solutions, whether neutralized or not.
e. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic
substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any
such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the city for such materials.
f. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city as necessary after
treatment of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
g. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
h. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
i. Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligrams per liter as Hg at any time
except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
j. Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 milligrams per liter at any time except as permitted by the city
in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
k. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth,
lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined in
section 9-3-1 of this chapter.
l. Waters and wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction
by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such
degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (1977 Code § 13.40.040)
2. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection
C1 of this section, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in
chapter 1, EPA rules and regulations, subchapter D, water programs part 128 - pretreatment
standards, federal register volume 38, no. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any
amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 315/460
the sewage works processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
a. Reject the wastes;
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
d. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of subsection 9-3-6-5D of this chapter.
3. If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city, and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (1977 Code § 13.40.050)
9-3-6-2: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. (1977 Code § 13.40.060)
9-3-6-3: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZATION:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (1977 Code
§ 13.40.070)
9-3-6-4: CONTROL MANHOLE:
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole, and when required by the city, the owner
of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall
be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as
to be safe and accessible at all times. (1977 Code § 13.40.080)
9-3-6-5: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
A. The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide
laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with
this chapter and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 316/460
B. The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as
stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year, the industry must supply a complete analysis
of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state,
and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and
laboratory analyses to the city at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the city.
C. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the
city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service. (1977 Code § 13.40.090)
D. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
"Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analysis involved will
determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls,
whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. (1977 Code § 13.40.100)
9-3-6-6: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this section 9-3-6 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement
or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with article A of this chapter, by the industrial concern, provided such payments are in
accordance with federal and state guidelines for the user charge system and the industrial cost
recovery system. (1977 Code § 13.40.110)
9-3-7: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating
this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct. (1977 Code
§ 13.42.010)
9-3-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
A. Entry Powers; Limitation On Requested Information:
1. The superintendent, inspector and other duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois
environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency, bearing proper
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 317/460
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The city shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having
a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for
waste treatment. (1977 Code §§ 13.24.010, 13.46.010; amd. 2013 Code)
2. Duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair,
and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (1977 Code § 13.46.030;
amd. 2013 Code)
B. Safety Precautions: While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
subsection A1 of this section, duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois environmental
protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions as required in section 9-3-6-4 of this chapter. (1977 Code § 13.46.020;
amd. 2013 Code)
9-3-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except sections
9-3-4 and 9-3-7 and subsection 9-3-8A of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
B. Revocation Of Permit: The city may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any
violation of any provision of this chapter. (1977 Code § 13.48.010)
C. Fine: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided in subsection A of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (1977 Code § 13.48.020; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Liability For Violations: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter except section 9-
3-4 and subsection 9-3-8A of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such
violation. (1977 Code § 13.48.030)
ARTICLE A. RATES AND CHARGES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 318/460
9-3A-1: BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE; SURCHARGE:
The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of
the city shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt
service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
A. Basic User Charge: The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water
meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal concentrations:
1. a. A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of three
hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l).
b. A suspended solids (SS) content of three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l).
2. The basic user charge shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and
shall be computed as follows:
a. Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement fund for the year, for all works categories.
b. Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended solids
and BOD, if possible.
c. Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be treated.
d. Proportion the estimated costs to nonindustrial and industrial users by volume, suspended
solids and BOD.
e. Compute cost per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage strength.
f. Compute surcharge costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons per milligrams per liter in excess
of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
B. Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt
service of all outstanding bonds and service charges related to bonds by the number of users.
Through further divisions, the monthly and quarterly debt service charges can be computed.
C. Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal concentrations
for BOD (300 milligrams per liter) and SS (300 milligrams per liter). The surcharge will be based on
water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the
three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) concentration for BOD and SS respectively.
Subsection 9-3A-3B of this article specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
D. Review Of Charges: The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by
certified public accountants for the city in their annual audit report. The wastewater service charge
shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service or a change in operation and
maintenance costs including replacement costs. (1977 Code § 13.50.010)
9-3A-2: MEASUREMENT OF FLOW:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 319/460
A. The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall be the metered
water consumption read to the lowest even increments of one hundred (100) gallons.
B. If the person discharging wastes into the public sewer procures any part or all of his water from
sources other than the public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public
sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by
the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
C. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the city if these
volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records.
D. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and maintained by
the person. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service
is canceled, without the consent of the city. (1977 Code § 13.50.020)
9-3A-3: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
A. Basic User Rate And Debt Service Charge:
1. Minimum Monthly Charge And Basic User Rate:
a. There shall be and is hereby established a minimum charge and a basic user rate for service
supplied by the wastewater facility of the city.
b. A minimum monthly charge of five dollars forty cents ($5.40) ($14.90 including debt service)
for users of the sewer system shall be and is hereby established for water consumption and/or
metered sewers not to exceed two thousand (2,000) gallons monthly.
c. A basic user rate of three dollars five cents ($3.05) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water
consumption and/or metered sewers in excess of the established minimum shall be and is
hereby established for all sewer users.
2. Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge to each user of the wastewater facility of the city
shall be nine dollars fifty cents ($9.50) per month.
3. Nonmetered Residential Users: All nonmetered residential users of the wastewater facilities
shall pay the debt service charge, the minimum service charge and the basic user rate
established in this subsection. In the event use of the wastewater facilities is determined by the
city to be in excess of two thousand (2,000) gallons monthly, the city may require such flat rate
user to install metering devices on the water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of
service supplied.
4. Annual Increase: Sewer rates will be increased by three percent (3%) per fiscal year, excluding
debt service. (Ord. 2361, 6-13-2011)
B. Surcharge Rate: The rates of surcharges for BOD5 and SS shall be as follows: For each pound of
BOD5 and SS contributed by the user based on milligrams per liter during the billing period, a
surcharge will be levied for each pound of BOD5 above the three hundred milligrams per liter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 320/460
(300 mg/l) level. The following rates are hereby established with the pounds of surcharge to be
determined by subsection 9-3A-4B of this article:
BOD5 And SS (mg/l) Price Per Pound
First 500 lbs. $0.0500
Second 500 lbs. 0.0625
Next 250 lbs. 0.0750
Next 250 lbs. 0.0875
Next 250 lbs. 0.1000
Next 250 lbs. 0.1125
Next 250 lbs. 0.1250
All over 0.1375
(Ord. 2360, 6-13-2011)
9-3A-4: COMPUTATION OF RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following
formula:
CW = CD + CM + (Vu-X)CU + CS
Where:
CW
=
Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period
CD
=
Debt service charge (subsection 9-3A-3A2 of this article)
CM
=
Minimum charge for operation, maintenance, replacement and debt service
(subsection 9-3A-3A1 of this article)
Vu
=
Wastewater volume for the billing period
X =
Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (subsection 9-3A-
3A1 of this article)
CU
=
Basic user rate for operation, maintenance, replacement (subsection 9-3A-
3A1 of this article)
CS
=
Amount of surcharge (subsection 9-3A-3B of this article)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 321/460
(1977 Code § 13.50.070)
B. Surcharge: The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be established by
waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the
city and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges. (1977 Code § 13.50.060)
9-3A-5: FEES FOR TREATMENT OF BULK SEWAGE WASTES:
A. Minimum Fee: All sewage wastes transported to the wastewater treatment plant in bulk containers
such as trucks, tanks, or similar enclosed containers shall be assessed a minimum dumping fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) per container. Before dumping, the waste must have been inspected and/or
tested by the wastewater treatment superintendent and found acceptable for wastewater plant
treatment. Only those wastes generated in the city will be accepted at said wastewater treatment
plant. Any exception would have to be approved by the sewer commissioner, with the advice of the
wastewater treatment plant superintendent.
B. Surcharge:
1. For those wastes brought to the wastewater treatment plant in containers and having a BOD5 in
excess of three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l), a surcharge of fifteen cents ($0.15) per
pound of BOD5 shall be charged to the waste contributor. The tests will be run by employees of
the city wastewater treatment plant and these results used in assessing the charges. If the waste
contributor so desires, an independent testing laboratory, approved by both the city and the
waste contributor, may be used for testing the BOD5.
2. The method of calculating the surcharge costs shall be as follows:
(Measured BOD5 (mg/l)) - 300 mg/l x 8.33#/gal. x no. of gals. x $0.15/lb = $ dumping charge
However, if the dollar amount calculated is less than fifty dollars ($50.00), the fifty dollar ($50.00)
minimum fee will govern. (Ord. 1297, 9-27-1989)
9-3A-6: BILLS RENDERED; DUE DATE:
A. Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly or quarterly depending on the classification
of service for which bills are rendered. Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the city finance
director-treasurer on the first day of the month or quarter succeeding the period for which the
service is billed. (1977 Code § 13.56.010; amd. 2013 Code)
B. All sewer bills are due and payable ten (10) days after being sent out. A penalty of one percent
(1%) shall be added to all bills not paid by the fifteenth day after they have been rendered. (1977
Code § 13.56.010)
9-3A-7: LIABILITY FOR SERVICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 322/460
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by
the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are
jointly and severally liable therefor to the city. (1977 Code § 13.56.010)
9-3A-8: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
If the charges for such services are not paid within ten (10) days or fifteen (15) days as provided in
subsection 9-3A-6B of this article, after the rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall
be discontinued without further notice and shall not be reinstated until all claims are settled. (1977
Code § 13.56.020)
9-3A-9: LIEN PROVISIONS:
A. Lien Claim And Notice:
1. Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for sixty (60) days on a monthly bill or one
hundred five (105) days for quarterly service after it has been rendered, the city finance directortreasurer
shall file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement
shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a
notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the
period covered by the bill.
2. The failure of the city finance director-treasurer to record such lien or to mail such notice or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid
bills as mentioned in subsection B of this section. (1977 Code § 13.56.030; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment of
the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs,
as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the
name of the city.
C. Suit For Foreclosure: The city attorney is authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in
the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for
which the bill has remained unpaid forty five (45) days in the case of a monthly bill or one hundred
five (105) days in the case of a quarterly bill after it has been rendered. (1977 Code § 13.56.040)
9-3A-10: REVENUES:
A. All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be deposited in
the sewerage account of the sewerage fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the
city finance director-treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart
from all other funds of the city, and all of such sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be
delivered to the city finance director-treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the
same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the mayor and
council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 323/460
B. The city finance director-treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and
all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered
to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the "sewerage fund of the
city of Marion". The finance director-treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner provided by statute. (1977 Code § 13.56.050; amd. 2013 Code)
9-3A-11: ACCOUNTING:
A. System Of Accounts: The city finance director-treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts
and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be
made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall
cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts
and disbursements of the sewerage system.
B. Annual Audit Report: In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a
replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system do
in fact meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following: (1977 Code § 13.56.060; amd. 2013 Code)
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
3. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of nonmetered users.
6. A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users) and volume of waste
discharged. (1977 Code § 13.56.060)
9-3A-12: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois environmental protection agency, or its authorized representative, shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the city system of user
charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state grant. (1977 Code
§ 13.56.080; amd. 2013 Code)
9-3A-13: NOTICE OF PROVISIONS:
A copy of this article, properly certified by the city finance director-treasurer, shall be filed in the office
of the county recorder of deeds and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges
of the sewerage system of the city on their properties. (1977 Code § 13.56.070; amd. 2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 324/460
9-3A-14: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
(1977 Code § 13.56.090; amd. 2013 Code)
Title 10
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 1
GENERAL BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
REGULATIONS
10-1-1: GENERALLY ACCEPTED BUILDING PRACTICES APPLY:
All building construction, renovation and/or repair within the city shall be done in accordance with
generally accepted building practices within the southern Illinois area. (Ord. 1135, 11-10-1986)
10-1-2: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Enforcement And Penalties:
1. Permit Required:
a. No person nor business entity shall erect, build or construct or install any building, edifice or
structure for residential, commercial, recreational or storage use within the corporate limits of
the city unless a permit from the code enforcement officer for such erection, building,
construction or installation has been applied for, approved and issued. (Ord. 2068, 3-6-2006;
amd. 2013 Code)
b. No city water or sewer service shall be connected to new construction of any structure,
building or edifice unless a permit to erect, build, construct or install such structure, building or
edifice, as required by subsection A1a of this section has been issued and a copy thereof filed
with the office manager of the water department. (Ord. 2068, 3-6-2006)
c. (1) No commercial building permit authorizing the construction of any structure shall be issued
until: (Ord. 3230, 1-12-2015; amd. Ord. 3249, 4-13-2015)
(A) The chief of the fire department has certified the applicant for a building permit, has
complied with the provisions of subsection 9-2-4E of this code; and
(B) The superintendent of the water department has certified the applicant for a building
permit, has received a water connection permit and paid the fees required therefor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 325/460
(C) The superintendent of the water department has certified the applicant for a building
permit, has received a sewer connection permit and paid the fees required therefor.
(2) No business, individual or other entity shall connect to the city water system in any way
without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent of the water department. (Ord. 3230,
1-12-2015)
2. Enforcement And Penalties:
a. Citation: The code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation against any person or
business entity that is in violation of this subsection. Such citation shall be filed in the county
circuit court for processing.
b. Injunction: The code enforcement officer is authorized to petition the county circuit court for a
writ of injunction prohibiting any person or business entity from proceeding with construction,
erection or installation of any building, edifice or structure for residential, commercial,
recreational or storage use unless a permit for such activity has been applied for, approved
and issued. (Ord. 2068, 3-6-2006; amd. 2013 Code)
c. Penalties:
(1) For a violation of subsection A1a of this section, a person or business entity may be fined
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(2) For a second or subsequent violation of subsection A1a of this section, a person or
business entity may be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2068, 3-6-2006)
B. Permit Fees: Building permit fees are as follows:
1. Residential:
a. Single- and multi-family structures:
$0.15 per square foot
$100.00 minimum fee
b. Accessory buildings:
$0.15 per square foot
$15.00 minimum fee
2. Commercial and industrial progressive rates:
Up to 50,000 square feet $0.12 per square foot
50,001 to 200,000 square feet 0.10 per square foot
200,001 square feet and over 0.08 per square foot
3. Trailer-mobile homes: One hundred dollars ($100.00) flat fee. (Ord. 2024, 6-27-2005; amd. 2013
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 326/460
10-1-3: INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS AND PLANS; INSPECTION FEE:
A. Inspection Of Buildings And Plans: The code enforcement officer shall be allowed access to all
buildings being constructed, renovated or repaired at all reasonable times; and upon his request,
he shall be allowed to review any and all building plans and construction drawings or documents,
which said plans and construction documents shall be furnished for inspection by the owner and/or
by any and all contractors engaged in the construction, renovation or repair. (Ord. 1135, 11-10-
1986; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Inspection Fee:
1. Established: There shall be an inspection fee charged which shall be payable at the time of
issuance of the building permit and a fee for each reinspection after the first inspection. Motels
and hotels shall be considered as multi-family complexes. All commercial and industrial
construction shall require an inspection fee also, payable at the time of issuance of the building
permit. The fee for inspection of a structure to be demolished shall also be paid where
applicable. All inspection fees shall be in such amounts as may be set by the city council by
motion or resolution.
2. Exemptions:
a. This subsection shall not apply to existing structures as of the effective date hereof.
b. This subsection shall not apply to the refurbishing, repair or remodeling of structures existing
at the effective date hereof.
c. This subsection shall not apply to new residential construction. "New residential construction"
means any original construction of a single-family home or a dwelling containing two (2) or
fewer apartments, condominiums, or townhouses. (Ord. 2343, 4-25-2011)
10-1-4: PERMITTEE RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND
FEDERAL REGULATIONS:
The issuance of a building permit by the city shall not be construed as an indication, assurance,
evidence or a guarantee by the city that the building, building plans, or any part thereof comply with
any applicable state or federal statute, rule or regulation. It shall be and is the sole responsibility of the
owner, builder and/or builders of any building being constructed, renovated or repaired to comply with
all applicable state and federal statutes, codes, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1135, 11-10-1986)
10-1-5: FENCE PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: No person or business entity, nor the agent or employee of any business entity,
shall erect or install a fence of any description within the corporate limits of the city unless a permit
from the code enforcement officer for such erection or installation has been applied for, approved
and issued.
B. Enforcement And Penalties:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 327/460
1. Citation: The code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation against any person or
business entity that is in violation of this section. Such citation shall be filed in the county circuit
court for processing.
2. Injunction: The code enforcement officer is authorized to petition the county circuit court for a
writ of injunction prohibiting any person or business entity from proceeding with the erection or
installation of any fence of any description unless a permit for such activity has been applied for,
approved and issued. (Ord. 2067, 3-6-2006; amd. 2013 Code)
3. Penalties:
a. For a violation of subsection A of this section, a person, a business entity or the agent or
employee of any business entity may be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
b. For a second or subsequent violation of section A of this section, a person, a business entity
or an agent or employee of a business entity may be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2067, 3-6-2006)
10-1-6: CERTAIN DEVELOPMENTS RESTRICTED NEAR RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
A. Mining: There shall not be allowed in the city, nor within the sphere of area that Marion may
regulate beyond its city limits, any development of a mine, whether underground or above ground,
within one mile of any area zoned residential within the city.
B. Landfills: There shall not be allowed in the city, nor within the sphere of area that Marion may
regulate beyond its city limits, any development of a landfill of any type, within one mile of any area
zoned residential within the city. (Ord. 2202, 5-27-2008)
10-1-7: BLOCKING EXITS PROHIBITED:
No person, firm or corporation owning, managing, leasing or occupying any church, theater, opera
house, public hall or other public building, within the corporate limits of the city, shall suffer to be
placed or permitted to remain in or across the lobby, aisle or passageway of the same, when the same
is occupied by the public, any chairs, stools, seats or other articles blocking or obstructing such lobby,
aisle or passageway. (1977 Code § 8.28.010)
10-1-8: CITY SIGN OFF AND APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENTS REQUIRED:
A. No owner of real estate and no developer, corporate or individual, of real estate shall undertake
development or site improvement of any tract of real estate including, but not limited to, subdivision
development, without first obtaining sign off by and approval of designated city representatives.
The site of improvement and subdivision development approval form shall be substantially as
attached to the ordinance codified herein.
B. Any person or other entity who undertakes site improvement or subdivision development without
having received satisfactory completion of the form mentioned in subsection A of this section shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 328/460
be denied connection to any city service. (Ord. 2325, 9-13-2010)
C. Each day a violation of this section occurs shall be a separate violation and subject the violator to a
fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2325, 9-13-2010; amd. 2013 Code)
10-1-9: PORTABLE BUILDINGS:
A. Definitions: As used herein:
PORTABLE BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any structure which meets any of the following criteria:
1. Is originally designed to be moved from place to place by any means whatsoever, whether on
wheels, skids or otherwise.
2. Any structure which is not originally designed to be permanently attached to the real property on
which it sets by means of a permanent foundation.
3. Any structure constructed on site so as not to allow all inspections required of site built
structures provided for or required by the building code of the city of Marion.
4. Any structure not having permanent water and sewer connections.
5. Any metal (50 percent or more) building or structure less than four hundred (400) square feet
shall be presumed to be a portable building subject to the right of the person seeking to construct
the same rebut said presumption by clear and convincing evidence of the permanency of said
structure.
6. Is of a temporary nature including, but not limited to, sheds, tents, inflatable structures.
7. Is not built or constructed in compliance with federal housing and urban development standards
or approved pursuant to the Illinois manufactured housing and mobile home safety act.
B. Prohibited Portable Buildings: No portable building or structure, that is used or intended to be used
for habitation shall be placed, located or assembled to be placed or located, on any property within
the city of Marion.
C. Permitted Portable Buildings: Portable building or structures may be allowed as an accessory use
to buildings or residences as set forth in the zoning ordinances of the city of Marion.
D. Applicability To Mobile Homes And Tents: This section shall not apply to mobile homes as defined
and regulated by the zoning ordinances of the city of Marion or by federal housing and urban
development or the Illinois manufactured housing and mobile home safety act or to tents for
special sales or events of established retail businesses provided such use is consistent with any
laws or city of Marion ordinances regulating such use.
E. Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building official as to the classification of a
structure as a "portable building or structure" as determined by the building inspector may appeal
to the mayor and city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 329/460
F. Penalties For Violation: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall
be fined no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 3104, 5-13-2013)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODE
10-2-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The international building code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is
adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, construction,
quality of materials, alteration, repair, demolition, equipment, use, occupancy and location of buildings
and structures as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of
the international building code, as well as any appendices referenced, are hereby referred to, adopted,
incorporated and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. At least one copy of the code is on file in the office of
the city clerk or her designee. (Ord. 2343, 4-25-2011)
10-2-2: EXEMPTIONS:
A. This chapter shall not apply to existing structures as of the effective date hereof.
B. This chapter shall not apply to the refurbishing, repair or remodeling of structures existing at the
effective date hereof.
C. This chapter shall not apply to new residential construction. "New residential construction" means
any original construction of a single-family home or a dwelling containing two (2) or fewer
apartments, condominiums, or townhouses. (Ord. 2343, 4-25-2011)
Chapter 3
PLUMBING CODE AND REGULATIONS
10-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and words shall have the meanings indicated in
this section. The definitions contained in this section shall take precedence over any other accepted
meanings, including those contained in any reference material referred to in this chapter.
PLUMBING: The practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and
alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following:
sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and public or private water supply
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 330/460
systems within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also, the practice and materials
used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste, or sewage,
and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or
other acceptable terminal.
PLUMBING FIXTURES: Installed receptacles, devices or appliances which are supplied with water or
which receive or discharge liquids or liquidborne wastes with or without discharge into the drainage
system with which they may be directly or indirectly connected.
PLUMBING SYSTEM: Includes the water supply and distribution pipes; plumbing fixtures and traps;
soil, waste and vent pipes; building drains, including their respective connections, devices and
appurtenances within the property lines of the premises; and water treating or water using equipment.
(1977 Code § 15.32.010)
10-3-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT BY STATE:
The administrative authority designated to administer and enforce this chapter shall be the Illinois
state plumbing inspector. (1977 Code § 15.32.030; amd. 2013 Code)
10-3-3: PLUMBING CODE:
The Illinois state plumbing code as authorized by 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes is adopted by
reference and is made a part of this code as though set out in full. At least one copy of said code is on
file in the office of the city clerk for public use and inspection. Any person who shall violate any
provision of the code adopted herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code § 15.36.010; amd. 2013 Code)
10-3-4: PLUMBING CONTRACTORS:
A. State License Required: No person shall hereafter engage in the business of plumbing in the city,
either as a plumbing contractor, employing plumber, or journeyman plumber, who does not comply
with the license requirement of the plumber license law of the state of Illinois. (1977 Code
§ 15.32.020)
B. Registration Requirements:
1. Registration Required: Every plumbing contractor, employing plumber, and self-employed
journeyman plumber engaged in the business of plumbing in the city shall cause his name, his
residence, and his place of business to be registered with the city clerk.
2. Issuance Of Certificate; Fee: The city clerk shall issue a certificate showing registration under
this section in compliance with this chapter upon payment of a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00),
which fee shall be an annual fee to be deposited in the general fund.
3. Revocation Of Certificate:
a. Any firm which employs plumbers in their business who are not licensed under the plumbing
license law of the state of Illinois shall have their certificate of registration revoked, and no new
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 331/460
certificate of registration shall be issued to such firm for a period of one year after such
revocation.
b. Such firm shall be entitled to a hearing before the plumbing inspector prior to such revocation,
and to a notice of such hearing given by registered mail at least ten (10) days prior to such
hearing; such notice to be addressed to the business address last registered by said firm.
(1977 Code § 15.32.060; amd. 2013 Code)
10-3-5: INSPECTIONS:
The Illinois state plumbing inspector shall conduct all required plumbing inspections. (1977 Code
§ 15.32.090; amd. 2013 Code)
10-3-6: PENALTIES:
Any person who engages in the business of plumbing as a journeyman plumber, plumbing contractor
or self-employing plumber in the city without having obtained a license from the state of Illinois as
provided in this chapter and/or any such person who shall not be registered as provided in this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each time that he
so engages in the business of plumbing in violation of this chapter. (1977 Code § 15.32.100; amd.
2013 Code)
Chapter 4
ELECTRICAL CODE AND REGULATIONS
10-4-1: ELECTRICAL CODE:
A. Adoption Of Code: The installation or alteration of any and all electric wiring, connections and
apparatus, under the provisions of this title, shall be under the supervision of the code enforcement
officer and in accordance and in conformity with the rules and regulations set down in the rules and
requirements of the National Board Of Fire Underwriters for electric wiring and apparatus as
recommended by the National Fire Protection Association and known as the national electrical
code of 2008, pamphlet no. 70, and same, by reference thereto, is adopted and approved as the
specifications governing electrical conductors under this title; provided, that the fire chief and chief
of police, respectively, shall have control of all matters pertaining to the installation and operation
of the fire and police alarm system. At least one copy of the code herein adopted is on file in the
office of the city clerk for public use and inspection. (1977 Code § 15.20.010; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Application To Heavy Industries: Any industry classified as "heavy industry" in the zoning ordinance
which employs a graduate electrical engineer and which is equipped with fire extinguishing
facilities that are operated by trained fire personnel shall comply, at its option, with one of the
following alternatives:
1. Shall comply fully with the electrical code as incorporated herein; (1977 Code § 15.20.020)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 332/460
2. At the start of construction of any permanent structure containing electrical wiring or equipment
which is separated from the property of others by protective industrial steel fencing and which is
more than fifty feet (50') from the property line of any other adjoining property which may be built
upon by other individuals (for the purposes of this section the phrase "property which may be
built upon" does not include any highway or railroad right of way, and provided further, in the
case of 2 adjoining properties occupied by like manufacturing, processing or storage structures,
other than dikes, curbs, fences or retaining walls on each of the respective properties, shall be
deemed to meet the clearance qualifications of the foregoing exception) may apply for an
"exempt" permit, and the company shall submit a statement of such facts and the location within
the city, whereupon the city shall ascertain such facts, and if correct, grant the applicant
permission to proceed without complying with the types of construction and wiring designated by
the electrical code. Upon completion of the structure, the applicant shall file a statement by a
properly registered professional engineer, who may be one of the applicant's own employees,
stating that he is familiar with the electrical work of said structure, and that same has been
properly and soundly constructed. Such statement shall be accompanied with the fees provided
by this title based on the estimated cost of construction. No such permit, statement or fee will be
required for maintenance, repair, remodeling or minor additions to existing structures; provided,
that the clearance, fencing and fire department requirements of the foregoing exception clauses
are met. (1977 Code § 15.20.020; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Penalty: Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (2013 Code)
10-4-2: USE OF CONTRACTOR NAME OR LICENSE BY OTHERS PROHIBITED:
No licensed electrician shall allow his name or license to be used by any other persons for the
purpose of doing work under his license. (1977 Code § 15.24.030; amd. 2013 Code)
10-4-3: RIGHT OF ENTRY; ASSISTANCE REQUIRED:
A. The code enforcement officer and fire chief shall have the right, during reasonable hours, and in
such manner as not to unreasonably interfere with the safe and proper operation of any apparatus,
equipment or construction inspected or tested, to enter any premises in the city in the discharge of
their official duties, and for such purpose, they shall be given prompt access to all such premises
on application to the owner, agent or person in charge or control of the same.
B. Any person or persons owning, controlling or using any electrical apparatus, construction or
equipment subject to inspection under the provisions of this chapter shall provide, at his or their
expense, such arrangements and facilities as may be necessary for the purpose of the inspection
in this chapter provided, and lend all reasonable assistance required by the code enforcement
officer or fire chief upon inspection. (1977 Code § 15.12.040; amd. 2013 Code)
10-4-4: CORRECTION OF DEFECTIVE CONDITIONS:
Whenever, upon any inspection by the fire chief or code enforcement officer, any wiring or other
electrical construction or connections are found to be defective or dangerous to life or property, the
owner or person in control of the premises or his agent shall immediately remedy such defective
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 333/460
conditions upon notice and in such manner as shall be directed by the fire chief or code enforcement
officer. (1977 Code § 15.12.050; amd. 2013 Code)
10-4-5: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any
person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for damage to any person
injured or for any defect therein, nor shall the city be held to assume any such liability. (1977 Code
§ 15.12.060; amd. 2013 Code)
10-4-6: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; VIOLATIONS:
All licensed electricians shall observe and comply with all ordinances, regulations and specifications of
the city regarding such work and all orders and directions of the code enforcement officer and the fire
chief and the city relative thereto. Each day's continuance of work in violation of this chapter, or each
day's part of a day's failure to observe or comply with any order of the code enforcement officer or fire
chief relative to such work as provided in subsection 10-4-3A of this chapter shall be deemed a
separate offense. (1977 Code § 15.12.080; amd. 2013 Code)
10-4-7: SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The license of any licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall, for a violation of any of the
ordinances, rules and regulations of the city governing such work, be suspended by the code
enforcement officer or fire chief who reports such suspension to the mayor, who shall notify the
offending licensee and call him before the next city council meeting to show cause why his license
should not remain suspended. After the suspension of any license as aforesaid, no further work shall
be done by the licensee for the doing of electrical work until the violation of the ordinances, rules and
regulations aforesaid, for which said license was suspended, has been corrected, remedied and made
satisfactory, as the circumstances of the case may require. (1977 Code § 15.12.090; amd. 2013
Code)
Chapter 5
FIRE CODES AND REGULATIONS
10-5-1: FIRE CODES ADOPTED:
The 2006 edition of the international fire code and the 2000 edition of NFPA 101, life safety code are
hereby adopted by reference. One copy of each shall be on file in the office of the fire chief. Any
person who violates any of the provisions of the codes adopted herein shall be subject to a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). If any violation of a
provision or provisions of this section shall continue, each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense. (2013 Code)
10-5-2: SMOKE AND CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 334/460
The smoke detector act as referenced by 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 60 and the carbon monoxide
act as referenced by 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 135 are hereby adopted, in their entirety, by
reference. Any person who violates any of the provisions of the acts herein adopted shall be subject to
penalties affixed to such acts. (2013 Code)
10-5-3: FIRE HYDRANT REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The fire hydrant act as referenced by 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 20/0.01 et seq., is hereby
adopted, in its entirety, by reference. (2013 Code)
10-5-4: BOARDS:
A. The board of police and fire commissioners as adopted in title 2, chapter 3 of this code.
B. The foreign fire insurance tax board as adopted in title 2, chapter 4 of this code pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-1 et seq. (2013 Code)
10-5-5: FIRE PREVENTION:
A. The fire investigation act as referenced by 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/0.01 et seq., is hereby
adopted in its entirety, by reference.
B. Assessment of fees and penalties for repeated false fire alarms as adopted by title 6, chapter 3 of
this code.
C. Regulation of underground storage tanks as adopted by title 5, chapter 7 of this code.
D. Controlled burning as adopted by title 5, chapter 6 of this code.
E. Guidelines for special amusement buildings as adopted by chapter 13 of this title.
F. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to penalties affixed to
such provisions. (2013 Code)
10-5-6: HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS:
A. Cleanup of clandestine drug labs as adopted by title 5, chapter 10 of this code.
B. Demolition of unsafe buildings and structures as adopted by chapter 9 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 335/460
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to penalties affixed to
such provisions. (2013 Code)
10-5-7: SPECIAL SERVICES:
A. Fees for certain fire department services as adopted by section 6-1B-3 of this code.
B. Fees for services rendered in the containment, removal and disposal of hazardous materials as
adopted by section 6-1B-4 of this code.
C. Fees for services rendered for specialized and technical rescue services as adopted by section 6-
1B-5 of this code. (2013 Code)
10-5-8: EMPLOYMENT:
A. Establishment of preemployment contracts for police officers and firefighters as adopted by section
6-1-3 of this code.
B. Residency requirement for continued employment as adopted by section 1-8-4 of this code. (2013
Code)
Chapter 6
HOUSING CODE FOR NONOWNER OCCUPIED
DWELLINGS
10-6-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS OF FACT:
It is hereby found and declared there exists in the city, premises used, designed, or intended for
human habitation which are, or may become in the near future, substandard with respect to structure,
equipment or maintenance, and further that such conditions together with inadequate provisions for
light and air, insufficient protection against fire hazards, lack of proper heating, unsanitary conditions
and overcrowding constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort
of its citizens. It is further found and declared that the existence of such conditions, factors, or
characteristics has created and will continue to create, slum and blighted areas requiring large scale
clearance, and further that in the absence of corrective measures, such areas will experience a
deterioration of social values, a curtailment of investment and tax revenues, and an impairment of
economic values. It is further found and declared that the establishment and maintenance of minimum
housing standards are essential to the prevention of blight and decay and the safeguarding of public
health, safety, morals and welfare. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-2: PURPOSE OF HOUSING CODE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 336/460
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and the general welfare of
the citizens of the city of Marion. These general objectives include, among others, the following
specific purposes:
A. To protect the character and stability of residential areas within the city of Marion.
B. To provide minimum standards for heating and sanitary equipment necessary to the health and
safety of occupants of buildings.
C. To provide facilities for light and ventilation, necessary to health and safety of occupants of
buildings.
D. To prevent additions or alterations to existing dwellings that would be injurious to the life, health,
safety or general welfare of the occupants of such dwellings or neighboring properties.
E. To provide minimum standards for the maintenance of existing residential buildings to prohibit
unsuitable residential housing.
F. To preserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the city.
G. To fix responsibility and duties of owners, operators, agents, and occupants of dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming houses, multiple dwellings, and rooming units unfit for human habitation.
H. To fix penalties for the violations declared to be remedial and essential to the public interest.
It is the intent of this chapter that each provision of this chapter shall be liberally constructed to
effectuate the purposes as stated above.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the city of Marion
or its officers or agents relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to
be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary or the abatement of any nuisance. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012,
eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-3: APPLICABILITY TO ALL DWELLINGS:
Each building or premises, or any part thereof, used, designed, or intended to be used for any
nonowner occupied dwelling purpose, except temporary housing, shall, subject to the provisions of
subsections 10-6-11C and D of this chapter, comply with the provisions of this chapter, irrespective of
when such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired; and irrespective of any permit or
license which shall have been issued for that construction or repair of the building, or for the
installation or repair of equipment or of the facilities prior to the effective date of this chapter. This
chapter establishes minimum standards (except as provided in section 10-6-4 of this chapter) required
to be met at all times for the use of dwellings, building facilities, and equipment. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-
2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 337/460
10-6-4: CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning,
building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, or health ordinance, or regulation of the city regulating
existing buildings, the provision which established the most restrictive standard shall prevail, except
that the provisions of this chapter shall, with regard to nonowner occupied dwellings, supersede the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-5: CONFLICTS OF PERMITS AND LICENSES:
All departments and officials of the city having the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses in
regard to the construction, installation, or repair of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming
units, multiple dwellings, equipment, or facilities, shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and no
such permit or license shall be issued, if such would be in conflict with this chapter. Any permit not
authorized to be issued shall be subject to revocation. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-6: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A detached structure which is not used and not intended to be used for
living or sleeping by human occupants and which is located on the same premises as a principal
structure and the use of such accessory structure is incidental to the principal structure.
APPROVED: Approved by the building and inspection department of the city of Marion, Illinois.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building partly underground by having more than half its clear floor to
ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BATHROOM: Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers, or both, and which may also
include toilets, lavatories, or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BUILDING: A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof to form a structure
affording shelter for persons, animals or property. The word "building" shall be construed, when used
herein as though followed by the words "or parts thereof" unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
DWELLING: Any building which is wholly or partly used, designed, or intended to be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants; provided that "temporary housing" as hereinafter defined shall not be
regarded as a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single habitable
unit with facilities which are used, designed, or intended to be used for living, sleeping, working, and
eating.
EGRESS: Arrangements and openings to assure a safe means of exit from buildings.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS: Open spaces on the premises and vacant open space on adjacent
premises.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 338/460
harborages; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods
approved by the proper authorities.
FLOOR AREA: The total horizontal area of habitable space.
GARBAGE: Anything that may decompose and become offensive or dangerous to health, including,
but not limited to, waste products resulting from the handling, storage, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
GRADE (GROUND LEVEL): The average of the finished ground level. In case walls are parallel to
and within five feet (5') of a sidewalk, the said finished ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace
rooms, pantries, and utility rooms of less than fifty (50) square feet, foyers, or communicating
corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, and workshops, hobby and recreation areas below
ground level or in attics.
HOT WATER: Water heated to a temperature of not less than one hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(100°F) at the outlet.
HOTEL AND MOTEL: See definition of Rooming House.
INFESTATION: The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
multiple dwelling, rooming unit, or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin and other pests.
KITCHEN: Any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or any area of a room within
three feet (3') of such equipment: sink or other device for dishwashing, stove or other device for
cooking, refrigerator or other device for cold storage of food, cabinets or shelves for storage or
cooking equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food preparation.
LEAD BEARING SUBSTANCE: Any paint, plaster, or other material or substance containing more
than six-tenths of one percent (0.6%) by weight (calculated as lead metal) in the total nonvolatile
content of liquid paints, or in the dried film of paint previously applied.
LET: Any lease, agreement or arrangement permitting occupancy or use; and also any contract for
deed, or agreement to purchase, or unrecorded deed permitting occupancy or use of a dwelling unit
which is not actually receiving the general homestead exemption from taxation under 35 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 200/15-175 during said occupancy or use.
MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS: Whenever the words "dwelling", "dwelling units", "rooming units",
"premises", "structure" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed
by the words "or any part thereof". Words used in the singular include the plural, and in the plural the
singular, the masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
MOBILE HOMES: A factory assembled, movable dwelling designed and constructed to be towed on
its chassis, comprised of frame wheels, to be used without a permanent foundation, and
distinguishable from other types of dwellings in that the standards to which it is built include provisions
for its mobility on that chassis as a vehicle. Removal of the tongue, wheels, or hitch, or placement of
the structure upon a permanent foundation shall not be considered in determining whether or not a
structure is a mobile home.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: Any dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit and/or rooming unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 339/460
OCCUPANT: Any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of a
dwelling unit or rooming units.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a multiple dwelling, hotel, motel or
rooming house, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy.
ORDINARY WINTER CONDITIONS: A temperature fifteen degrees Fahrenheit (15°F) (-9.4°C) above
the lowest recorded temperature in the city for the prior ten (10) year period.
OWNER: Any person or entity who shall have a legal, equitable or beneficial interest in the subject
real estate, or any improvements thereto; or a reversionary leasehold interest in the subject real
estate, or any improvements thereto; or a capacity to manage the subject real estate or any
improvements thereto pursuant to an order of court, power, or agreement.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
PLUMBING: All of the following facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water
pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, showers, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other
similar equipment and fixtures, and the installation thereof, together with all connections to water,
sewer or gas lines.
POTABLE WATER: Water duly approved as satisfactory and safe for drinking by the Illinois
environmental protection agency.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any buildings or structures thereon.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewerage system operated by the city of Marion, Illinois, and available for public
use.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling or part of a dwelling containing one or more rooming units in which
space is rented by the owner or operator to three (3) or more persons who are not the husband or
wife, father or mother, son or daughter, grandparent or grandchild, brother or sister, uncle or aunt,
nephew or niece or cousin of the first degree, of the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms intended to be used for living or sleeping but not for
cooking purposes.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage.
SEWAGE: Waste from a flush toilet, bath, sink, lavatory, dishwashing or laundry machine, or the water
carried waste from any other fixture or equipment or machine.
STRUCTURE: A combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable, forming construction,
including buildings. The word structure shall be construed as though followed by the words "or part or
parts thereof".
SUPPLIED FACILITIES: Facilities paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of the owner
or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING: Any tent, recreational vehicle as defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes,
or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or, to any utility system for more than fifteen (15)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 340/460
consecutive days or thirty (30) days during any calendar year.
VENTILATION: Supply and removal of air to and from any space by natural or mechanical means.
VERMIN HARBORAGE: Any place where rats, mice, raccoon, opossum, groundhog, stray cats or
other animals that are pests can live, nest or find shelter.
VERMINPROOFING: A form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of vermin to or
from a given space or building, or gaining access to food, water, or vermin harborage. It consists of
the closing and keeping closed of every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and
interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, and other places that
may be reached and entered by vermin by climbing, burrowing or other methods, by the use of
materials impervious to vermin gnawing and other methods approved by the appropriate authority.
(Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 3133, 10-28-2013; Ord. 3265, 7-13-2015)
10-6-7: STANDARDS FOR EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit which
does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Free From Hazards: Exterior property areas shall be free from conditions which might create a
health, accident or fire hazard, or which might endanger the public welfare, including, but not
limited to, holes and excavations, sharp protrusions, barbed wire (unless 6 feet above the ground
atop a chainlink, solid, or other approved fence), sheer embankments, inoperative or abandoned
vehicles or machinery, unused household goods or appliances and other objects or materials.
Walks, steps, and driveways that contain holes or tripping hazards shall be filled, repaired, or
replaced as necessary. Open wells, cesspools, septic tanks or cisterns shall be kept securely
closed if in approved use. If they are not in approved use, they must be filled with natural soil. No
unlicensed, inoperable, junk, or nuisance motor vehicle nor other nuisance as defined within city
ordinances 1759 and 2182 shall be permitted on the premises.
B. Free From Rubbish And Garbage: Disposal of rubbish and other refuse shall be done in
accordance with all regulations of the city. The property shall be free of accumulating rubbish and
garbage.
C. Fences: All fences provided by the owner or agent on the premises and/or all fences erected by an
occupant shall be constructed of manufactured metal fencing material, wood, masonry or other
material. Such fences shall be maintained in good condition. Wood materials, other than decay
resistant wood, shall be protected against decay by use of paint or other preservative. Any paint or
other protective material must be maintained free of deterioration, in sound condition and good
repair. The permissible height and other characteristics of all fences shall conform to the
appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations of the city and state. Wherever any egress from
the dwelling opens into the fenced area, there shall be a means of egress from the premises to any
public way adjacent thereto.
D. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures present or provided by the owner, agent or tenant
occupant on the premises of a dwelling shall be structurally sound, and be maintained in good
repair and free from insects and rats, or such structures shall be removed from the premises. The
exterior of such structure shall be made weather resistant through the use of decay resistant
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 341/460
materials or the use of paint or other preservatives. Paint or other protective coverings must be
maintained free of deterioration, in sound condition and good repair.
E. Sewage: Sewage must be discharged into a public sewer system or if otherwise permitted by the
revised code of ordinances into an approved septic tank. Discharge of inadequately treated
sewage shall not be permitted upon the surface of the ground or into any natural or artificial
drainageway.
F. Noxious Weeds: Exterior property areas shall be kept free of all weeds which are detrimental to the
public health, including, but not limited to, ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac.
G. Insect And Vermin Harborage: Where insect or vermin breeding areas, harborage, or infestation
exist, the same shall be eliminated.
H. Storage Of Materials: In the event that occupancy usages would result in stacking or piling
materials, the materials shall be so arranged as to prohibit the creation of a vermin harborage
area. Such shall be accomplished by orderly stacking and elevating so that there will be at least a
twelve inch (12") opening between the material and the ground level. No stacking or piling of
material shall take place against the exterior walls of the structure.
I. Standing Water: Water shall not be permitted to accumulate or stand on the premises so as to
create any stagnant condition, mosquito breeding ground, offensive smell, unsightly condition,
unsafe or hazardous condition or other condition potentially harmful to the public health or safety.
J. Outdoor Spas/Hot Tubs/Swimming Pools: All outdoor spas, and hot tubs must be securely enclosed
in a solid, chainlink, or other approved fence not less than four feet (4') in height with a self-closing
and self-latching gate or locked gate. Fencing or barriers for swimming pools and wading pools
shall comply with the applicable building and residential codes adopted by the city. (Ord. 3076A,
12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-8: STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE OF DWELLINGS AND DWELLING
UNITS:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit which
does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Foundations, Floors, Walls, Ceilings And Roofs: Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall
be reasonably weathertight, and verminproof, shall afford privacy, and shall be kept in good repair.
The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points; floors shall be free of
hazard; every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards and timbers, and
any other condition which might admit vermin, rain or dampness to the interior portions of the
walls, or the interior spaces of the dwelling; all exterior surface materials shall be protected from
the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment, when required to
prevent deterioration. Any paint or other protective materials must be maintained free of
deterioration, in sound condition and good repair. Every interior wall shall be free of holes and
large cracks, loose plaster and other structural material. The roof shall be tight and shall have no
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 342/460
defects which admit rain. All openings for pipes, conduits and other utility services accessible to
vermin shall be closed solidly for the full thickness of the wall, floor, roof, etc., with an approved
verminproof material or fitted with a collar or shield, securely fastened to the wall or floor, of not
less than 24-gauge galvanized sheet metal or other approved materials, extending at least three
inches (3") beyond all sides of the opening.
B. Lead Bearing Substances: No person shall sell, use, or apply any substance in which the total
nonvolatile ingredients contain more than six-tenths of one percent (0.6%) of lead, by weight,
calculated as metallic lead in or upon any exposed interior surface of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or
temporary housing, nor in or upon any fixture or other object used, installed or located in or upon
such surface or intended to be so used, installed or located. Upon notice from the city of the
existence of any such substances herein prohibited, it shall be the responsibility for the owner to
remove or to securely and permanently cover such surfaces within fourteen (14) days after the
receipt of such notice, unless the building inspector shall, for good cause shown, grant in writing an
additional period of time to complete such removal or covering.
C. Windows, Exterior Doors And Basement Hatchways: Every window, exterior door, and basement
hatchway shall be reasonably watertight, and verminproof; and shall be kept in good working
condition and good repair. Every opening located at or within one and one-half feet (11/2') of
ground level which might provide an entry for vermin, shall be adequately covered with screening
or some other device so as to effectively prevent the entrance of vermin, but so as not to prevent
emergency egress where such egress is appropriate.
D. Stairs And Porches: Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance to any of
the foregoing shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause
to be placed thereon, and all of the aforesaid shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
Every inside and outside stair or step shall have uniform risers and uniform treads.
E. Handrails: Structurally sound handrails shall be provided on any steps containing five (5) risers or
more. If steps are not enclosed, handrails and balusters spaced no more than four inches (4")
apart shall be provided. Porches and balconies located more than three feet (3') higher than the
adjacent area shall have structurally sound protective handrails thirty inches (30") to thirty six
inches (36") high and, if unenclosed, balusters spaced no more than four inches (4") apart shall
also be provided.
F. Chimneys, Flues, And Vents: All chimneys, flues, and vents on every structure used for human
habitation shall be structurally sound, free from defects and capable of performing the function for
which the same are designed or used. Each shall have sufficient draft to develop the rated output
of the equipment. Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of flue gasses or shall be rendered functionally
unusable by interior fireplaces and all other heating facilities as provided within the fire code of the
city.
G. Rubbish And Garbage: The interior of every structure used for human habitation shall be
maintained free from rubbish and garbage that might become a health, accident or fire hazard.
(Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 343/460
10-6-9: STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit intended
for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Kitchen Equipment: A room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked,
such room or portion thereof having adequate circulation area and being equipped with the
following minimum equipment:
1. A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewerage
system in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state.
2. Cabinets or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking and cooking equipment and utensils and
of food that does not under ordinary summer conditions require refrigeration for safekeeping.
3. A counter or table for food preparation.
All of the foregoing equipment shall be of sufficient size and design so as to be adequate for the
permissible occupancy of the dwelling or dwelling unit and all shall have surfaces that are easily
cleaned and that will not impart any toxic or harmful effect to food.
4. A stove or similar device for cooking food and a refrigerator or similar device for the safe storage
of food at temperatures less than fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) but more than thirty two
degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) under ordinary maximum summer conditions must be provided by the
owner or occupant. All must be properly installed with all necessary connections for safe,
sanitary and efficient operation. No stove, refrigerator or similar devices aforesaid need be
installed, however, in any dwelling unit that is not occupied if sufficient space and adequate
connections are provided so that the same may be installed immediately by owner or occupant
upon any occupancy of such dwelling or dwelling unit.
B. Toilet Facilities: A room affording privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a
flush water closet and lavatory basin, both in good working condition and properly connected to a
water and sewage system in accordance with the applicable ordinances to the city and the statutes
of the state.
C. Bathing Facilities: A room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped
with a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewage
system in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the city and Illinois statutes. The room
containing the toilet facilities required by subsection B of this section and the room containing the
bathing facilities required by the provisions of this subsection may be one and the same room.
D. Water Supply: Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required under the
provisions of this chapter shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines.
E. Water Heating Facilities: Every dwelling unit shall have water heating facilities which are properly
installed and connected and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an
adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, tub or shower
at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 344/460
F. Garbage Storage Facilities: Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage storage containers.
Garbage shall be placed in containers with tightly fitted lids. Containers shall not be located in such
a manner to be a visually offensive, health threat, or nuisance due to the blowing of debris from
containers by the wind, odors from the container or for any other reason. Containers, except on the
day of pick up shall be situated within an enclosed building or shall be situated immediately
adjacent to a building; containers shall not be placed or situated adjacent to any street or alley or
within any yard, except as herein provided. In the event, a dumpster or other community container
is provided for the temporary storage of garbage prior to disposal such dumpster or community
container shall be enclosed within a building, or shall be enclosed by a solid, six foot (6') screening
device such as a fence or wall so as to be completely concealed on three (3) sides, with only one
side open for accessibility by a garbage collection crew.
G. Rubbish Storage: No rubbish shall be stored or placed upon any premises or within any dwelling
unit, except rubbish may be temporarily placed within containers with tightly fitted lids or inside an
accessory structure in a manner such that the rubbish creates no nuisance, fire hazard, vermin
harborage, or other danger.
H. Egress Requirements: Every dwelling unit shall have at least one unobstructed means of egress
that leads to a public street or alley either directly or through a court or yard. Every dwelling unit
located on the second or higher story shall have at least two (2) such exits. An emergency escape
ladder placed upon each second or higher story shall be considered an acceptable second means
of egress as long as it is UL Underwriters Laboratory listed and approved; the requirement to
provide an approved emergency escape ladder shall be the sole responsibility of the owner unless
the written lease of the owner with a tenant requires the tenant to obtain and place said approved
emergency escape ladder during the entire term of the lease; in the event it is the tenant's primary
responsibility to provide and place an emergency escape ladder, then said emergency escape
ladder shall be obtained and placed within forty eight (48) hours of the tenant entering into
possession of the dwelling unit. The following language within a lease shall be sufficient to place
primary responsibility upon the tenant to provide an emergency escape ladder:
Within 48 hours of the tenant assuming occupancy of the leased premises, tenant shall place,
and shall thereafter maintain during the lease term, an approved emergency escape ladder upon
each second or higher story floor of the leased premises.
Passage to a dwelling unit's exit(s) shall not lead through any other dwelling unit or through a
space that might reasonably be locked by anyone who is not a member of the household. As any
basement bedroom shall have a minimum of two (2) exits, if one exit is a window it shall be at least
5.7 square feet of clear opening and no more than forty four inches (44") above the floor.
I. Medication And Poison Storage Facilities: Each dwelling unit shall provide for the safe storage of
medications and household poisons. Each cabinet or storage facility used for medications or
household poisons shall have an approved child resistant locking device if any part of the storage
area of said cabinet or storage facility is less than four feet (4') in height above the floor. The
requirement to provide approved child resistant locking devices shall be the sole responsibility of
the owner unless the written lease of the owner with a tenant requires the tenant to obtain, install
and maintain said approved child resistant locking devices during the entire term of the lease; in
the event it is the tenant's primary responsibility to provide approved child resistant locking
devices, then said locking devices shall be installed within forty eight (48) hours of the tenant
entering into possession of the dwelling unit. The following language within a lease shall be
sufficient to place the primary responsibility upon the tenant to provide child resistant locking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 345/460
devices:
Within 48 hours of the tenant assuming occupancy of the leased premises, tenant shall install,
and shall thereafter maintain during the lease term, approved child resistant locking devices for
each cabinet or storage facility used for storage of medications or household poisons having any
storage area less than four feet in height above the floor.
J. Locks: No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling units unless all exterior
doors of the dwelling or dwelling unit are equipped with safe, functional locking devices, and are
further made secure as set forth in section 10-6-13 of this chapter.
K. Smoke Detectors: All dwellings and dwelling units, shall have an operable smoke detector in the
immediate area of the bedrooms. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with a properly installed
smoke alarm on each story of the dwelling unit and within fifteen feet (15') of each sleeping room
area, which detector shall comply with the applicable codes of the city and with the statutes of the
state of Illinois.
L. Carbon Monoxide Detectors: Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with a properly installed carbon
monoxide detector on each story of the dwelling unit and within fifteen feet (15') of each sleeping
room area, which detector shall comply with the applicable articles of the city and with the statutes
of the state of Illinois.
M. Plumbing: Every dwelling unit shall have properly installed sewer lines, water lines, plumbing
fixtures, vents, and drains all of which shall be maintained free from obstructions, leaks, or defects
so as to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards. All plumbing shall comply with the state
of Illinois plumbing code and the applicable ordinances of the city.
N. Stairway And Porches: Every stairway, inside or outside a dwelling, and every porch shall be kept
in a safe condition, free of deterioration, and in sound repair. Every open stairwell and every flight
of stairs and every porch shall comply with the applicable city ordinances. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-
2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-10: STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit intended
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Lighting: Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing outdoors or
artificial lighting capable of producing at least an average illumination of six (6) foot-candles over
the area of the room at a height of thirty inches (30") above the floor (3 foot-candles minimum
requirement in bathrooms), excepting that such rooms that are connected to another room or area
and such other room or area is used only seasonally (such as, but not limited to, porches) and
adequate daylight enters the said habitable room through the interconnection, are not required to
have such windows or skylights. The minimum total window or skylight area shall be measured
between stops and shall be, for every room where required, equal to at least eight percent (8%) of
the floor area of the room in which located. No window shall be deemed to be facing outdoors if
any light obstructing structures are located less than three feet (3') from such window and extend
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 346/460
to a level above that of the ceiling of the room in which such window is located, and the same shall
not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area.
Every public hall and every stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by
natural or electrical light at all times, so as to provide in all parts thereof at least ten (10) footcandles
of light at the tread or floor level. Every public hall and every stairway in structures
containing not more than two (2) dwelling units or not more than two (2) rooms used as rooming
units shall comply with the provisions of this subsection relating to multiple dwellings, or in the
alternative, shall be supplied with conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate
lighting system to be turned on when needed with full time lighting not being required.
B. Ventilation: Every habitable room, excepting those connected to another room or area that is used
only seasonally and adequate ventilation is provided through such interconnection and further
excepting those rooms ventilated by some other approved device, shall have at least one window
or skylight facing outdoors which can be easily opened, or provided mechanical exhaust of sixty
(60) cfm, exhausted to the atmosphere above the roofline or secured into a vented soffit area and
away from openable windows into which foul air might be blown. The total of openable window or
skylight area required shall be equal to at least four percent (4%) of the floor area of the room in
which it is located.
C. Bathroom Ventilation: Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as provided in subsection B of this section.
D. Electrical Service: The electrical service within each dwelling, dwelling unit, and accessory
structure shall comply with the applicable electrical, fire, residential, and other codes adopted by
the city, including, but not limited to, the following requirements:
Where there is usable electrical service available from power lines which are situated not more
than three hundred feet (300') from a dwelling, every dwelling unit situated in such dwelling and all
public and common areas of such dwelling shall be supplied with electrical service, outlets, and
fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition,
and shall be connected to a source of electrical power in a lawful manner and in accordance with
applicable codes. Under no circumstance shall temporary wiring for electrical service within a
dwelling unit or for any accessory structure be permitted. The minimum capacity of such service
and the number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
1. Every habitable room shall have electrical service and outlets and/or fixtures capable of
providing at least three (3) watts per square foot of total floor area. Outlets should be distributed
reasonably evenly around the room. Extension cords may not be used for more than their UL
rated capacity; no extension cord shall be used as a receptacle for another extension cord.
2. Every habitable room and every nonhabitable room used for food preparation shall have at least
one floor type or one wall type electrical convenience outlet for each sixty (60) square feet or
fraction thereof total floor area, and in no case less than two (2) such outlets.
3. Every bathroom, water closet compartment, kitchen or kitchenette, laundry room, furnace room
and public hall shall contain at least one ceiling type or one wall type electrical light fixture.
No dwelling shall have less than a one hundred (100) amp service. No dwelling or electric
service upon any dwelling premises shall utilize or have knob and tube wiring; upon removal of
knob and tube wiring the entire electric service, outlets, and fixtures shall comply with the
electrical code of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 347/460
E. Heating Facilities: Every dwelling shall have permanent heating facilities which are properly
installed, maintained in safe and good working condition with proper safety devices, and which are
capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments in every dwelling unit located therein, to a temperature of at least sixty eight
degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) at a distance of thirty six inches (36") above floor level under ordinary
winter conditions. Permanent heating facilities are not capable of being readily moved around the
dwelling and are generally affixed directly to the building. Examples of permanent heating facilities
include, but are not limited to, oil, gas, electric and coal furnaces or boilers; electrical heat pumps;
wood furnaces or stoves; electric baseboard heaters; active or passive solar devices; or devices
connected to a district heating system. Permanent heating facilities can be used singly or in
combinations to meet the performance standards contained herein. Any auxiliary heater shall be
UL approved and equipped with automatic shutoff. All auxiliary heaters must be used in
accordance with manufacturer's instructions. Auxiliary heaters are intended to supplement the
permanent heating facilities. Auxiliary heating devices include, but are not limited to, portable
electric space heaters and portable kerosene or oil heaters. The capacity of auxiliary heaters shall
not be counted in determining whether the performance standards for heating are met in a
dwelling.
F. Insect Protection: During that portion of each year between May 1 and October 1, both dates
inclusive, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit or rooming unit to outside space that is
used for ventilation and every window and other device with openings to outside space that is used
or capable of being used for ventilation shall have properly fitted screens having at least sixteen
(16) mesh so as to afford protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other flying insects. Screens
must be on premises and available for inspection from October 2 through April 30, both dates
inclusive. Also between May 1 and October 1 all hinged screen doors shall be equipped with selfclosing
devices. Provided however, that if a dwelling unit has fully functioning and operating central
air conditioning which services the entire dwelling unit then the screening requirements herein are
not applicable. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-11: STANDARDS FOR SPACE, USE AND LOCATION:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, intended
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Minimum Space In Dwelling Units: The minimum habitable room space of any dwelling unit shall be
not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area for the first occupant and not less
than an additional one hundred (100) square feet of floor area for every additional occupant.
B. Minimum Space In Sleeping Rooms: Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant
shall have a minimum floor area of at least seventy (70) square feet. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor
area for each occupant.
C. Access To Bathrooms And Sleeping Rooms: Any dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or
more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangement so as to provide access to a bathroom or
water closet compartment so as to permit persons using each of such sleeping rooms to have
access to a bathroom or water closet compartment without the necessity of passing through
another sleeping room and shall further have such room arrangement so as to provide access to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 348/460
each sleeping room so as to permit persons using such sleeping room to have access thereto
without the necessity of passing through another sleeping room or through any bathroom or water
closet compartment. Provided however that if a dwelling, constructed in full compliance with the
applicable codes on the date of its construction, because of its structural design is noncompliant
with the provisions of this subsection, such nonconformity may continue but shall not be expanded.
D. Height Requirements: At least one-half (1/2) the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of at least seven feet (7'). The floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling
height is less than five feet (5') shall not be considered as a part of the floor area in computing the
total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the minimum permissible occupancy
thereof. Provided however that if a dwelling, constructed in full compliance with the applicable
codes on the date of its construction, because of its structural design is noncompliant with the
provisions of this subsection, such nonconformity may continue but shall not be expanded.
E. Rooms Below Grade: Basements may be used as dwelling units if they meet the light, ventilation,
heating, egress and all other applicable portions of this chapter. No basement space shall be
deemed fit for or used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless the floor and walls thereof are
impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and dampness. (Ord. 3076A, 12-
10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-12: STANDARDS FOR ROOMING HOUSES:
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, no person shall operate a rooming house or
occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming house except in compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and unless such rooming house complies with the following requirements:
A. Bathing And Toilet Facilities: At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower,
in good working condition and properly connected to sewer and water system in accordance with
the applicable articles and ordinances of the city and the laws of the state shall be supplied for
each six (6) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the
operator's family wherever they share the use of said facilities; provided, however, that in the case
where rooms are rented only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half
(1/2) of the required number of water closets. Such bathing and toilet facilities shall be reasonably
accessible from a common hallway or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No such facilities
as aforesaid that are located in a basement shall be provisions of subsection 10-6-10E of this
chapter.
B. Bed Linen And Towels: Where bedding, bed linen or towels are supplied, the owner or operator
shall maintain the same in a clean and sanitary condition and shall furnish clean bed linen and
towels at least once each week and in any event prior to the renting of any room to any occupant.
C. Rooming Unit: Every room constituting or being a part of a rooming unit that is occupied for
sleeping purposes shall comply with the standards set forth in subsection B of this section, and
shall, in addition, contain not less than four (4) square feet of closet space per occupant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 349/460
D. Means Of Egress: Every rooming unit shall have immediate access to not less than two (2) safe,
unobstructed means of egress, with minimum headroom of six feet four inches (6'4") leading to
safe and open space at ground level.
E. Maintenance: Every rooming house shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and full
compliance with those standards set forth in section 10-6-8 of this chapter and each subsection
thereof of sections 10-6-1 through 10-6-16 of this chapter.
F. Hotels And Motels: Every provision of this chapter applicable to rooming houses shall apply equally
to hotels and motels, provided, that the provisions of subsection 10-6-10A, "Lighting", of this
chapter does not apply to hotels and motels if said hotels and motels meet the requirements of
subsection 10-6-10B, "Ventilation", of this chapter.
G. Mobile Homes: Every provision of this chapter applicable to rooming houses shall apply equally to
mobile homes used for rooming houses.
H. Hot Air Heating System Returns: Where hot air heating systems are used, no return air shall be
circulated directly from one unit or sleeping room to another. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-
2013)
10-6-13: STANDARDS FOR SECURITY:
A. Scope: All dwelling units within the city shall meet the minimum requirements as set forth herein
except structures which, although providing sleeping accommodations, are primarily used for:
1. Medical care or other treatment of individuals suffering from physical or mental illness, disease
or infirmity;
2. The care of infants, convalescents, or the elderly;
3. Penal or corrective purposes; and
4. Hotel or motel purposes and which provide temporary sleeping accommodations for hire used
by transients with or without meals.
B. Alternative Materials And Methods Of Construction: The provisions of this section are not intended
to prevent the use of any material or method of structural design or analysis not specifically
prescribed herein, provided any such alternate is substantiated by suitable evidence.
C. Approval Of Alternate Material Or Method: The building and inspection department may approve
any such alternate material or method provided the proposed design is satisfactory and the
material or method of work offered is, for the purposes intended, at least equivalent of that
prescribed in this section.
D. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 350/460
CYLINDER: The part of a lock set that has an entrance for the key which thereby activates the
locking mechanism.
CYLINDER GUARD: A hardened ring surrounding the exposed portion of the lock cylinder or other
device which is so fastened as to protect the cylinder from wrenching, prying, cutting or pulling at
attack tools.
DEAD BOLT LOCK: A locking device with a bolt that has no automatic spring action and which is
operated manually by a key cylinder on its exterior side and by a knob, thumb tum, or lever on its
interior side, and a bolt that is positively held fast when in the projected position (also known as
deadlock).
DORMITORY: A building, not open to transients, where lodging is provided for ten (10) or more
nonfamily persons, and no kitchen facilities other than one central kitchen facility, are provided any
dwelling unit occupied by persons other than management personnel.
FLUSH OR SURFACE BOLT: A deadlock normally used on inactive door(s) that is attached to the
top and bottom and/or side of the door and engages in the frame and/or base of the door.
HOOK OR EXPANDING BOLT: A dead bolt lock in which the bolt or bolts interlock with the strike
plate into which the bolt or bolts are projected, attached to the door, window or other access points
of a building or structure which is designed to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the
building or structure through the door, window, or other access point on which the locking device is
activated.
SINGLE CYLINDER LOCKING DEVICE: A bolt that is activated on its exterior side by a key and
on its interior side by a knob, thumb tum, lever or similar mechanism.
THROW: The outward movement of a bolt or spring bolt which is measured by the distance which
such a bolt travels, i.e., when the bolt or spring bolt is moved from the open position to the locked
position (extended), it is said to have been thrown.
E. Security Standards: Except as otherwise herein provided, exterior doors serving as the required
means of egress to the exterior of a multiple dwelling, dormitory, rooming house, and individual
dwelling units shall comply with the following provisions:
1. Doors to individual dwelling units shall meet the following security standards:
a. Single doors shall be secured with a single cylinder locking device. In addition, if requested in
writing by a tenant, each single door shall also be secured with a dead bolt lock having a
minimum throw of one inch (1") or a hook or an expanding bolt with a throw of three-fourths
inch (3/4") provided that the type of lock shall be at the election of the landlord with the cost of
the lock and installation thereof to be paid by the tenant and provided that upon installation of
such additional locking device the locking device shall become the property of the landlord
and shall thereafter remain installed and be maintained by the landlord so that it is functional.
All locking devices required herein shall have bolts that contain hardened material to repel
attempts at cutting through the bolt.
b. On pairs of doors, the active leaf shall be secured with the type lock required for single doors
in subsection E1a of this section. The inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush or surface
bolts protected by hardened material with a minimum throw of three-fourths inch (3/4") at the
head and foot of the door. Multiple point locks, cylinder activated from the active leaf and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 351/460
complying with subsection E1a of this section and the requirements herein, may be used in
lieu of flush bolts.
c. Exterior doors to individual dwelling units shall have rabbeted jambs which are reinforced at
the point where the required lock engages the jamb.
d. Firmly secured metal strike plates are required on the jambs of all doors and are to be located
at the point when the required lock engages the jamb.
e. Locking devices and parts of locking devices shall not be used if they bear any numbers or
letter which would reveal a combination from which the key deactivates the locking device.
2. All patio type of sliding doors opening onto patios or balconies which are accessible from the
outside shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Patio type or sliding doors shall not be used or installed as exterior doors for the main
entrance of any individual dwelling unit.
b. All single sliding patio doors shall have the movable section of the door sliding on the inside of
the fixed portion of the door, except as provided in subsection B of this section.
c. Dead bolt locks shall be provided on all single sliding patio doors. If the lock is operable from
the outside, it shall be activated by a key utilizing a cylinder of pin tumbler construction.
Mounting screws for the lock case shall be inaccessible from the outside. Lock bolts shall be
of hardened steel or have hardened steel inserts and shall be capable of withstanding a force
of three hundred (300) pounds applied in any direction. The lock bolt shall engage the strike
sufficiently to prevent its being disengaged by any possible movement of the door within the
space or clearances provided for installation and operation. The strike area shall be reinforced
to maintain effectiveness of bolt strength. In lieu of providing a dead bolt lock that meets the
requirements of this subsection, a single sliding patio door may utilize a removable physical
barrier (such as a rod or pipe of substantial construction) of suitable and functional length that
is manually placed within the tract of the sliding patio door to securely block the patio door
closed.
d. Double sliding patio doors must be locked at the meeting rail and meet the locking
requirements as specified in subsection E1b of this section.
e. Alternate methods for securing doors with movable sections of the door sliding on the outside
of the fixed portion of the door must be approved by the building official.
3. Any exterior door and any garage door or other inside door leading to the common areas of any
multiple dwelling, dormitory or rooming house or to a garage attached to any dwelling unit, which
has outside hinge pins shall be secured by a minimum of two (2) safety hinge studs or hinges
having nonremovable hinge pins, one hinge above and one below the center of any locking
device.
4. Parking facilities either under or within the confines of the perimeter walls of any dwelling unit,
multiple-family dwelling, dormitory, or rooming house which are equipped with any garage door
shall be so equipped that such doors are capable of being locked. Specific locking devices to be
employed shall be of one or more of the following types: a) throw bolt or flush bolt, b) dead bolt,
c) cylinder type lock, d) padlock and hasp, e) or an electronic power operated mechanism with
automatic locking capabilities. When a padlock type locking device is used, the slide bolt or hasp
and shackle to which the padlock is attached shall be constructed of hardened steel and shall be
installed so that it cannot be removed when the door is closed and the padlock is activated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 352/460
5. All exterior windows other than fixed windows or those designed not to be opened, less than
twelve feet (12') off ground level or any other accessible exterior level shall comply with the
following requirements:
a. Windows shall be so constructed that when the window is locked it cannot be lifted from the
frame.
b. All windows shall be equipped with a locking device which shall be capable of withstanding a
force of one hundred fifty (150) pounds applied in any direction, and all locks should fully
engage. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-14: PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Intent: It is the intent of this section to establish primary responsibilities in certain areas of
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Each owner or occupant shall have responsibility for
compliance with this chapter and be subject to enforcement, notwithstanding any agreement
assigning primary or other responsibility to the other or to a third person.
B. Primary Responsibilities Of Occupants: Every occupant above the age of eighteen (18) years shall
be primarily responsible as to that part of any building, structure or premises over which such
occupant shall have a right to possession or control, for the following:
1. To keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. To not permit rubbish, garbage or other materials to accumulate so as to create a vermin
harborage.
3. To dispose of rubbish, garbage and other material in the manner provided by city ordinances.
4. The extermination of insects and vermin, after twenty one (21) continuous days of occupancy
where: a) the dwelling contains only one dwelling unit, or only the occupant's dwelling unit of a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit is infested, and b) infestation has resulted from
some cause other than the failure of an owner to maintain the dwelling in a verminproof or
reasonably insectproof condition prior to the commencement of the occupancy.
5. To not do anything to cause intentional interruption or disconnection of any utility for which the
occupant is liable.
6. To maintain and replace required screens after the owner has fulfilled all his primary
responsibilities regarding the same as hereinafter set forth in subsection C of this section.
7. To remove any abandoned or inoperative vehicle or machinery owned by the occupant as
provided by city ordinance.
C. Primary Responsibilities Of Owners: Every owner shall be responsible as to that part of any
building, structure or premises over which such owner has the right to possession or control,
including, but not limited to, areas used by the public or used in common by occupants of two (2)
or more dwelling units, as hereinafter set forth (such responsibilities shall likewise apply to any
other part of a building, structure or premises where the content of any such responsibility so
implies) as follows:
1. To provide and install all required screens once each calendar year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 353/460
2. To keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
3. To not permit rubbish, garbage or other materials to accumulate so as to create a vermin
harborage.
4. To provide adequate and suitable containers for rubbish, garbage or other waste materials
where the premises in question contains three (3) or more dwelling units.
5. "Verminproofing" as defined in section 10-6-6 of this chapter.
6. The extermination of insects and vermin in all instances excepting those instances where the
occupant is primarily responsible therefor as hereinabove provided in subsection B of this
section.
7. To keep and maintain all supplied facilities in good and proper condition and operation.
8. To provide and maintain in working order a permanent heating system as specified in subsection
10-6-10E of this chapter. In structures in which the permanent heating system supplies heat to
two (2) or more dwelling units, or rooming units, the owner shall be responsible for supplying
heat in accordance with the standard in subsection 10-6-10E of this chapter. Where compliance
is not reasonably possible because of general shortage of fuel or because of some act of an
occupant, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply until such causes have been
corrected.
9. To not do anything to cause an intentional interruption or disconnection of any utility for which an
owner is liable.
10. To remove any abandoned or inoperative vehicle or machinery not owned by the current
occupants from the premises as provided by city ordinance.
11. To keep and maintain all accessory structures in good and proper condition. (Ord. 3076A, 12-
10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-15: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Officer Duties: The chief building inspector of the city and inspectors of the fire
department or authorized designees of each, are hereby authorized and directed to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. This broad responsibility encompasses, but is not limited to,
the following specific duties:
1. To inspect dwellings, accessory structures, and residential premises in accordance with this
chapter;
2. To take appropriate actions to correct violations of this chapter;
3. To review and issue applications for occupancy permits and temporary occupancy permits;
4. To maintain up to date records of all matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of
this chapter;
5. To periodically review the provisions of this chapter to determine whether revisions are needed,
and to make recommendations on these matters to the city council;
6. To provide information to the general public on matters related to this chapter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 354/460
7. To attend the applicable meetings of the city council, any court hearings concerning this chapter,
and to cooperate with the corporate authorities, including the city attorney's office;
8. To prepare an occupancy permit application form, inspection checklist, and certificate of
occupancy;
9. To make surveys in any area of the city to determine the general condition of structures used for
human habitation, the extent of any deterioration, lack of facilities and maintenance, unsafe and
unsanitary conditions, the extent of overcrowding and land use, and any other matters relating to
the provision and requirements of this chapter;
10. To perform such other duties as the corporate authorities may from time to time prescribe.
B. Inspections: In order to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public, inspectors of the
building and inspection department and fire department are hereby authorized to make exterior
and interior inspections of all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, hotels,
motels, multiple dwellings and premises, when the same shall appear necessary to determine the
condition thereof and the compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Immediate access to and entry to any such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit,
hotel, motel, multiple dwelling or premises, shall be afforded any such inspector in the case of an
emergency determined by the building and inspection department or fire department to exist. No
such access and entry shall be required, however, unless such inspector shall first identify himself
and request entry; and exhibit his badge or other visual identification to any person entitled to the
same who requests said identification. Every owner, owner's agent, an occupant of a rental
dwelling(s) shall provide access to the rental dwelling(s) as required by section 10-6-16 of this
chapter. If any owner or occupant of a dwelling unit fails or refuses to permit free access and entry
to the structure or premises under his control, or any part thereof, with respect to which an
inspection authorized by this chapter is sought to be made, the building and inspection department
or fire department may petition and obtain an administrative search warrant. Whenever inspections
of any rental dwelling units are made by the building and inspection department or fire department
and there are no violations, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the property owner or
owner's agent and shall be made available by the owner or the owner's agent to tenants and
prospective tenants. If upon subsequent inspections, violations of this chapter are found, the
certificate of occupancy shall be surrendered to the city, and if not surrendered it may be revoked.
C. Notice Of Violations: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in those instances where the
building and inspection department or fire department shall determine that there exists a violation
of this chapter, written notice of such violation shall be given the person alleged to have committed
the violation or to be responsible for the violation. In the case of rental dwellings, notice of violation
shall be given to the owner or the owner's agent and the occupant of the rental dwelling or unit.
Such written notice shall state the alleged violation and a legal description or local address of the
structure in violation. It shall state that such violation must be corrected within a reasonable time
period specified by the building and inspection department or fire department based on the nature
and severity of the violation. Such notice may be personally served on the person to whom
addressed or may be sent by first class, registered, or certified mail, to the last known address of
the addressee; such service by mail shall be deemed to have been served at the time of the
deposit in the mail thereof. Service shall also be made by posting a placard copy of such notice in
a conspicuous place in or about the building, structure or premises in question. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary, notice may be given in any other manner permitted by law in the service
of process in civil cases.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 355/460
D. Unfit Dwelling Units: In addition to any other rights and powers granted the building and inspection
department and fire department under the provisions of this chapter, the building and inspection
department or fire department may designate and find unfit for human habitation any dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, hotel, motel, rooming unit, multiple dwelling or premises and may so
placard the same, in the manner described in subsection C of this section upon determining that
one or more or all of the following conditions exist:
1. The building, structure or premises lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat or other
facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants or of the public;
2. The building, structure or premises is damaged, decayed, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin infested
in such a manner and to such extent as to create a serious hazard to the health and safety of the
occupants or of the public;
3. The building, structure or premises, because of the location thereof, the general conditions
existing, the state of the premises or number of occupants, is so unsanitary, unsafe,
overcrowded or otherwise detrimental to the health and safety that it creates a serious hazard to
the health and safety of the occupants or of the public.
E. Notice Of Intent To Vacate: Whenever the building and inspection department or fire department
determines that a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling, is unfit
for human habitation as provided in subsection D of this section, it shall include such findings
within the notice of violations provided for in subsection C of this section, and it shall also include a
statement of its intent to vacate and placard the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming
unit, or multiple dwelling, if compliance with the provisions of the notice of violation has not been
secured.
F. Order To Vacate: Whenever a notice of violation, as provided for under subsection C of this section,
has not been complied with the building and inspection department or fire department may order
the dwelling to be vacated. A copy of such notice to vacate shall be served on the owner, agent,
operator or the occupant, as provided in subsection C of this section.
G. Vacating An Unfit Dwelling: Any dwelling or dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple
dwelling designated as unfit for human habitation pursuant to subsection D of this section and
ordered vacated as provided in subsection F of this section, shall be vacated within such
reasonable time as the building and inspection department or fire department may specify in the
order. No such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or multiple dwelling shall again
be used for human habitation and the placard removed until written approval is secured from the
building and inspection department or fire department.
H. Removal Of Placard: No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling which has been designated as unfit for
human habitation.
I. Vacated Dwellings Made Secure: The owner, agent, or operator of any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling shall make such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling safe and secure in whatever manner the building and
inspection department or fire department shall deem necessary. Any vacant building open at a
door or window or other unenclosed opening shall be deemed dangerous to human life and a
nuisance within the meaning of this provision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 356/460
J. Power To Act In Emergencies: Notwithstanding the notice of violation provisions of this section, as
provided by subsection C of this section, whenever the building and inspection department or fire
department, at any time, shall determine that a violation of this chapter exists and that such
violation is of such a nature as to require immediate action to abate a hazard or immediate danger
to the health, safety, morals or welfare of the occupants of any building or structure or of the public,
the building and inspection department or fire department may issue an order citing the violation
and ordering the immediate abatement or removal or correction of such hazard or danger as the
building and inspection department or fire department appears necessary and proper. Such order
may include, but is not limited to, an order to vacate the building, structure or premises in question.
Any order issued under the provision of this subsection shall be and become effective immediately
upon the issuance thereof. The powers granted by this subsection shall be in addition to any and
all other rights and powers granted by law.
K. Transfer Of Interest In Certain Property: No person having any interest in any property that is
described in any notice of any violation of this chapter or any order issued under this chapter shall
sell, transfer, grant, convey, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of any such interest in said
property so long as any such violation continues to exist, unless such person having the right to
sell, transfer, grant, convey, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such interest in said property
shall first furnish to the intended purchasee, transferee, grantee, donee, mortgagee, lessee or
other intended recipient of such property interest a true and exact copy of such notice or order, and
concurrently therewith furnish the building and inspection department and fire department with the
names and addresses of all such parties.
L. Records: All requests to inspect and/or copy records or documents prepared, maintained and under
the control of the city shall be made in accordance with Illinois freedom of information act. (Ord.
3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-16: MANDATORY RENTAL DWELLING INSPECTION PROGRAM:
A. Inspection Required: Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall lease, let, or otherwise permit
occupancy of any rental dwelling within the city, unless the rental dwelling has been inspected by
the building and inspection department and/or fire department and an occupancy permit has been
issued for the property. Any person who leases to another any rental dwelling on or before the
effective date of this chapter may continue leasing said rental dwelling without an inspection and a
certificate of occupancy for a period of one year from the effective date of this chapter. In addition,
any owner who converts the usage of an owner occupied dwelling to a rental dwelling during the
five (5) year period subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may lease said rental dwelling
without an inspection and a certificate of occupancy for a period of one year from date of
conversion of the owner occupied dwelling to a rental dwelling.
B. Inspections Authorized:
1. The building and inspection department and fire department are hereby authorized to conduct
inspections of any and all rental dwellings, or units thereof, within the city to determine
compliance with this code, including this chapter.
2. The employees and agents of the building and inspection department and fire department are
hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey all rental dwellings within the city. All inspections
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 357/460
shall occur at reasonable hours except in emergency situations where the life, health, and/or
safety of any individual is threatened.
C. Frequency, Access For And Notice Of Inspection:
1. All rental dwellings shall be inspected by the employees or agents of the building and inspection
department and fire department at least once every three (3) years. Inspections may occur more
frequently provided there is:
a. Reasonable suspicion to believe that there exists within such rental dwelling conditions which
present a threat to the health, safety, welfare or general comfort of the resident(s) of such
rental dwelling; or
b. A complaint lodged by the resident(s) of the rental dwelling to be inspected; or
c. A request made by a prospective resident accompanied by the consent of the owner (or
owner's agent) of the rental dwelling to be inspected; or
d. A request made by the owner or owner's agent.
2. Every owner or owner's agent of any rental dwelling shall provide access to such rental dwelling,
or any unit thereof, to the employees or agents of the building and inspection department and
fire department for purposes of inspecting the rental dwelling or unit thereof for compliance with
all applicable standards and regulations set forth in this code, as amended. Either the owner, the
owner's agent, or the occupant shall be offered the opportunity to accompany the inspector
during the inspection.
3. Notice shall be given to the owner or the owner's agent and the occupant of the rental dwelling
or unit thereof at least five (5) days in advance of such inspection except in those situations
described in subsection C1a, C1b, and C1d of this section.
4. Notice of inspection shall be provided to both the owner or owner's agent and occupant and may
consist of a letter sent by first class mail, personal service, telephone call, e-mail upon an
owner's or occupant's request or, for occupants only, the posting of a door hanger upon the
doorknob of the rental dwelling or unit thereof. The form of notice shall be given at the city's sole
discretion provided the form used substantially achieves the purpose of this "notice"
requirement. Where a rental dwelling or unit thereof is occupied by more than one person, notice
to one occupant of each dwelling unit shall be deemed notice to all occupants of a dwelling unit.
5. Notice of inspection to which an owner or occupant is entitled may be waived by said owner or
occupant or agent thereof.
D. Identification Of Rental Dwelling And Designation Of Owner's Agent:
1. Any person owning, managing, or supervising any rental dwelling shall within ninety (90) days of
the effective date hereof or within thirty (30) days of assuming ownership, management or
supervision of any rental dwelling, whichever date is later, inform the building and inspection
department and fire department on a form approved by the city of such rental dwelling.
2. Every owner of any rental dwelling, or unit thereof, who does not reside on the premises of such
rental dwelling shall appoint and designate an individual to act as an agent in his behalf. Every
owner shall notify, in writing, the building and inspection department, the fire department, and
each occupant of the rental dwelling, of the name, address and telephone number of the agent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 358/460
Such written notice shall contain the signature of the agent accepting appointment and
designation as agent of the owner.
3. Any individual, who is appointed and designated as agent of the owner, shall reside within
Williamson County, Illinois, or within a county which adjoins Williamson County, Illinois. An
owner of a rental dwelling may act as his own agent provided he meets the residency
requirements set forth herein.
E. Occupants To Provide Access For Inspections And Compliance With Chapter:
1. Each and every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give the owner thereof, his agent, or
employee or agents of the building and inspection department and fire department access to the
rental dwelling, or unit thereof under their control, to conduct inspections authorized by this
chapter.
2. Each and every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or his
employees, access to any part of such rental dwelling at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of
this chapter or with any standard regulation set forth in this code, as amended.
F. Fees:
1. A fee as provided within subsection I of this section, shall be assessed against the owner by the
building and inspection department for inspection of any rental dwelling unit pursuant to this
chapter. Notice of assessment of the fee shall be served upon the owner by regular mail.
2. Any inspection fees assessed by reason of an inspection initiated by the building and inspection
department and/or fire department remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days shall be a debt due
and owing the city and shall be a lien upon the real estate and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law. In the event a lien is filed with the recorder of deeds of
Williamson County, a reasonable attorney fee, an administration fee for preparation of the lien
and the cost of recording shall be assessed and included as part of the lien. In the event the city
incurs any attorney fees in enforcing any lien or in otherwise collecting any fee, all such
reasonable attorney fees shall be paid by the party against whom collection is made.
G. Occupancy Permit: Except as provided under temporary occupancy permits and except as
provided within subsection A of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to occupy and
unlawful for any owner or agent to allow another person to occupy any rental dwelling unit unless
the building and inspection department has issued a valid occupancy permit. The building and
inspection department shall not issue an occupancy permit until an inspector of the building and
inspection department and/or the fire department has inspected the dwelling unit and the dwelling
unit conforms to the requirements of this chapter. An occupancy permit shall be valid for three (3)
years from date of issuance unless sooner revoked; the existence of an occupancy permit for a
dwelling unit shall not prevent inspection of a dwelling unit.
H. Temporary Occupancy Permit: A rental dwelling or unit therein not in full compliance with this
chapter may be occupied while repairs are being made if the building and inspection department
has issued a temporary occupancy permit. No temporary occupancy permit shall be issued until
the building and inspection department and fire department have inspected the dwelling unit and
determined that the occupancy thereof does not constitute a serious hazard to the health or safety
of the occupants as indicated by the inspection checklist. A temporary occupancy permit shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 359/460
valid for up to thirty (30) days, and may be renewed once upon written request. (Ord. 3076A, 12-
10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
I. Application For Permits: Every application for an occupancy permit or a temporary occupancy permit
shall be filed with the building and inspection department on a prescribed form. The application
filing fee (which includes the initial inspection fee and 1 subsequent reinspection if required) for
each occupancy permit or for the temporary occupancy permit, for each the initial permit or its
renewal shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per dwelling unit.
An inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per dwelling unit shall be paid and assessed for
each inspection by the building and inspection department and fire department for each inspection
subsequent to the initial application inspection and to one reinspection. All application fees shall be
paid at the time of the application. Inspection fees shall be paid within thirty (30) days after
assessed. Any fee not timely paid may be collected as provided within subsection F of this section.
Every application for any occupancy, temporary, or renewal permit shall include the name,
address, and telephone number of the applicant and applicant's relationship to property (i.e.,
tenant, owner, occupant); name, address, and telephone number of the owner; the address and
general description of the premises to be occupied; and such other necessary information as may
be required by city. (Ord. 3117, 8-26-2013)
J. Revocation Of Permits: The building and inspection department, upon five (5) day notice to the
owner and occupant in writing, may revoke any occupancy permit or temporary occupancy permit
if:
1. The building and inspection department determines that material information contained in the
application for said permit is false;
2. The occupant refuses to allow an unauthorized inspection of the premises at any time;
3. The work authorized by a temporary occupancy permit is not proceeding; or
4. The occupant or owner fails to comply with a corrective action order or fails to maintain the
property in compliance with this chapter.
5. The permit was issued in error by the building and inspection department.
The five (5) day notice of revocation shall be served in the same manner as required for a
corrective action order. During the five (5) day period the applicant or current permit holder may
provide such information as desired by the applicant or permit holder to the building and
inspection department and fire department for consideration by the building and inspection
department in the decision to revoke.
K. Utilities Not To Be Provided: The city of Marion may refuse to provide and/or may disconnect water
and sewer service until or unless a valid occupancy or temporary occupancy permit is obtained
and presented by the owner to the city's water department.
L. Corrective Action Order: Whenever the building and inspection department or fire department
determines that any occupancy or any dwelling unit, accessory structure, or other portion of
premises is in violation of this chapter, it shall so notify the owner and/or occupant in writing, and
order appropriate corrective action.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 360/460
1. Contents Of Order: The order to take corrective action(s) shall include the following information:
a. A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
b. A statement indicating the nature of the violation;
c. A statement of the remedial action (repairs, reduced number of occupants, etc.) necessary to
effect compliance;
d. The date (at least 5 days unless an emergency condition) by which the violation must be
corrected;
e. Statement that if the violation is not corrected, the occupancy permit may be revoked, a
complaint for violation issued, and/or the property may be declared unfit for human habitation
with attendant consequences. If a corrective action order has been served as provided herein,
no additional notice of revocation is required to be given.
2. Service Of Order: The corrective action order shall be deemed properly served upon the owner,
agent, or occupant if it is:
a. Served upon each personally or sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address
of each with service being effective upon deposit in the mail; and
b. Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the dwelling or premises.
3. Transfer Of Ownership Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling who has
been served a corrective action order to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease, or otherwise dispose of
the dwelling or its ownership interest until he/she has either: a) effected compliance with the
provisions of this chapter; or b) furnished the grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee a true
copy of the corrective action order, and has given the building and inspection department and
fire department a signed and notarized statement from said grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or
lessee that acknowledges receipt of such corrective action order and unconditionally accepts
responsibility for making the required repairs.
4. Access By Owner Or Operator: The occupant(s) of every dwelling unit shall give the owner or
operator, or his agent or employee, free access thereto at any reasonable time in order to allow
him to make any inspection, alteration, maintenance, or repair necessary to effect compliance
with this chapter.
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or let or hold out to another for occupancy any dwelling
unit for the purpose of living therein, where such dwelling unit does not comply with the steps
required by the corrective action order. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-17: UNLAWFUL INTERRUPTION OF TENANT OCCUPANCY:
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for any landlord or any person acting at their direction to knowingly oust or
dispossess or attempt to oust or dispossess any tenant from a dwelling unit without authority of
law, by plugging, changing, adding or removing any lock or latching device; or by blocking any
entrance into said unit; or by removing any door or window from said unit; or by interfering with the
services to said unit, including, but not limited to, electricity, gas, hot or cold water, plumbing, heat
or telephone services; or by removing a tenant's personal property from said unit; or by the use of
force or threat of violence, injury or force to a tenant's person or property; or by any other act
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 361/460
rendering a dwelling unit or any part thereof or any personal property located therein inaccessible
or uninhabitable.
B. Defense: The following shall constitute a valid defense to any prosecution by city of a complaint
alleging violation of subsection A of this section (although nothing herein shall authorize any
landlord or other person to take any action or to commit any act otherwise prohibited by state or
federal law):
1. A landlord acts in compliance with the laws of Illinois pertaining to forcible entry and detainer
and engages the sheriff of Williamson County to forcibly evict a tenant or his personal property;
or
2. A landlord acts in compliance with the laws of Illinois pertaining to distress for rent; or
3. A landlord acts pursuant to court order; or
4. A landlord interferes temporarily with possession only as necessary to make needed repairs or
inspection and only as provided by law; or
5. The tenants with a right to possession of the dwelling unit have been absent therefrom for thirty
(30) consecutive days without advising the landlord of such absence or their intent to return, and
the current rent is thirty (30) or more days overdue, and after diligent inquiry the landlord has
valid reason to believe that tenants have abandoned the premises and do not intend to return; or
6. After diligent inquiry the landlord has valid reason to believe that the tenants identified within a
written lease have surrendered possession of the premises and do not intend to return, and by
the express language of said lease document the lease term has expired for at least ten (10)
days, and the landlord has not accepted any rental or other payment after expiration of the lease
term for rental for periods after expiration of the lease term. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-
2013)
10-6-18: NONLIABILITY OF CITY OFFICIALS:
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damage to persons or
property resulting from any act required or permitted in the discharge of the duties of such officer,
agent, or employee under the provisions of this chapter. Any lawsuit of any nature brought against
such officer, agent, or employee as a result of any act, requirement or permitted function in the
discharge of the official duties of such officer, agent, or employee aforesaid shall be defended at the
sole expense of the city until a complete and final determination of such lawsuit. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-
2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
10-6-19: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate or assist in the violation of any provisions of this chapter, shall, upon a
finding of guilt, be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each
day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, said persons shall be
subject to an action for injunction to eliminate or to prevent violations of this chapter or of any other
applicable code of the city related thereto. (Ord. 3076A, 12-10-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 362/460
Chapter 7
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
10-7-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, the word "person" is considered to include, but is not limited to, any
individual, group of individuals, partnership, firm or corporation. (1977 Code § 15.40.010)
10-7-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall remove, cause to be removed, demolish, raze or wreck any building or structure on
and from any lot or tract of real estate within the city that has city water or city sewer connections
without first receiving a permit to do so from the city clerk. (1977 Code § 15.40.020)
10-7-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any person desiring such permit shall make application therefor upon forms to be provided by the city
clerk for such purpose and designate thereon the point at which the water and sewer connections are
made upon such lot or tract. (1977 Code § 15.40.030)
10-7-4: PERMIT FEE; CONDITION OF ISSUANCE:
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of application for a demolition
permit, and the permit shall not be issued or work commenced until all utility services have been
located and disconnected with proof thereof provided to the city clerk. (Ord. 1972, 7-12-2004)
10-7-5: INSPECTION; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Upon receipt of each application, the city clerk shall notify the code enforcement officer who shall,
without delay, inspect the lot or tract and designate, if practicable or feasible at that time, the point that
the water and sewer connections thereon shall be hermetically sealed or plugged. In the event such
designation is not practicable or feasible at that time without a partial demolition, razing or wrecking of
such building or structure, the code enforcement officer may authorize a partial demolition, razing or
wrecking of such building or structure to the point that designation of the hermetic sealing of water and
sewer connections as set out herein may be made. After such designation is made, all demolition,
razing and wrecking of the building or structure shall cease immediately until such sealing or plugging
of the water and sewer connections has been accomplished and the permit issued. (1977 Code
§ 15.40.040; amd. 2013 Code)
10-7-6: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS SEALED:
The person undertaking the removal, demolition, razing or wrecking of the building or structure shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 363/460
seal or plug the water and sewer connections at the point designated, and its location shall be
appropriately indicated on the application for permit and on the permit when issued. (1977 Code
§ 15.40.050)
10-7-7: RESTORATION OF PREMISES:
No person shall remove, cause to be removed, demolish, raze or wreck any building or structure on
and from any lot or tract of real estate within the city without removing in the same operation all
foundations, appurtenances and debris upon such lot to ground level. In the event the structure was
built upon a cellar, basement or crawl space, said area shall be filled with dirt and seeded with lawn
seed. (Ord. 1972, 7-12-2004)
10-7-8: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
A. The contractor shall exercise proper precaution at all times for the protection of persons and
property and shall be responsible for all damages to persons or property, either on or off the site,
which occur as a result of his prosecution of the work.
B. Public sidewalks shall be kept passable for pedestrian traffic at all times. If it is necessary to
partially block the street, barricades shall be placed and warning lights shall be activated at night,
and the commissioner of accounts, finances and streets shall be notified. Approved fencing shall
be used to screen and secure the construction site, at the discretion of the building department
and/or street department.
C. The contractor shall adhere to all applicable regulations of all federal, state and local environmental
agencies having jurisdiction in the city. Care shall be taken to prevent the spread of dust or flying
particles. After work is started on any building, the work on the building shall be continued to
completion promptly and expeditiously. (2013 Code)
10-7-9: PENALTY:
Any person, individual, group of individuals, partnership, firm or corporation failing to comply with any
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine, upon conviction, of not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1972, 7-12-2004; amd.
2013 Code)
Chapter 8
MOVING BUILDINGS
10-8-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall move any building on, through or over any public street, alley,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 364/460
sidewalk or the public square within the city without having first obtained a permit therefor from the city
clerk. (1977 Code § 15.44.010)
10-8-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for such permits shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall state thereon the
proposed route and the number of days it is intended the building should occupy any portion of any
public street, alley, sidewalk or the public square. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to submit such
application to the commissioner of accounts, finances and streets for his approval. (1977 Code
§ 15.44.010; amd. 2013 Code)
10-8-3: PERMIT FEES:
Upon the approval of the application by the commissioner of accounts, finances and streets, a fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day or fraction thereof that it is intended that the building shall
occupy any portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk or the public square shall be paid to the city
clerk and the permit shall be issued. An additional payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
day or fraction thereof over and above the time stated on the permit during which any building shall
occupy any portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk or the public square within the city shall be paid
to the city clerk, and no permit shall be issued except on payment of such fees. All such fees collected
by the city clerk shall be paid into the city treasury. (1977 Code § 15.44.010; amd. 2013 Code)
10-8-4: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Every person, firm or corporation applying for a permit under this chapter shall submit with such
application a bond in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) with good and
sufficient surety, to be approved by the commissioner of accounts, finances and streets, conditioned
upon compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and agreeing to save and hold the city
harmless from any claim which may be made against the city by reason of the occupancy of any
public street, alley, sidewalk, or the public square by the building or structure moved, and further
conditioned upon the payment to the city of all damages for injuries caused to any public street, alley,
sidewalk or the public square within the city by reason of the placing of or moving of such building
upon or over the same. (1977 Code § 15.44.020; amd. 2013 Code)
10-8-5: WARNING DEVICES:
Whenever any public street or alley is blocked by any building which is being moved, the person, firm
or corporation moving the same shall place and maintain warning signs, in the daytime, and red
lanterns during the nighttime, upon such building and at suitable distances from such building in such
numbers and of such character as to reasonably apprise any person or driver of any vehicle of such
obstruction. (1977 Code § 15.44.030)
10-8-6: PUBLIC UTILITY WIRES:
Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with wires or cables of a public utility in moving a building,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 365/460
the terms of any special or franchise ordinance governing shall apply, and the bond therein specified
shall be given. If no such terms apply, then the city council shall estimate the expense of fixing the
wires and the bond to be given to cover this. (2013 Code)
10-8-7: FIRE ALARM WIRES AND POLES:
When any moving building shall approach any fire alarm wire or pole which shall be endangered by
the moving of the building, it shall be the duty of the mover to notify the fire chief at least twenty four
(24) hours before reaching such wire or pole so that they may be removed or cared for by the
authorities of the city. (2013 Code)
10-8-8: RESTORATION OF PREMISES:
No person shall remove or cause to be removed any building or structure on and from any lot or tract
of real estate within the city without removing in the same operation all foundations, appurtenances
and debris upon such lot to ground level. In the event the structure was built upon a cellar, basement
or crawl space, said area shall be filled with dirt and seeded with lawn seed. (2013 Code)
Chapter 9
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
10-9-1: DEFINITION:
The term "dangerous building", as used in this chapter, is hereby defined to mean and include:
A. Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure that is dangerous to the public health
because of its construction or condition, or which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or
cause injury to the health of the occupants thereof or of its neighboring structures.
B. Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of faulty construction, age,
lack of proper repair or any other cause, is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire
hazard.
C. Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which, by reason of faulty construction, age,
lack of proper repair or any other cause, is liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a
collapse or fall of any part of such a building.
D. Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of its condition or because of
lack of doors or windows, is available to and frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who
are not lawful occupants of such a building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 366/460
E. Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which is not habitable because of the lack of
proper heat, electricity and plumbing. (Ord. 2042, 10-3-2005)
10-9-2: NUISANCE DECLARED; PROHIBITION:
Any "dangerous building" in the city, as that term is defined in section 10-9-1 of this chapter, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the city; and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in custody of any
dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a dangerous condition, or to occupy such building,
or permit it to be occupied while it is or remains in a dangerous condition. (Ord. 2042, 10-3-2005)
10-9-3: NOTICE TO ABATE; FAILURE TO COMPLY:
A. Whenever the code enforcement officer, fire chief, or police chief, upon inspection of any building or
structure in the city, shall be of the opinion that such building or structure in the city is a dangerous
building, he shall thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the owner thereof, and upon
the occupant thereof, if any, by registered or certified mail or by personal service. Such notice shall
state that the building has been declared to be in a dangerous condition, and that such dangerous
condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it;
and that the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice may be in the following form: (Ord.
2042, 10-3-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
To (owner-occupant) of the premises known and described as .
You are hereby notified that (describe building) on the premises above described has been
condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after inspection by . The causes for this
decision are (Insert the facts as to the dangerous condition). You must remedy this condition or
demolish the building immediately, (within fifteen days from receipt of this notice), or the City will
proceed to do so.
B. If the person receiving such notice has not complied therewith within fifteen (15) days from the time
the notice is served upon such person by personal service or by registered or certified mail, the city
may proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building. (Ord. 2042, 10-3-2005)
10-9-4: DAMAGED BUILDINGS:
A. Any building or structure within the city which has or may be damaged by fire, decay, or other
cause to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value shall be torn down and removed. (Ord. 2042,
10-3-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Upon written notice of such building filed with the fire chief, he shall then appoint three (3) persons
to determine whether or not such building or structure has been damaged to the extent of fifty
percent (50%) of its value.
C. A copy of the notice filed with the chief, together with a notice of the appointment of this board of
three (3) persons to determine the damage, shall be served upon the owner of the premises by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 367/460
personal service or by registered or certified mail to his last known address. Such notice may be in
substantially the following form:
To ,
You are hereby notified that has determined that the building owned by you at , located within
the City, has been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its
value; and that a board of three (3) members has been appointed to verify this finding, which board
will hold its first meeting in the City Hall on the day of , at the hour of o'clock, at which time it will
determine whether this finding is correct.
If this finding is certified by the board, you must tear down and remove said building.
D. If the board of three (3) members determines that the building in question has been damaged to the
extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value, it shall be the duty of the owner to tear down or remove
the building within twenty (20) days after the finding of the board; and it shall be unlawful to occupy
or permit such building to be occupied after such finding. (Ord. 2042, 10-3-2005)
10-9-5: UNKNOWN OWNERS:
If the owner of the premises concerned is unknown, or if his address is unknown, service of any notice
provided in this chapter may be made by posting a copy thereof on the premises and by publishing,
one time, a copy thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (Ord. 2042, 10-3-2005; amd.
2013 Code)
10-9-6: ABATEMENT BY CITY; COSTS A LIEN:
A. In the event the owner or owners of any building fail, refuse, or neglect to carry out the orders to
remedy the condition or demolish the building as provided in section 10-9-3 of this chapter, or if
said owner or owners fail, refuse, or neglect to carry out the order to tear down or remove the
building as provided in section 10-9-4 of this chapter, the city may cause said building or structure
to be removed, and the city, in such event, shall, in addition to the other remedies provided herein,
have a lien against said property to the extent of the costs and expenses of removal.
B. The city may proceed to remove any such building or structure described herein by one of the
following means:
1. If the cost exceeds one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), the city shall advertise for
bids in the ordinary manner as provided by law.
2. If the cost does not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), the city may contract
with any recognized or authorized wrecker firm, without taking bids, to remove the building or
structure.
3. Contract with anyone who will remove the said building or structure without cost to the city,
regardless of the estimated cost of removal, said person to assume all liability and costs of
removal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 368/460
C. All costs and expenses incurred by the city in removing the building or structure as provided herein
may be recovered in an action at law against the owner or owners of said building or structure.
(Ord. 2042, 10-3-2005)
10-9-7: INVESTIGATIONS; ACTION BY CITY:
A. In addition to the actions authorized by other sections of this chapter, the chief of the fire
department or any other municipal officer whose duty it is to investigate fires may make the
investigations authorized by 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 2042, 10-3-2005; amd. 2013
Code)
B. If such officer shall find that any building or structure is so occupied or situated as to endanger
persons or property or, by reason of faulty construction, age, lack of repair, or for any cause, is
especially liable to fire, or is liable to cause injury by collapsing or otherwise, he shall order the
dangerous situation removed or remedied, and shall so notify the owner or occupant of the
premises. Service of such notice may be in person or by registered or certified mail, and any
person so notified may appeal from the decision of such officer in the manner provided by law.
C. The city may, by ordinance, declare a specific structure to be a nuisance and make provision for its
demolition; and in extreme cases where the owners cannot be located, the city may, by summary
action, demolish a building which is a fire or health hazard. (Ord. 2042, 10-3-2005)
10-9-8: PENALTY:
In addition to the remedies provided in this chapter, any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter, or permitting any dangerous building, or any building or structure to remain in
a dangerous condition, or to remain in the city, after it has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) of its value, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day such structure remains in violation of this chapter. (Ord.
2042, 10-3-2005; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 10
SWIMMING POOLS
10-10-1: DEFINITION:
A "swimming pool", within the meaning of this chapter, shall be any depression in the ground, either
temporary or permanent, or a container of water, either temporary or permanent, and either above or
below the ground, in which water of more than twenty four inches (24") (60.96 centimeters) in depth is
contained and which is used primarily for the purpose of bathing and swimming. (Ord. 1341, 5-16-
1990)
10-10-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 369/460
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or enlarge a swimming pool not enclosed in a
permanent building in the city, except in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1341, 5-16-1990; amd.
2013 Code)
10-10-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, enlarge, or alter any swimming pool unless a
building permit has first been obtained from the code enforcement officer. The permit fee shall be as
provided in section 11-3-8 of this code. (Ord. 1341, 5-16-1990; amd. Ord. 1450, 7-20-1992; 2013
Code)
10-10-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for permits shall be on forms provided by the code enforcement officer, and shall be
accompanied by plans drawn to scale showing the following: (Ord. 1341, 5-16-1990; amd. 2013 Code)
A. Pool dimensions and volume of water in gallons (liters).
B. Location and type of waste disposal system.
C. Location of pool on lot, distance from lot lines, and distance from structure.
D. Fencing and landscape plan, or a combination thereof. (Ord. 1341, 5-16-1990)
10-10-5: LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION AND DISINFECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. No pool shall be located, erected, constructed or maintained closer to any side or rear lot line than
allowed by the zoning ordinance for permitted accessory building uses, and in no case shall the
water line of any pool be less than four feet (4') (1.22 meters) from any lot line.
B. No direct connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer or septic system.
C. A gaseous chlorination system shall not be made use of as a disinfection method for pool waters.
The city code enforcement officer shall recommend a proper disinfectant. (Ord. 1341, 5-16-1990)
10-10-6: FENCING:
A. Generally:
1. Pools within the scope of this chapter or not enclosed within a permanent building shall be
completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient strength to prevent access to the pool and shall not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 370/460
be less than four feet (4') (1.22 meters) in height, so constructed as to not have voids, holes or
openings larger than four inches (4") (10 centimeters) in one dimension.
2. Gates or doors shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the
gate or doors securely closed at all times when not in actual use.
3. Location or fencing required shall be subject to all other applicable ordinances.
4. No fence shall be located, erected, constructed or maintained closer to a pool than three feet
(3') (0.91 meters).
5. The wall of the house or building faced to the pool may be incorporated as a portion of the
fence.
B. Aboveground Pools:
1. Aboveground pools with self-provided fencing to prevent unguarded entry will be allowed without
separate additional fencing, provided the self-provided fence is the minimum required height and
design as heretofore specified.
2. Permanent access from grade to aboveground pools having stationary ladders, stairs or ramps
shall not have less than equal safeguard fencing and gates. (Ord. 1341, 5-16-1990)
10-10-7: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. All electrical installations provided, installed, and used in conjunction with a swimming pool shall be
in conformance with the state laws and city ordinances regulating electric installations. (Ord. 1341,
5-16-1990; amd. 2013 Code)
B. If overhead flood or other artificial lights are used to illuminate the pool at night, such lights shall be
shielded to direct light only on the pool. (Ord. 1341, 5-16-1990)
10-10-8: MAINTENANCE; INSPECTIONS:
Swimming pools shall be maintained in a sanitary manner. The city shall reserve the right to inspect or
cause to be inspected each swimming pool maintained in the city. (Ord. 1341, 5-16-1990; amd. 2013
Code)
10-10-9: NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED:
No pool shall be so operated or maintained as to create a nuisance, a hazard, an eyesore, or
otherwise to result in a substantial adverse effect on neighboring properties, or to be in any other way
detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1341, 5-16-1990)
10-10-10: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 371/460
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1341, 5-16-1990; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 11
MOBILE HOMES
10-11-1: PERMITTED LOCATIONS:
Trailers, otherwise referred to as "mobile homes", may be placed in the following areas described in
this section, and in no other, except mobile home parks. (1977 Code § 17.04.010)
A. Area 1: Area 1 is that area bounded as follows: Beginning at a point on the east right of way line of
North Lear Street one hundred fifty feet north of the intersection of said street and the north right of
way line of West Central Street, then running east to a point one hundred forty feet east of the east
right of way line of North Walker Street, then running south along a line parallel to and one
hundred forty feet east of said right of way line to its intersection with the north right of way line of
West Union Street, then west along the north right of way line of West Union Street to its
intersection with the west right of way line of North Vicksburg Street, then north sixty five feet to the
south right of way line of a public alley, then west along said right of way line to the east right of
way line of North Bently Street, then north along said right of way line to its intersection with the
north right of way line of the Illinois Central Railroad, then west along said right of way line to its
intersection with the east right of way line of North Lear Street, then north along said right of way
line to the point of beginning. (1977 Code § 17.04.020)
B. Area 2: Area 2 is that area bounded as follows: Beginning at a point on the east right of way line of
the Central and Eastern Illinois Railroad eighty five feet south of the south right of way line of West
College Street, then running south along the east right of way line of said railroad to a point eighty
five feet north of the north right of way line of Boyton Street, then running east to a point on the
west right of way line of South Monroe Street, then running north along said west right of way line
to a point one hundred seventy five feet south of the south right of way line of Gent Street, then
running east to a point on the east right of way line of South Liberty Street, then running south
along said right of way line to a point seventy five feet north of the north right of way line of Boyton
Street, then running east one hundred twenty feet to a point, then running north to the intersection
with the south right of way line of Jones Street extended, then running east along said right of way
line extended to a point one hundred feet west of the west right of way line of South Market Street,
then running north to the south right of way line of Hartwell Street extended, then running west to
the west right of way line of South Liberty Street, then running north along said right of way line to
a point eighty five feet south of the south right of way line of West College Street, then running
west to the point of beginning. (1977 Code § 17.04.030)
C. Area 3: Area 3 is that area bounded as follows: Beginning at a point one hundred feet north of the
north right of way line of East Main Street and one hundred fifty feet east of the east right of way
line of North McLaren Street, then running north to the intersection with the south right of way line
of the Illinois Central Railroad, then running west along said right of way line to the west right of
way line of North Garfield Street, then running north along said right of way line to a point two
hundred seventy feet south of Browning Street, then running west to the west right of way line of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 372/460
North Logan Street then running north along said right of way line to the intersection with the south
right of way line of White Street, then running west along said right of way line to the east right of
way line of North Harper Street, then running south along said right of way line to the north right of
way line of the Illinois Central Railroad, then running west along said right of way line to the
intersection of the east right of way line of North Madison Street, then running south to the north
right of way line of Calvert Street, then running east to the intersection of the east right of way line
of North Buchanan Street, then running south to the intersection of the north right of way line of
East Jefferson Street, then running east along said right of way line to the east right of way line of
North Cunningham Street, then running south to a point one hundred feet north of the north right of
way line of East Main Street, then running east to the point of beginning. (1977 Code § 17.04.040)
D. Area 4: Area 4 is that area bounded as follows: Beginning at the northwest corner of Maplewood
Cemetery and running south to the north right of way line of Morgan Avenue, then running west
along said right of way line to a point one hundred fifty feet east of the east right of way line of
Cash Street, then running south to the north right of way line of West DeYoung Street, then running
west along said right of way line to a point three hundred feet east of the east right of way line of
Yale Avenue, then running north along said right of way line to the intersection of the north right of
way line of Princeton Avenue extended, then running west along said right of way line to a point
three hundred feet east of the west right of way line of Cornell Avenue, then running north to the
south right of way line of Morgan Avenue, then running east along said right of way line to the
corporate limits, then running north along the corporate limits four hundred feet to the east right of
way line of an unnamed public road, then running north along said right of way line to the end of
said road, then running east to the west right of way line of North Russell Street, then running
south along said right of way line to a point due west of the point of beginning, then running east to
the point of beginning. (1977 Code § 17.04.050)
10-11-2: SIZE AND LOCATION OF MOBILE HOME SPACE:
Each trailer shall be placed upon a rectangular space having two (2) sides of not less than twelve feet
(12') in length and two (2) sides of not less than sixty feet (60') in length, each side of which shall be
ten feet (10') distant from the surveyed property lines or the line designating the area allotted to
another trailer; except, that there shall be compliance with the requirements as set out for R-1 and R-2
zones in title 11 of this code with respect to side, front and back yards where a trailer is to be located
on a lot fronting on a city street. (1977 Code § 17.04.060)
10-11-3: MOBILE HOMES SHARING A LOT:
More than one trailer may be placed upon a lot, and a trailer may be placed upon a lot upon which a
building now stands, provided there is a minimum distance of twenty feet (20') between trailers or
between a trailer and building, and further provided, there is an area of two thousand five hundred
sixty (2,560) square feet allotted to and available for each trailer and the requirements of this title are
otherwise met. (1977 Code § 17.04.070)
10-11-4: SECURING MOBILE HOMES:
Any trailer placed in any of the four (4) areas described in this chapter shall be underpinned and
secured and shall have no open space between the lower edge of the exterior walls and the surface of
the ground. (1977 Code § 17.04.080)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 373/460
10-11-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to trailer courts or mobile home parks in which trailer
space allotments were established prior to November 8, 1967. (1977 Code § 17.04.090)
Chapter 12
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
10-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of
improvements of special character or historical interest or value in the interest of the health, prosperity,
safety, and welfare of the people of the city by:
A. Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the historic and architectural characteristics of the
city which represents elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural
history;
B. Promoting civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past as represented in the
city landmarks and historic districts;
C. Stabilizing and improving the economic vitality and value of the city's landmarks and historic areas;
D. Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the city to buyers, visitors and shoppers and thereby
supporting business, commerce, and industry, and providing economic benefit to the city;
E. Fostering and encouraging preservation and restoration of structures, areas, and neighborhoods
and thereby preventing future urban blight. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
10-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this chapter shall be interpreted giving them the
same meanings as they have in common usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
ADDITION: Any act or process which changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a
structure designated for preservation by adding to, joining with or increasing the size or capacity of the
structure.
ALTERATION: Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a
structure including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any
structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 374/460
AREA: A specific geographic division of the city of Marion.
BUILDING: Any structure created for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property
of any kind and which is permanently affixed to the land.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate from the historic preservation commission
authorizing plans for alterations, construction, removal or demolition of a landmark or site within a
designated historic district.
COMMISSION: Marion historic preservation commission.
COMMISSIONERS: Voting members of the Marion historic preservation commission.
CONSTRUCTION: The act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the erection of a new
principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Marion.
DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a landmark or site within a historic
district.
DESIGN GUIDELINE: A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve the historic and architectural
character of a structure or area.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE: The architectural and general composition of the
exterior of a structure including, but not limited to, the kind, color, and the texture of the building
material and the type, design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and
appurtenant elements.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area designated as a historic district by ordinance of the city council and
which may contain, within definable geographic boundaries, one or more landmarks and which may
have within its boundaries other properties or structures that, while not of such historic and/or
architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual
characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the historic district.
LANDMARK: Any building, structure or site which has been designated as a "landmark" by ordinance
of the city council, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, that is worthy of rehabilitation,
restoration, and preservation because of its historic and/or architectural significance to the city of
Marion.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person, corporation, or other legal entity listed as owner on the records of
the county recorder of deeds.
REHABILITATION: The process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration,
which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of
the property which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values.
REMOVAL: Any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site.
REPAIR: Any change that does not require a building permit and that is not construction, relocation or
alteration.
STRUCTURAL CHANGE: Any change or repair in the supporting members of a building, structure,
roof or exterior walls which would expand the building in height, width or bulk of the building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 375/460
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary
location on or in the ground including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, buildings,
fences, gazebos, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, radio and television
antennas, including supporting towers, swimming pools, satellite dishes, solar panels and wind
generation. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
10-12-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
A. Composition And Appointment: The city historic preservation commission shall consist of nine (9)
voting members, residents of the city, appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council.
B. Qualifications: The members shall be appointed on the basis of expertise, experience or interest in
the area of architectural history, building construction or engineering, finance, historical and
architectural preservation, neighborhood organizing or real estate.
C. Terms Of Office: Members of the commission shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. Of
those members first taking office, three (3) shall be appointed for one year, three (3) for two (2)
years, and three (3) for three (3) years. No members shall serve more than two (2) successive
three (3) year terms. Alternate members shall be appointed to serve in the absence of or
disqualification of the regular members.
D. Officers: Officers shall consist of a chair, vice chair, and a secretary elected by the preservation
commission who shall serve a term of one year and shall be eligible for reelection, but no member
shall serve as an officer for more than two (2) consecutive years. The chair shall preside over
meetings. In the absence of the chair, the vice chair shall perform the duties of the chair. If both are
absent, a temporary chair shall be elected by those present. The secretary to the preservation
commission shall have the following duties:
1. Take minutes of each preservation commission meeting;
2. Be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the minutes, reports, and decisions of
the preservation commission to the members of the preservation commission;
3. Give notice as provided herein or by law for all public hearings conducted by the preservation
commission;
4. Advise the mayor of vacancies on the preservation commission and expiring terms of members;
and
5. Prepare and submit to the city council a complete record of the proceedings before the
preservation commission on any matter requiring council consideration.
E. Meetings:
1. Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established by resolution of the
commission at the beginning of each calendar year or at any time upon the call of the chair.
There shall be a minimum of four (4) meetings per year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 376/460
2. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. All decisions or actions of the historic
preservation commission shall be made by a majority vote of those members present and voting
at any meeting where a quorum exists.
3. The chair, and in his absence the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses.
4. All meetings of the preservation commission shall be open to the public.
5. No member of the historic preservation commission shall vote on any matter that may materially
or apparently affect the property, income or business interest of that member. No action shall be
taken by the commission that could in any manner deprive or restrict the owner of property in its
use, modification, maintenance, disposition, or demolition until such owner shall first have had
the opportunity to be heard at a public meeting of the preservation commission, as provided
herein.
6. The preservation commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed in the office of the preservation commission and shall be a public record.
F. Powers And Duties: The historic preservation commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
1. To adopt its own procedural regulations.
2. To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and architecturally significant properties,
structures and areas.
3. To investigate and recommend to the city council the adoption of procedural ordinances to
designate properties or structures to protect as landmarks which have special historic,
community, or architectural value.
4. To investigate and recommend to the city council the adoption of procedural ordinances to
designate properties or structures to protect as historic districts which have special historic,
community, or architectural value.
5. To keep a register of all properties and structures that have been designated as landmarks or
historic districts, including all information required for each designation.
6. To determine an appropriate system of markers and make recommendations for the design and
implementation of specific markings of the special historic, community, or architectural value of
properties and structures along with the streets and routes leading from one landmark or historic
district to another.
7. To advise property owners on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation,
rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on the state or national register of
historic places.
8. To inform and educate the citizens of the city concerning the historic and architectural heritage
of the city by publishing appropriate maps, newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and by
holding programs and seminars.
9. To hold public hearings and to review applications for construction, alteration, removal, or
demolition affecting proposed or designated landmarks or structures or historic districts and
issue or deny certificates of appropriateness for such actions. Applicants shall be required to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 377/460
submit plans, drawings, elevations, specifications, and other information as may be necessary to
make decisions.
10. To develop specific guidelines for the alteration, demolition, construction, or removal of
landmarks or property and structures within historic districts.
11. To review proposed zoning amendments, applications for special use permits or variances that
affect proposed or designated landmarks and historic districts. Such review shall be made prior
to the date of the hearing by the city plan commission or the zoning board of appeals. (Ord.
1981, 9-13-2000)
12. To administer on the behalf of the city any property or full or partial interest in real property,
including a conservation right as that term is used in 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/0.01 et
seq., which the city may have or accept as a gift or otherwise, upon designation by the city
council. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
13. To accept and administer, on behalf of the city, upon designation by the city council, such gifts,
grants and monies as may be appropriate for the purpose of this chapter.
14. To call upon available city staff members as well as other experts for technical advice.
15. To testify before all boards and commissions, including the city plan commission and the
zoning board of appeals, on any matter affecting historically and architecturally significant
property and landmarks.
16. To periodically review the city zoning ordinance and to recommend to the city plan commission
and the city council any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of
historically or architecturally significant landmarks or properties and structures within historic
districts.
G. Surveys And Research: The historic preservation commission shall undertake an ongoing survey
and research effort in the city to identify neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures, and objects that
have historic, community, architectural, or aesthetic importance, interest, or value. As part of the
survey, the historic preservation commission shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and
studies by any unit of government or private organization and compile appropriate descriptions,
facts, and photographs. The historic preservation commission shall identify significant structures
and potential landmarks and adopt procedures to nominate them in groups, based upon the
following criteria:
1. Architecturally or historically significant properties and potential landmarks in one identifiable
neighborhood or district geographical area of the city.
2. The potential landmarks associated with a particular person, event, or historical period.
3. The potential landmarks that represent a particular architectural style or school, or a particular
architect, engineer, builder, designer or craftsman.
4. Such other criteria as may be adopted by the historic preservation commission to assure
systematic surveys and nomination of all significant potential properties or landmarks within the
city. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
10-12-4: LANDMARK DESIGNATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 378/460
A. Criteria:
1. Nominations for landmark designations shall be made by any person to the historic preservation
commission concerning property located within the city limits on a form provided by the
commission. A filing fee may be required. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
2. The commission shall, upon investigation as it deems necessary, make a preliminary
determination as to whether a property, structure, or area possesses the integrity of design,
workmanship, materials, location, setting and feeling and meets one or more of the following
criteria:
a. Significant value as part of the historic, heritage or cultural characteristics of the community,
county, state or nation.
b. Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the development of
the community, county, state or country.
c. Representative of the distinguishing characteristics of architecture inherently valuable for the
study of a period, type, method of construction or use of indigenous materials.
d. Notable work of a master builder, designer, architect or artist whose individual work has
influenced the development of the community, county, state or country.
e. Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it an established or familiar
visual feature.
f. Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure including, but not
limited to, farmhouses, gas stations, or other commercial structures, with a high level of
integrity or architectural significance.
g. Area that has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in history or prehistory.
3. A preliminary determination as to whether a property, structure, or area meets one or more of
the foregoing criteria shall be made within thirty (30) days of filing of a nomination with the
commission.
B. Procedures:
1. Application: Any person, group of persons or association including, but not limited to, the Marion
historic preservation commission, may request a historic landmark designation for any structure,
building or site within the boundaries of the city which may have historic or architectural
significance as defined by this chapter. The planning department shall supply, upon request, the
application forms. Completed forms shall be submitted to the planning department which shall
be forwarded to the commission for their consideration. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
2. Hearing:
a. Hearing Scheduled: The commission shall schedule a public hearing within thirty (30) days
after the filing of an application. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
b. Notices Of Hearing: Notice of date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent
by mail to the owner(s) of record and to the nominator(s) as well as to the adjoining property
owners, not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. A
public hearing notice also shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 379/460
city. The notice shall state the location of the property and a statement summarizing how the
proposed landmark meets the criteria set forth in subsection A2 of this section.
c. Review And Evaluation Of Application; Further Considerations: During the public hearing, the
commission shall review and evaluate the application according to the criteria established in
subsection A2 of this section. If the historic preservation commission finds at the time that the
application merits further consideration, then the commission may table the request until its
next regularly scheduled meeting.
3. Decision:
a. A decision shall be made within thirty (30) days following the date of the closing of the public
hearing.
b. Following the public hearing, the secretary of the commission shall prepare the commission's
evaluation, recommendation and all available information for submission to the city council
within thirty (30) days.
c. If the commission decides that the landmark should be designated, it shall do so by a
resolution passed by a majority of the commission.
d. The owner(s) of record shall be notified promptly by a letter containing information of the
commission's decision. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
e. A simple majority vote by the city council is necessary for approval of a landmark designation.
If the city council approves the application for a designation, a notice will be sent to the
property owner, the code enforcement officer, and the city clerk's office, and recorded with the
county recorder of deeds. If the city council denies the petition, no petitioner or applicant can
file to the secretary of the commission a new application for the same property until ninety (90)
days have elapsed. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
4. Certificate Of Appropriateness:
a. Buildings designated as historic landmarks shall be subject to issuance of certificates of
appropriateness.
b. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for alteration, construction, removal or
demolition of a proposed landmark from the date when the nomination form is presented to
the commission until the final disposition of the request. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
10-12-5: HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS:
A. Criteria:
1. Nominations for historic district designations shall be made to the historic preservation
commission on a form provided by the commission. A filing fee may be required. (Ord. 1981, 9-
13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
2. The following criteria shall be utilized by the Marion historic commission in determining the
designation of historic districts:
a. The historic district contains one or more landmarks along with such other buildings, places or
areas within its definable geographic boundaries which, while not of such historic significance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 380/460
to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of
the landmark or landmarks located in such district;
b. A significant number of structures meeting any of the standards of subsection 10-12-4A2 of
this chapter;
c. Establishing a sense of time and place unique to the city; and/or
d. Exemplifying or reflecting the cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history of the
nation, the state or the city.
3. A preliminary determination as to whether a district or an area meets one or more of the
foregoing criteria shall be made within sixty (60) days of the filing of a nomination with the
commission.
B. Procedure:
1. Request For Designation; Application:
a. Any person, group of persons, or association including, but not limited to, the Marion historic
preservation commission, may present to the commission a petition requesting that a defined
geographic area be designated as a historic district. The city clerk shall supply, upon request,
the application forms. Completed forms shall be submitted to the planning department which
shall forward them to the commission for their consideration.
b. The petition shall contain the names of no less than fifty one percent (51%) of the property
owners. Or, if leaseholders with a five (5) year or longer leasehold interest are signatories to
the petition, then the petition shall contain no less than fifty one percent (51%) of the property
owners and/or leaseholders. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
2. Hearing:
a. Hearing Scheduled: Upon receipt of the application, the secretary of the commission shall
schedule a public hearing to be held within thirty (30) days.
b. Notices Of Hearing: Notice of date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent
by mail to the owner(s) of record and to the nominator(s) as well as to the adjoining property
owners, not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. A
public notice also shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. The
notice shall state the location of the property and a statement summarizing how the proposed
historic district meets the criteria set forth in subsection A2 of this section. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-
2000; amd. 2013 Code)
c. Review And Evaluation Of Application; Further Considerations: During the public hearing, the
commission shall review and evaluate the application according to the criteria established in
subsection A2 of this section. If the historic preservation commission finds at the time that the
application merits further consideration, then the commission may table the request until its
next regularly scheduled meeting.
3. Decision:
a. A decision shall be made within thirty (30) days following the date of the closing of the public
hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 381/460
b. Following the public hearing, the secretary of the commission shall prepare the commission's
evaluation, recommendation and all available information for submission to the city council
within thirty (30) days.
c. If the commission decides that the proposed historic district should be designated, it shall do
so by a resolution passed by a majority of the commission.
d. The owner(s) of record shall be notified promptly by a letter containing information of the
commission's decision. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
e. A simple majority vote by the city council is necessary for approval of a historic preservation
designation. If the city council approves the application for a designation, a notice will be sent
to the property owner, the code enforcement officer, and the city clerk's office, and recorded
with the county recorder of deeds that the area has been designated as such and that
buildings located within the boundaries of the historic district shall be subject to issuance of
certificate of appropriateness. If the city council denies the petition, no petitioner can file with
the secretary of the commission a new application for the same property until ninety (90) days
have elapsed. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
10-12-6: APPLICATIONS FOR NOMINATIONS:
Any person, group of persons or association may apply to the Marion historic preservation
commission for the designation of a landmark or historic district. Applications for a nomination shall be
filed with the city clerk. Persons wishing guidance or advice prior to completing an application may
contact the members of the historic preservation commission. At a minimum, the application shall
include the following:
A. For a landmark:
1. The name and address of the property owner.
2. The legal description and common street address of the property.
3. A written statement describing the property and setting forth reasons in support of the proposed
designation.
4. Documentation that the property owner has been notified or consents to the application for
designation.
5. A list of significant exterior architectural features that should be protected.
6. An overall site plan and photographs of the landmark. The plan shall also include a front, side
and rear elevation drawing.
B. For a historic district:
1. The names and addresses of the property owners.
2. A map delineating the boundaries of the area to be designated.
3. A written statement describing the area and properties within the historic district and setting forth
reasons in support of the proposed designation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 382/460
4. A list and photographs of significant exterior architectural features of all properties in the district
that should be protected. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
10-12-7: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
A. Certificate Required; Exemptions:
1. A certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission shall be required before a building
permit, moving permit or demolition permit is issued for any designated historic landmark or any
building, structure or site or part thereof in the historic district. The certificate is required for the
following:
a. If the building, structure or site will be altered, extended, or repaired in such a manner as to
produce a major change in the exterior appearance of such building or structure. (Ord. 1981,
9-13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
b. Major changes by addition, alteration, maintenance, reconstruction, rehabilitation, renovation
or repair.
c. Any new construction and demolition in whole or in part requiring a permit from the city.
d. Moving a building.
e. Any construction, alteration, demolition, or removal affecting a significant exterior architectural
feature as specified in the ordinance designating the landmark or historic district.
2. An exception to the certificate of appropriateness shall be made if the applicant shows to the
commission that a failure to grant the permit will cause an imminent threat to life, health or
property. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
B. Application For Certificate: Every application for a moving permit, a demolition permit or a building
permit, including plans and specifications, shall be forwarded by the code enforcement officer to
the historic preservation commission within fifteen (15) days following receipt of the application by
the code enforcement officer. The application for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness must
include: (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
1. Street address of the property involved.
2. Legal description of the property involved.
3. Brief description of the present improvements situated on the property.
4. A detailed description of the construction, alteration, demolition or use proposed, together with
any architectural drawings or sketches if those services have been utilized by the applicant and,
if not, a sufficient description of the construction, alteration, demolition, and use to enable
anyone to determine what the final appearance and use of the real estate will be.
5. Owner's name.
6. Developer's name, if different than owner.
7. Architect's name.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 383/460
8. A filing fee if required.
C. Standards: In making a determination whether to approve or deny an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Marion historic preservation commission shall be guided by the U.S.
secretary of the interior's publication entitled, "Illustrated U.S. Secretary Of The Interior's
Standards For Rehabilitation", as follows:
1. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal
change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site environment.
2. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic
materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
3. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that
create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or
architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
4. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their
own right shall be retained and preserved.
5. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship that characterize a building,
structure, or site shall be treated with sensitivity.
6. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of
deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in
design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of
missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.
7. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials
shall not be used. The surface cleaning of the structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken
using the gentlest means possible.
8. Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If
such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
9. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic
materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and
shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the
historic integrity of the property and its environment.
10. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner
that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
D. Design Guidelines: Design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of certificates of
appropriateness shall, at a minimum, consider the following architectural criteria:
1. Height: The height of any proposed alteration or construction should be compatible with the style
and character of the landmark and with surrounding structures in a historic district.
2. Proportions Of Windows And Doors: The proportions and relationships between doors and
windows should be compatible with the architectural style and character of the landmark.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 384/460
3. Relationship Of Building Masses And Spaces: The relationship of a structure within a historic
district to the open space between it and adjoining structures should be compatible.
4. Roof Shape: The design of the roof, fascia, and cornice should be compatible with the
architectural style and character of the landmark.
5. Landscaping: Landscaping should be compatible with the architectural character and
appearance of the landmark.
6. Scale: The scale of the structure after alteration, construction, or partial demolition should be
compatible with its architectural style and character and with surrounding structures in a historic
district.
7. Directional Expression: Facades in historic districts should blend with other structures with
regard to directional expression. Structures in a historic district should be compatible with the
dominant horizontal or vertical expression of surrounding structures. The directional expression
of a landmark after alteration, construction, or partial demolition should be compatible with its
original architectural style and character.
8. Architectural Details: Architectural details including types of materials, colors, and textures
should be treated so as to make the landmark compatible with its original architectural style and
character of a landmark or historic district.
9. New Structures: New structures in a historic district shall be compatible with the architectural
styles and design in said district. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
E. Hearing: Applications for a certificate of appropriateness are available from the city clerk. Such
applications shall be completed and submitted to the city clerk, which shall be forwarded to the
Marion historic preservation commission. The commission shall schedule a public meting for
consideration of the application within fifteen (15) days of receipt of application. A public notice for
consideration of the application shall be made not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty
(30) days before hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. If the historic
preservation commission finds at the time that the application merits further consideration, then the
commission may table the request until its next regularly scheduled meeting.
F. Issuance Of Certificate; Term:
1. The Marion historic preservation commission shall notify the applicant of their decision within
five (5) days after the public meeting. Upon approval of the application, the commission shall
direct the code enforcement officer to issue a signed certificate of appropriateness to the
applicant with copies retained by the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000; amd.
2013 Code)
2. A certificate of appropriateness shall be invalid if changes in the plans reviewed by the
commission are necessary in obtaining a building permit or if the building permit issued for the
same work becomes invalid. The certificate of appropriateness remains valid for the same period
of validity as the building permit (1 year).
G. Denial Of Certificate; Reapplication:
1. In the event of denial of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall
notify the applicant in writing of the disapproval and the reasons therefor and shall recommend
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 385/460
changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause the commission to reconsider its denial.
2. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notification of disapproval, the applicant may resubmit
an amended application that takes into consideration the recommendations of the historic
preservation commission. The application shall be considered to be withdrawn if no written
modification on request for public hearing is received. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a
written modification, the commission must either issue the certificate of appropriateness or hold
a hearing. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
H. Appeal And Decision:
1. Notices Of Appeal: The Marion historic preservation commission shall select a reasonable time
and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the applicant by mailing
notice of the hearing, said mailing to be made at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published at least once, not
less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days before the hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
2. Hearing: The chairperson shall conduct the hearing, and the Marion historic preservation
commission and the applicant shall have the right to introduce evidence and cross examine
witnesses. A recorded or written transcript of the hearing shall be made and kept.
3. Decision: The commission shall vote, announce its decision, make its recommendation, and
notify the city council and the applicant within five (5) days after the conclusion of the public
hearing, unless the time is extended by mutual agreement between the commission and the
applicant.
4. Subsequent Appeals: In the event of a denial of appeal by the Marion historic preservation
commission, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council, whose decision in this
matter shall be final, subject only to judicial review as provided by law. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
10-12-8: CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
A. Authority To Issue: Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the
commission may issue a certificate of economic hardship to allow the performance of work for
which a certificate of appropriateness has been denied.
B. Application For Certificate: An applicant for a certificate of economic hardship may submit any or all
of the following information in order to assist the commission in making its determination on the
application:
1. The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party from whom purchased
(including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner and the person from whom
the property was purchased).
2. The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to the two (2) most recent
assessments.
3. Real estate taxes for the previous two (2) years.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 386/460
4. Remaining balance on mortgage, if any, and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two (2)
years.
5. All appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the owner or applicant in connection
with the purchase, financing or ownership of the property.
6. Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any.
7. Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for the property.
8. If the property is income producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous
two (2) years, itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two (2) years, and
annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period.
9. Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not for
profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other.
10. Any other information, including the income tax bracket of the owner, applicant or principal
investors in the property, reasonably necessary for a determination as to whether the property
can be reasonably used or yield a reasonable return to present or future owners.
C. Delay Of Application: If the commission finds that, without approval of the proposed work, the
property cannot obtain a reasonable economic return therefrom, then the application shall be
delayed for a period not to exceed three (3) months. During this period of delay, the commission
shall investigate plans and make recommendations to the city council to allow for a reasonably
beneficial use or a reasonable economic return, or to otherwise preserve the subject property.
Such plans and recommendations may include, but not be limited to, a relaxation of the provisions
of this chapter, a reduction in real property taxes, financial assistance, building code modifications
and/or changes in zoning regulations.
D. Issuance Or Denial Of Certificate: If, by the end of the three (3) month period, the commission has
found that, without approval of the proposed work, the property cannot be put to a reasonable
beneficial use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic return therefrom, then the
commission shall issue a certificate of economic hardship approving the proposed work. If the
commission finds otherwise, it shall deny the application for a certificate of economic hardship.
(Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
10-12-9: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
A. When a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship is approved or denied
for either a landmark or a structure within a historic district, the applicant or any interested party
may, within thirty (30) days, appeal the commission's decision to the city council. The council may
receive comments on the contents of the record, but no new matter may be considered by the
council.
B. The city council may affirm the decision or recommend changes by a majority vote of the council
after due consideration of the facts contained in the record submitted to the council by the
commission. The council may overturn the commission's decision by a majority vote of a quorum
of the council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 387/460
C. If the council decides that a certificate of economic hardship should be issued, the city clerk shall
notify the applicant and the inspector within seven (7) days of the council's decision, and the
inspector then shall issue the permit within fifteen (15) days. If the council concurs with the
commission's decision not to issue a certificate of economic hardship, the city clerk shall notify the
applicant and the inspector within seven (7) days. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
10-12-10: NATURAL DESTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION:
In the case of partial or complete natural destruction or demolition of a site within a historic
preservation district or of a landmark, the owner will be required to obtain a certificate of
appropriateness from the commission prior to reconstruction. Although exact duplication of the
previous structure may not be required, the exterior design of the property shall be in harmony with:
A. The exterior design of the structure prior to damage; and
B. The character of the historic preservation district. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
10-12-11: FEES:
The preservation commission may establish an appropriate system of processing fees for the review
of nominations and certificates of appropriateness. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000)
10-12-12: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who undertakes or causes an alteration, construction, demolition, or removal of any
nominated or designated landmark or property within a nominated or designated landmark or
designated historic district without a certificate of appropriateness shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
Every day such violation shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate violation. The preservation
commission may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in the name of the city to enjoin,
correct or abate any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1981, 9-13-2000; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 13
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDINGS
10-13-1: DEFINITION:
When used in this chapter, the term "special amusement building" means any building, temporary,
permanent or mobile, or portion thereof, if occupied for amusement entertainment or educational
purposes and that contains a device or system that conveys passengers or provides a walkway along,
around or over a course in any direction so arranged that the means of egress path is not readily
apparent due to visual or audio distractions or is intentionally confounded or is not readily available
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 388/460
because of the nature of the attraction or mode of conveyance through the building or structure. (IFC
202 definitions.) (Ord. 2377, 9-26-2011)
10-13-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
Special amusement buildings having an occupant load of fifty (50) or more shall comply with the
requirements for the appropriate group A occupancy. Amusement buildings having an occupant load
of less than fifty (50) shall comply with the requirements for group B occupancy. Amusement buildings
or portions thereof that are without walls or a roof constructed to prevent the accumulation of smoke
shall be exempt. (Ord. 2377, 9-26-2011)
10-13-3: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
A. In any special amusement building using the maze concept, there may be no dead end corridors,
and there must be an obvious exit out of the maze for every seventy five feet (75') of linear travel.
B. All stairways must be illuminated at a level of at least one foot-candle.
C. Only class (A) fire retardant finish materials shall be used. All curtains shall be made of fire
retardant materials. Any exposed wooden structures must be treated or coated with a fire retardant
material.
D. All electrical installations must meet the national electrical code (NFPA 70). No extension/zip cords
are permitted; however, electrical multistrip devices with a circuit breaker are allowed. No more
than four (4) 12-gauge heavy duty cords shall be used with multistrip.
E. Automatic sprinkler systems are required where the total floor area exceeds five thousand (5,000)
square feet. (Ord. 2377, 9-26-2011)
F. There shall be a lobby entrance if the occupant load is greater than fifty (50), and if there is a travel
distance of seventy five feet (75'), two (2) exits are required. (Ord. 2377, 9-26-2011; amd. 2013
Code)
G. Exit lights and emergency lights shall be posted.
H. There shall be no smoking anytime inside building. "NO SMOKING" signs shall be posted.
I. Fire extinguishers shall be placed every fifty feet (50') of travel distance.
J. Smoke detectors shall be installed (battery operated allowed).
K. A public address system or a fire alarm detection system is required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 389/460
L. A group shall consist of twenty (20) individuals or less. Each group shall be accompanied or
supervised by a staff person who is eighteen (18) years of age or older. This staff person must
have in his possession an operable flashlight, a whistle and a portable radio capable of
communicating with a supervisor, and will be completely familiar with the building, the exits, and
the evacuation process.
M. Evacuation drawings shall be given to the city fire department. (Ord. 2377, 9-26-2011)
N. Plans shall be provided to the code enforcement officer prior to installation. Upon plan approval, a
fire inspection is required. A forty eight (48) hour notice will be needed before an inspection can be
scheduled. (If in an existing structure, a $50.00 permit fee is required.) (Ord. 2377, 9-26-2011;
amd. 2013 Code)
O. Dates of use and operation hours shall be made known to the city (starting date to ending date).
P. A person shall be stationed in a control area with the ability to shut down the amusement and turn
on all lights in the event of an emergency. (Ord. 2377, 9-26-2011)
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
PURPOSE; JURISDICTION; INTERPRETATION
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MARION,
ILLINOIS. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to establish zone districts and regulations governing the development and
use of land within the city in order to preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1 et seq. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff.
6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
11-1-3: JURISDICTION:
A. This title shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the city and within one and one-half (1.5)
miles of the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 390/460
B. No general or specific zoning classification of any type or form which is or may be imposed under
and by virtue of this title shall apply to or affect, in any regard, the lands and territory contained
within the county regional airport authority; these lands and territories being specifically and
expressly excluded from coverage by this title. Neither by the express or implicit language of this
title shall the perimeter zoning of the city extend unto the lands and territory of the county regional
airport authority, as the same coverage shall be and is hereby expressly excluded therefrom. (Ord.
1351, 8-27-1990)
11-1-4: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
A. Every provision of this title shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, and every requirement
imposed herein shall be deemed minimal. Whenever the requirements of this title differ from the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted and effective ordinance, regulation, deed restriction, or
covenant, the more stringent requirement shall prevail. Regardless of any other provision of this
title, no land shall be used and no structure shall be erected or maintained in violation of any duly
constituted laws of the state of Illinois or of the United States Of America.
B. If any provision of this title is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-
1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-1-5: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Except as specifically provided in this title, no building, structure, or land shall be used and no
building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, occupied, moved,
altered or repaired, except in conformity with this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-1-6: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no official, city council member, agent,
commission or board appointee, or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any
damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of duties under this title. Any such person made a party to a civil action, civil rights or
constitutional rights damage action, or antitrust action by reason of the discharge of said duties shall
be held harmless and indemnified by the city for all damages and attorney fees incurred; provided,
that: a) the person makes a timely disclosure of the litigation or threatened litigation to the city; and b)
the person authorizes the city to provide primary representation through the city attorney in such
litigation or threatened litigation and cooperates with the city in the primary presentation. The city will
not indemnify such person for punitive damages assessed against the person nor pay attorney fees
incurred by the person for counsel not retained by the city. Said indemnification shall be against all
judgments, fines, amounts paid in settlements, and reasonable expenses incurred resulting from any
such action or proceeding, or any appeal, to the fullest amount permitted by the laws of the state of
Illinois. The foregoing statement of indemnification is deemed to be a contract between the city and
each city official, city council member, agent, commission or board appointee, or employee with
explicit or implied responsibilities under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-
1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 391/460
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In constructing the intended meanings of terms used in this title, the following rules are observed:
A. Words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in section 11-2-2 of this
chapter unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; terms not defined in section 11-2-2 of this
chapter shall have their standard English dictionary meanings.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is discretionary.
D. All distances shall be measured to the nearest integral foot; six inches (6") or more shall be
deemed one foot (1').
E. References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections within that section; but a
reference to a particular subsection designates only that subsection. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-
1-1987)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ABUTTING: As applied to lots, means having a common lot line or district line, or so located in relation
to each other that there would be a common lot line or district line but for the existence of a street,
alley, or other public right of way.
ACCESSORY USE: Any structure or use that is:
A. Subordinate in size or purpose to the principal structure or use which it serves;
B. Necessary or contributing to the comfort and convenience of the occupants of the principal
structure or use served; and
C. Located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served.
ACCESSWAY: A curb cut, ramp, driveway, or other means for providing vehicular access to an off
street parking or loading area.
ADMINISTRATOR: The person or agent assigned to administer this title by the Marion city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 392/460
AGRICULTURE: Any one or any combination of the following: the growing of farm or truck garden
crops, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, or animal/poultry husbandry. The term "agriculture"
encompasses the farmhouse and accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to agricultural
activities.
AISLE: A vehicular trafficway within an off street parking area, used as a means of access/egress
from parking spaces.
ALLEY: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting
premises that front on a nearby street.
ALTER: To change the size, shape, or use of a structure.
AMENDMENT: A change in the provisions of this title, including those portions incorporated by
reference, properly accomplished in accordance with state law and the procedures set forth herein.
APARTMENT: See definition of Dwelling, Multiple-Family.
ATTACHED: As applied to buildings, means having a common wall and/or common roof.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An operator occupied residence providing
accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than five (5) guestrooms for rent. Meals may
be provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfast establishments shall not include motels, hotels,
boarding houses or food service establishments.
BLOCK: An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers, or ways (except alleys,
pedestrianways, or exterior boundaries of a subdivision) or bounded by a combination of streets,
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The zoning board of appeals of the city of Marion, Illinois.
BUILDING: Any covered structure permanently affixed to land and designed to be used to shelter
persons or chattels.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average grade at the front wall of a
building to the highest point of the coping of flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the
mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs. Chimneys, towers,
cooling towers and similar projections shall not be included in calculating building height.
BUILDING LINE: The line nearest the front of and across a lot, delineating the minimum open space
required between the front of a structure and the street right of way line.
CITY: The city of Marion, Illinois.
CLINIC: An establishment where licensed physicians, chiropractors, dentists, or other practitioners of
the healing arts, who are licensed by the state of Illinois, respectively practice medicine, chiropractic,
or dentistry but where overnight lodging for sick or injured persons is not provided.
CLUB/LODGE: A nonprofit association of people who are bona fide members organized for some
purpose(s) that includes the rendering of a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.
CONFORMING: In compliance with the applicable provisions of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 393/460
CONVENTIONALLY BUILT: A generic type of construction activity, exclusive of mobile homes,
involving the original assembly of building materials or final assembly of unitized components on a
construction site within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Marion, Illinois.
DAYCARE CENTER: See definition of Nursery School.
DETACHED: As applied to buildings, means surrounded by yards on the same lot as the building and
not otherwise attached to a second structure.
DEVELOP: To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of land, or to undertake
any activity (such as grading) in preparation thereof.
DIMENSIONS: Refers to lot depth and width.
DISTRICT, ZONING: A portion of the territory subject to this title wherein certain uniform requirements
or various combinations thereof apply to structures, lots, and uses under the terms of this title.
DRIVEWAY: A minor way commonly providing vehicular access to a garage or off street parking area.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used primarily as living quarters for one or more
families, but not including hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, motels, or other accommodations for the
transient public.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof containing two (2) or more dwelling
units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building intended for the use of one family as living quarters.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed or used as living quarters by one family. A "dwelling
unit" always includes at least one bathroom and a kitchen.
EASEMENT: A right to use another person's real property for certain limited purposes.
ENCLOSED: As applied to a building, means covered by a permanent roof and separated on all sides
from adjacent open space or other buildings by fixed exterior walls or by common walls, with openings
only for windows and doors.
ENLARGE: To increase the size (floor area, height, etc.) of an existing structure or to devote more
land to an existing use.
ERECT: To build or construct.
ESTABLISHMENT: Either of the following:
A. An institutional, business, commercial, or industrial activity that is the sole occupant of one or
more buildings; or
B. An institutional, business, commercial, or industrial activity that occupies a portion of a building
such that:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 394/460
1. The activity is a logical and separate entity from the other activities within the building and not
a department of the whole; and
2. The activity has either a separate entrance from the exterior of the building, or a separate
entrance from a common and clearly defined entryway that has direct access to the exterior of
the building.
EXISTING: Actually constructed or in operation on the effective date hereof.
FAMILY: One person, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, or not
more than three (3) unrelated persons, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building,
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center of the common walls of
attached buildings. Gross floor area includes basement floors, attic floor space, halls, closets,
stairwells, space devoted to mechanical equipment, and enclosed porches.
FRONTAGE: The linear extent of the front (street side) of a lot.
GREENHOUSE: A building in which trees, shrubs, and other plants are raised for transplanting and
sale in support of agricultural, wholesale, or retail enterprises.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any business, profession, or occupation conducted for gain entirely within a
dwelling or on residential premises in conformity with the provisions of this title.
HOSPITAL: An institution devoted, on an around the clock basis, to the maintenance and operation of
facilities for the diagnosis, treatment, or care of members of the general public suffering from disease,
injury, or other abnormal physical conditions. The term "hospital", as used in this title, includes
sanatoriums but excludes institutions operating solely for the treatment of mentally ill, drug addicts or
alcoholics, and convalescent/nursing homes.
IMMOBILIZE: As applied to a mobile home, means to remove the wheels, tongue, and hitch and/or to
place on a permanent foundation.
INTERSECTION: The point at which two (2) or more public rights of way (generally streets) meet.
KENNEL: Any structure or premises or portion thereof on which more than three (3) dogs, cats, or
other household domestic animals over four (4) months of age are kept.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space used for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of transfer of
ownership or development. A lot may or may not coincide with a "lot of record".
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot having at least two (2) sides that abut along their full length upon street rights of
way but not along alleys or other minor ways. Both lot lines that abut street rights of way shall be
deemed front lot lines.
LOT COVERAGE: The portion of a lot that is occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 395/460
buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot boundary abutting the street right of way.
LOT LINE, REAR: An interior lot line which is most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary line of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS: Refers to the required area, width, and depth dimensions of a lot within
a given zone district.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut two (2) approximately
parallel street rights of way. Both lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The average horizontal width of a lot measured at right angles to the side lot lines.
MAINTENANCE: The routine upkeep of a structure, premises, or equipment, including the
replacement or modification of structural components to the extent necessary to keep the said
structure in sound condition.
MOBILE HOME: Regardless of intended or ultimate use, a structure designed to permit transport on
its own wheels and chassis including, but not limited to, "doublewides" and "modulars".
MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot(s), not more than two (2) acres in area, in single ownership/control,
developed with facilities for accommodating occupied mobile homes in accordance with the
requirements of the Marion mobile home regulations.
MOBILE HOME STANDARDS: Standards applying to the space beneath a mobile home that includes
a concrete slab or runners on which the home is placed.
NONCONFORMING: As applied to a lot, structure, or use, means: a) lawfully existing on the effective
date hereof; but b) not in compliance with the applicable provisions hereof.
NUISANCE: Any thing, condition, or conduct that endangers health, or unreasonably offends the
senses, or obstructs the free use and comfortable enjoyment of property, or essentially interferes with
the comfortable enjoyment of life.
NURSERY: A tract of land on which trees, shrubs, or other plants are raised for transplanting and
sale, and including any structure in which said activities are conducted.
NURSERY SCHOOL: An establishment for the part time care and/or instruction of four (4) or more
unrelated children of preelementary school age.
NURSING HOME: A building used as a medical care facility for persons who need long term nursing
care and medical services, but do not require intensive hospital care.
OFFICE: Any building or portion thereof in which the business (usually clerical and administrative
affairs) of a commercial/service enterprise or professional person is transacted.
PARKING AREA/LOT, OFF STREET: Land that is improved in accordance with this title and used
primarily for the storage/parking of passenger motor vehicles, free of charge or for compensation. An
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 396/460
"off street parking area", depending upon the circumstances of its use, is either a principal use or an
accessory use.
PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET: An area at least twenty feet (20') long and ten feet (10') wide within
an off street parking area or garage, used for parking or storage of one passenger motor vehicle.
PERMITTED USE: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular district, provided it
conforms with all the requirements applicable to said district.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, organization, or corporate body.
PET BOARDING FACILITY: An animal facility used for the care and temporary boarding (including
daycare) of dogs and cats and other animals normally kept as pets, in return for consideration, not
including an animal hospital which only boards animals receiving medical treatment.
PLOT: A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which is described by
reference to a recorded plat or by metes and bounds.
PREMISES: A lot and all the structures and uses thereon.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE/USE: The main structure erected on or the main use occupying
a lot, as distinguished from an accessory (subordinate) structure or use.
PROPERTY LINE: See definition of Lot Line, Front, Lot Line, Rear and Lot Line, Side.
RECONSTRUCT: As applied to nonconforming structures, means to rebuild after partial or total
destruction.
RELOCATE: To move to another location on a lot or to a different lot.
REPAIR: To restore to sound condition, but not to reconstruct.
RETAIL: Refers to the sale of goods or services directly to the consumer rather than to another
business.
RIGHT OF WAY, PUBLIC: A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has dedicated to the city or to
another unit of government for streets, alleys or public passage.
SERVICE USE/ESTABLISHMENT: Any land use or establishment wherein services are provided for
remuneration either to individuals or to other firms.
SETBACK: The distance between the front lot line and the building line; or between a side or rear lot
line and that side of the structure which faces such lot line; or between the appropriate lot line and the
nearest boundary of the area of operation which is approximately parallel to such lot line.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: See definition of Dwelling, Single-Family.
SKIRTING: The covering affixed to the bottom of the exterior walls of a mobile home to conceal the
underside thereof.
SPECIAL USE: A use that has unusual operational, physical, and other characteristics which
distinguish it from the permitted uses of a district, but which can be made compatible with the intended
overall development within a district. "Special uses" commonly must meet special standards not
necessarily applicable to permitted uses in the district, and are allowed only by permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 397/460
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this title to regulate the
development/operation of a special use.
STABLE: A structure, situated on the same lot as a dwelling, and designed or used for housing horses
for the private use of occupants of the dwelling, but not for hire.
STREET: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street" includes a highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, and
similar designations, but excludes an alley or a way for pedestrian use only.
STREET, PRIVATE: Any street providing access to abutting property that is not maintained by or
dedicated to the city or another public entity.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to something having a
fixed location on the ground. All buildings are structures, but not all structures are buildings.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: Any structure that is not attached to a permanent foundation.
TEMPORARY USE PERMIT: A permit issued in accordance with provisions of this title and valid for
not more than one year, which allows the erection or occupation of a temporary structure or the
operation of a temporary enterprise.
TOPOGRAPHY: The physical relief features or surface configuration of an area.
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or a structure thereon is designed, occupied, or used.
USE VARIANCE: An amendment (not variance) that allows a use in a district where said use would
not be allowed under existing provisions of this title.
UTILITY SUBSTATION: A secondary utility facility such as an electrical substation, gas regulator
station, telephone exchange facility, and sewage treatment plant.
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the strict application of the lot size, setbacks, or other bulk requirements
applicable to a particular lot or structure.
WHOLESALE: Refers to the sale of goods or services by one business to another business.
YARD: Open space that is unobstructed except as specifically permitted in this title and is located on
the same lot as the principal building.
YARD, FRONT: A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, front lot lines, and the building line.
YARD, REAR: A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot lines, and the rear building line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard line, side property line and side
building line.
ZONING MAP: The map and any amendments thereto designating zoning districts, and incorporated
into this title by reference. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 2118, 12-11-2006; 2013
Code; Ord. 3142, 12-9-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 398/460
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-3-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The mayor, with the consent of the city council, will appoint a zoning administrator who will administer
the day to day functions of this title. The administrator will receive and record all applications for
permits and clearances authorized under this title. The administrator will issue zone clearances upon
applicant satisfaction of the zoning requirements. The administrator is additionally authorized to grant
relief of up to ten percent (10%) from any zoning requirement involving setbacks, heights, or parking
when the zoning procedure does not involve the zoning board of appeals, city council, or county
regional airport authority. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-3-2: ZONE CLEARANCE:
A zone clearance shall be issued by the administrator prior to the issuance of a building permit(s). An
approved zone clearance shall indicate that a proposed use, lot, and/or structure is in compliance with
the provisions of this title. The administrator shall not issue a zone clearance in any instance requiring
action by the zoning board of appeals and/or city council prior to their final action(s). (Ord. 1148, 4-27-
1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-3-3: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
This title divides the city into various districts, and permits, in each district, as a matter of right, only
those uses which are clearly compatible with one another. Certain other uses, because of their special
operational or physical characteristics, may not have a detrimental impact on nearby permitted uses,
depending upon their precise location, manner of operation, and other factors. Such "special uses"
require careful case by case review and may be allowed only by permission of the city council.
A. Application For Permit: Every applicant for a special use permit shall submit to the administrator, in
narrative and/or graphic form, the items of information enumerated in this subsection. The
administrator shall prepare an advisory report on every request for a special use permit. He shall
promptly transmit the completed application and his advisory report to the board of appeals. A filing
fee is required and is presented in section 11-3-8 of this chapter, which fee may be amended from
time to time by the city council. Application forms will be made available by the city clerk and/or
administrator. Said application will provide the following items of information:
1. Name and address of the applicant;
2. Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed structure or use, if different from
subsection A1 of this section;
3. Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner of operation, number of occupants
or employees, and similar matters;
4. Location of the proposed use or structure, and its relationship to existing adjacent uses or
structures;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 399/460
5. Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or use;
6. Existing topography of the site (USGS 10 foot contour data is acceptable), and proposed
finished grade;
7. Height and setbacks of the proposed structure;
8. Number and size of proposed dwelling units, if any;
9. Location and number of proposed parking/loading spaces and accessways;
10. Identification and location of all existing or proposed utilities, whether public or private; and/or
11. Any other pertinent information that the administrator may require.
B. Public Hearing; Notice: The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on every special use
permit application within a reasonable time after said application is submitted thereto. The
applicant for a special use permit shall provide a list of names and addresses of the parties whose
property abuts the proposed special use. The chair of the board of appeals shall have the
responsibility of scheduling the public hearings and sending out notices to that effect. At the
hearing, any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent
or attorney. Notice indicating the time, date, and place of hearing, and the nature of the proposed
special use shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the
hearing:
1. By first class mail to the applicant and to all parties whose property abuts the proposed special
use.
2. By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
C. Advisory Report; Factors Considered: Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the zoning
board of appeals shall submit their advisory report to the council. In deciding what their advice
should be, the board of appeals shall consider the following factors:
1. Whether the proposed design, location, and manner of operation of the proposed special use
will adequately protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and the physical environment;
2. The effect the proposed special use would have on the value of neighboring property and on the
city's overall tax base;
3. The effect the proposed special use would have on public utilities and on traffic circulation on
nearby streets; and
4. Whether there are any facilities near the proposed special use (such as schools or hospitals)
that require special protection.
D. Council Action: The council shall act on every request for special use permits at their regularly
scheduled meeting following submission of the advisory report of the board of appeals. Without
further public hearing, the council may grant a special use permit by simple majority vote of all
members then holding office. In a separate statement accompanying the permit, the council shall
state their findings of fact, and indicate their reasons for approving (with or without conditions) or
denying the request for a special use permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 400/460
E. Duration: A special use permit may be issued for a period up to eight (8) years and may be
extended by the same process for subsequent ten (10) year periods. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-
1-1987)
11-3-4: TEMPORARY USE PERMITS:
Requests for temporary use permits shall be treated in substantially the same manner as requests for
special use permits. The council shall not initially issue any temporary use permit for a period longer
than one year, but they may renew any such permit as they see fit. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-
1987)
11-3-5: VARIANCES:
A. Application For Variance; Fee Required:
1. Every application for a variance shall be filed with the administrator on a prescribed form. Every
variance application shall also be filed with the soil and water conservation district as per state
law1. The administrator shall promptly transmit said application, together with any advice he
might wish to offer, to the board of appeals.
2. The application shall contain sufficient information to allow the board to make an informed
decision, and shall include, at a minimum, the following:
a. Name and address of the applicant;
b. Brief description/explanation of the requested variance;
c. Location of the structure/use for which the variance is sought;
d. Relationship of said structure/use to existing structures/uses on adjacent lots;
e. Specific section(s) of this title containing the regulations which, if strictly applied, would cause
a serious problem; and
f. Any other pertinent information that the administrator may require. A filing fee is required.
B. Public Hearing; Notice: The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on each variance request
within a reasonable time after the variance application is submitted thereto. At the hearing, any
interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
Notice indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing and nature of the proposed variance shall
be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
1. By first class mail to the applicant and to all parties whose property abuts the property for which
the variance is requested.
2. By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
C. Standards For Variance: The board of appeals shall not recommend nor shall the council grant any
variance unless, based upon the evidence presented to them, they determine that:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 401/460
1. The proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of this title; and
2. Strict application of the district requirements would result in great practical difficulties or hardship
to the applicant and prevent a reasonable return on the property; and
3. The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from such requirements that will alleviate the
difficulties/hardships and allow a reasonable return on the property; and
4. The peculiar circumstances engendering the variance request are not applicable to other
property within the district, and therefore, the variance would be more appropriately a remedy
than an amendment (rezoning); and
5. The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the area where the premises in
question is located.
D. Advisory Report; Council Decision: Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the board of
appeals shall submit an advisory report to the council. The council may grant a variance by simple
majority vote of all members then holding office and shall act on the requested variance at their
next regularly scheduled meeting following submission of the advisory report of the board of
appeals. In accordance with state law, the council shall specify the terms of relief granted (if any) in
one statement and their findings of fact in another statement. The findings of fact shall clearly
indicate the council's reasons for granting or denying any requested variance. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-
1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
11-3-6: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authority: The council may amend this title in accordance with state law2, and the provisions of this
section. Proposed alterations of district boundaries or proposed changes in the status of uses
(permitted, special, prohibited) shall be deemed proposed amendments. Amendments may be
proposed by the council, administrator, the board of appeals, or any party in interest.
B. Filing Amendment; Fee: Every proposal to amend this title shall be filed with the administrator on a
prescribed form. Every amendment proposal shall also be filed with the soil and water
conservation district as per 70 Illinois Compiled Statutes 405/22.02a. The administrator shall
promptly transmit said proposal, together with any comments or desired recommendations, to the
board of appeals who will conduct a public hearing. A filing fee is required. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987,
eff. 6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Public Hearing; Notice: The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on every
amendment proposal within a reasonable time after said proposal has been submitted thereto. At
the hearing, any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by duly authorized
agent or attorney. Notice indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the nature of the
proposed amendment shall be given not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days
before the hearing:
1. By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city; and
2. When the amendment involves a rezoning, not a text amendment, by first class mail to all
parties whose property abuts the property(ies) for which rezoning is requested.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 402/460
D. Advisory Report; Findings Of Fact: Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the board of
appeals shall submit their advisory report to the council. The report shall state recommendations of
the board of appeals regarding adoption of the proposed amendment, and their reasons therefor. If
the effect of the proposed amendment would be to alter district boundaries or to change the status
of any use, the board of appeals shall include in their advisory report findings of fact concerning
each of the following matters:
1. Existing use(s) and zoning of the property in question;
2. Existing use(s) and zoning of other lots in the vicinity of the property in question;
3. Suitability of the property in question for uses already permitted under existing regulations;
4. Suitability of the property in question for the proposed use; and
5. The trend of development in the vicinity of the property in question, including changes (if any)
which may have occurred since the property was initially zoned or last rezoned.
E. Council Action: The council shall act on every proposed amendment at their next regularly
scheduled meeting following submission of the advisory report of the board of appeals. Without
further public hearing, the council may pass or deny any proposed amendment or may refer it back
to the board of appeals for further consideration by simple majority vote of all the members then
holding office. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
F. Protests: The favorable vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the council is required
to pass an amendment to this title when the proposed amendment is opposed, in writing, by the
owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners
of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered3.
(Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
G. Rezones From Rural-Agricultural District To Industrial District: The city council may amend the
rural-agricultural zone district to the industrial zone by suspension of the above procedures upon a
finding of fact at the city council level that the community's economic development will be
enhanced by the amendment. The city council may initiate the proceeding. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987,
eff. 6-1-1987)
11-3-7: APPEALS:
A. Authority; Compliance With Law: Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
administrator in any matter related to the interpretation or enforcement of any provision of this title
may appeal to the board of appeals. Every such appeal shall be made and treated in accordance
with Illinois law4 and the provisions of this section.
B. Filing; Record Transmittal; Fee: Every appeal shall be made within forty five (45) days of the matter
complained of by filing with the administrator and the board of appeals a written notice specifying
the grounds for appeal. Every appeal shall also be filed with the soil and water conservation district
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 403/460
as per state law5. Not more than five (5) working days after the notice of appeal has been filed, the
administrator shall transmit to the board of appeals all records pertinent to the case. A filing fee is
required. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all further action on the matter being appealed unless the
administrator certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him,
that, for reasons stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case, further action shall not be stayed unless the board of appeals or the circuit court grants
a restraining order for due cause and so notifies the administrator.
D. Public Hearing; Notice: The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on every appeal within a
reasonable time after the filing of the appeal. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and
testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the time, date,
and place of the hearing, and briefly describing the issue to be decided shall be given not more
than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
1. By first class mail to the applicant and to all parties whose property abuts the property affected
by the appeal; and
2. By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
E. Advisory Report; Council Decision: Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the board of
appeals shall submit an advisory report to the council. The council shall make the final decision on
the appeal at their next regularly scheduled meeting following submission of said report. The
council, by an ordinance passed by simple majority vote of all members then holding office, may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or amend the decision or order appealed from to
the extent and in the manner that they deem appropriate. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-3-8: FEES:
The schedule of fees is as follows:
Zone clearance $10.00
Prezoning None
Special use
permit
$20.00, plus the cost of publication - $30.00
Temporary use
permit
$20.00
Planned unit development $20.00, plus the cost of publication - $30.00
Amendments $20.00, plus the cost of publication - $30.00
Appeals $20.00, plus the cost of publication - $30.00
Variances $20.00, plus the cost of publication - $30.00
Fence permit $15.00, plus the cost of zone clearance - $10.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 404/460
(Ord. 1512, 6-13-1994)
11-3-9: VIOLATION PREVENTION PROCEEDINGS:
A. In case any building or structure, including fixtures, is constructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained, or any building or structure, including fixtures, or land is used in violation of this title,
the administrator, mayor and city council, or any other tenant of real property within one thousand
two hundred feet (1,200') of any direction of the property on which the building or structure in
question is located, may, in addition to other remedies, initiate actions or proceedings to: (Ord.
1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
1. Prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or
use;
2. Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land;
3. Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the premises; or
4. Restrain, correct, or abate the violation.
B. When any such action is initiated by the city, the city will be represented by the city attorney.
C. When any such action is initiated by an owner or tenant, notice of such action shall be served upon
the city at the same time the suit is begun by serving a copy of the complaint upon the mayor.
D. The court of proper jurisdiction may issue a restraining order, a preliminary injunction, and/or a
permanent injunction upon such terms and under such conditions as will do justice and enforce the
purpose of this title.
E. An owner or tenant need not prove any specific, special, or unique damages to self or property from
the alleged violation to maintain a suit. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
F. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-15, an owner or tenant plaintiff may seek and be
allowed a reasonable sum of money for legal fees when the defendant has engaged in prohibited
activities. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
11-3-10: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Violations of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in grants of variances, special uses, temporary
uses, or planned unit developments) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this title
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both, and shall
pay all legal expenses and corresponding court costs. Each day that a violation exists constitutes a
separate offense. The owner of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 405/460
builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such
violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. (Ord.
1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
ARTICLE A. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
11-3A-1: ESTABLISHED; STATUTE AUTHORITY:
The zoning board of appeals is hereby established in accordance with Illinois law1. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-
1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
11-3A-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION:
The board of appeals shall consist of five (5) members. Each board member shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. One of the members so appointed shall be
named as chair at the time of appointment. Each board member shall receive for services such
compensation, if any, as is determined from time to time by the council. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-
1-1987; amd. Ord. 3077, 1-14-2013)
11-3A-3: TERMS OF OFFICE; REMOVALS AND VACANCIES:
Each board member shall hold office for five (5) years from the date of appointment, and until a
successor has been selected and qualified. With the advice and consent of the city council, the mayor
may remove any member on the board of appeals for cause, after a public hearing. Vacancies on the
board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the
same manner as provided for the appointment of new members. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987;
amd. Ord. 3077, 1-14-2013)
11-3A-4: ORGANIZATION:
A. Meetings: All meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chair and at such time
as the chair may determine. All board meetings shall be open to the public.
B. Rules Of Procedures: The board may adopt their own rules of meeting procedures consistent with
this title and the applicable Illinois statutes.
C. Officers: The board may select such officers as they deem necessary. The chair, or in his absence
an acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
D. Quorum: Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of at
least four (4) members shall be necessary to authorize any board action.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 406/460
E. Authority To Present Opinions: Representatives of the Marion school district or the owner(s) of land
located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any land subject to board public hearings may appear
and give testimony concerning prospective or requested actions. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-
1987)
F. Minutes And Records: The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and examinations. These
minutes shall indicate the presence or absence of members, the vote, including abstentions, of
each member on each question, and any official action taken. A copy of every rule, variance,
special use permit, planned unit development, amendment, order, or decision of the board shall be
filed with the city clerk and shall be of public record. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd.
2013 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
11-4-1: CONTINUING EXISTING USES:
Any use lawfully existing at the effective date hereof shall be allowed to continue as a nonconforming
use, subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-4-2: REPAIR OF UNSAFE STRUCTURES:
Any part of any building or structure which is declared unsafe by the city may be strengthened or
restored to a safe condition pursuant to inspection by the administrator. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-
1-1987)
11-4-3: ACCESS AND STREET FRONTAGE:
No building shall be erected on any lot unless such lot abuts or has permanent easement of access to
a public or private street. Such lot abutment or permanent easement of access shall not be less than
thirty feet (30') on a street. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-4-4: INTRUSIONS INTO YARDS:
To the extent indicated below, the following features of principal buildings may intrude into required
yards without violating the minimum setback requirements:
TABLE 2
MAXIMUM YARD INTRUSIONS
Feature
Maximum Intrusion
Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 407/460
Cornices, chimneys, and architectural features 2 feet None 2 feet
Fire escapes 4 feet None 4 feet
Patios at ground level Not applicable No limit No limit
Decks (elevated 6 inches or more) 6 feet None 6 feet
Balconies 4 feet None 4 feet
Roof overhangs 4 feet 2 feet 4 feet
(Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-4-5: HEIGHT LIMIT EXCEPTIONS:
Chimneys, church spires, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, antennas, and other
necessary appurtenances commonly constructed above the roof line shall be permitted to exceed the
maximum height limitation of the district in which they are located if they comply with all other pertinent
city ordinances and do not conflict with the provisions of the airport overlay district (APO). (Ord. 1148,
4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
11-4-6: WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
In all districts, property owners of all buildings and places where people live, work, or assemble shall
provide for the sanitary disposal of all sewage in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Whenever the city sewage system is available within a distance of three hundred feet (300') or less
measured from the property line closest to the sewage system, all sewage shall be discharged into
the city system. This requirement applies regardless of the availability of a private sewage system
which may already exist or which may be more convenient.
B. Whenever the city sewage system is not located within the distance described in subsection A of
this section, a private sewage system shall be installed and used. All private sewage systems shall
be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the following requirements:
1. Illinois private sewage disposal licensing act, as amended.
2. Illinois private sewage disposal code number 4.002, promulgated by the Illinois department of
public health, as amended from time to time.
3. Pertinent current regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-
1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
4. Regulations of section 9-3-3 of this code. (2013 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 408/460
Chapter 5
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
11-5-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For the purposes of this title, the city is divided into the following districts:
R-A Rural-agricultural district
R-1 Single-family residential district
R-2 General residential district
M-H Mobile home district
C-1 General commercial district
C-2 Highway commercial district
I Industrial district
FPO Floodplain overlay district
APO Airport overlay district
PUD Planned unit development district
(Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 1287, 8-28-1989; 2013 Code)
11-5-2: BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
The boundaries of the zoning districts are established on two (2) corresponding maps entitled "Zone
District Map, City Of Marion, Illinois" (part 1 and part 2), which are part of this title. District boundary
lines follow lot lines, centerlines of streets and alleys, railroad rights of way, and other similar features.
Questions concerning the exact location of the district boundaries shall be determined by the zoning
board of appeals. In accordance with Illinois state law, if any changes are made in the zoning districts
or regulations during a calendar year, the city shall publish the revised official zoning map no later
than March 31 of the following year. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-5-3: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND; PREZONING:
A. Any territory annexed to the city is, upon such annexation, automatically zoned R-A ruralagricultural,
until otherwise zoned.
B. Property owners seeking to have their property annexed to the city may petition the city council to
prezone such territory. In assigning a zone district designation to the subject territory, any zone
classification or combination of classifications may be utilized so long as said classifications do not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 409/460
constitute a land use conflict in the opinion of the city council. The city council may seek the
advisory opinion of the zoning board of appeals on prezoning issues. The requirements of section
11-4-1 of this title apply to prezoning procedures. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
Chapter 6
R-A RURAL-AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
11-6-1: PERMITTED USES:
Agricultural uses including farms, ranches, and horticultural enterprises.
Commercial nurseries, greenhouses, and temporary produce stands.
Contractor storage yards and facilities related to agricultural enterprises including spraying, trimming,
fertilizing, tree removal, drainage, and/or crop harvesting and storage.
Governmental facilities including airports and cemeteries.
Offices.
Private or public recreational facilities including golf courses.
Single-family residences. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 1212, 5-9-1988)
11-6-2: SPECIAL USES:
Agricultural implement and heavy equipment sales.
Animal hospitals and veterinary offices.
Blacksmith and welding operations.
Churches.
Food and dairy products processing.
Horse keeping and the keeping of animals for agricultural projects, hobbies, or home occupations.
Hospitals.
Kennels.
Mobile homes.
Nursing homes; assisted living, supportive living, or age restricted housing; sanatoriums; and shelter
care homes; provided, that no sex offenders or penal or correctional inmates are housed therein.
Schools.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 410/460
Surface coalmining within two thousand feet (2,000') of any area zoned R-1 residential is prohibited
unless permitted by a special use permit.
A. Definition: "Surface coalmining" is defined as any uncovering, extraction, excavation or
disturbance of coal on any land, whether or not previously mined.
B. Criteria: Criteria for issuance of a special use permit for surface coalmining shall be as follows:
1. Application for a special use permit shall be filed with the city clerk.
2. The applicant shall provide the name of the individual, corporation or other entity on behalf of
whom the application is made as well as the address of the location of the applicant.
3. The application must be accompanied by a verified statement by a professional certified
engineer assessing the impact such mining may deliver into the city stormwater or drainage
system. Until and unless there is filed with the city clerk a certification by a licensed laboratory
that such water is free of contaminants of any nature that may be hazardous to humans or
plant life with which it may come into contact, no permit may be issued.
4. If the area in which mining or excavation of coal is inundated and water must be pumped or
otherwise removed, no such water operation upon any residential zoned property within two
thousand feet (2,000'), such assessed impact to include potential physical damage to such
property, economic or fiscal impact with respect to valuation of such property, and potential
health and safety impacts upon such property.
5. There shall also be filed with the city clerk a certificate by a licensed engineer that such water
to be pumped or otherwise removed shall not be placed in the city drainage system in an
amount too great for the capacity of the system. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd.
Ord. 1919A, 6-16-2003; Ord. 2130, 2-19-2007; 2013 Code)
11-6-3: ACCESSORY USES:
See section 11-12-3 of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-6-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area: One acre.
B. Height of main building: Twenty five feet (25') except nonresidential farm structures; may be
increased to a maximum of thirty five feet (35') with a reciprocal front and rear yard setback of at
least twenty five feet (25') each.
C. Minimum yard setbacks:
1. Front: Twenty feet (20') from any property line adjoining any public street.
2. Side: Ten feet (10').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 411/460
3. Rear: Twenty feet (20').
D. Minimum lot width: One hundred fifty feet (150').
E. Maximum lot coverage: None. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
Chapter 7
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT
11-7A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Bed and breakfast establishments.
Conventionally built single-family residences.
Public parks and playgrounds. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 2118, 12-11-2006)
11-7A-2: SPECIAL USES:
Churches.
Governmental uses.
Schools.
Utility substations with screening. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-7A-3: ACCESSORY USES:
See section 11-12-3 of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-7A-4: PROHIBITED USES:
Mobile homes. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-7A-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 412/460
A. Minimum lot area: Seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
B. Height of main building: Twenty five feet (25'); may be increased to thirty five feet (35') with a
reciprocal front and rear yard setback of twenty five feet (25') each.
C. Minimum yard setbacks:
1. Front: Twenty feet (20') from any property line adjoining any public street.
2. Side: Ten feet (10').
3. Rear: Twenty feet (20').
D. Minimum lot width: Seventy feet (70').
E. Maximum lot coverage: Twenty five percent (25%). (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
ARTICLE B. R-2 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-7B-1: PERMITTED USES:
Bed and breakfast establishments.
Conventionally built single-family residences.
Doublewide manufactured homes, by approval of the city council. Said homes must have the wheels
removed and be placed on permanent footing and concrete block foundation with the tongue
removed.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Public parks and playgrounds. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 2118, 12-11-2006; Ord.
2263, 5-26-2009)
11-7B-2: SPECIAL USES:
Churches.
Clinics.
Daycare centers.
Governmental uses.
Nursing homes; assisted living, supportive living, or age restricted housing; sanatoriums; and shelter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 413/460
care homes; provided, that no sex offenders or penal or correctional inmates are housed therein.
Offices of civic, religious, or charitable institutions; financial or insurance companies; physicians,
dentists, architects, engineers, attorneys, real estate, or allied professions; provided, that:
A. The applicant can demonstrate adequate off street parking facilities;
B. Selling of merchandise extraneous to the profession will not occur on the premises; and
C. Structures originally constructed to serve as residences remain unaltered.
Schools.
Utility substations with screening. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 2130, 2-19-2007)
11-7B-3: ACCESSORY USES:
See section 11-12-3 of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-7B-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area: Five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet or three thousand (3,000) square
feet per family in a multiple-family structure.
B. Height of main building: Twenty five feet (25'); may be increased to thirty five feet (35') with a
reciprocal front and rear yard setback of twenty five feet (25') each.
C. Minimum yards and setbacks:
1. Front: Twenty feet (20').
2. Side: Ten feet (10'). Lots legally platted prior to 1950 may utilize a five foot (5') setback on one
side yard if the side yards combined equal at least fifteen feet (15').
3. Rear: Twenty feet (20').
D. Minimum lot width: Sixty feet (60').
E. Maximum lot coverage: Thirty three percent (33%). (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
ARTICLE C. M-H MOBILE HOME DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 414/460
11-7C-1: PERMITTED USES:
Conventionally built single-family residences.
Mobile homes in a mobile home park configuration consisting of a single lot or group of lots where
mobile homes do not exceed eight (8) units per acre.
Mobile homes located on individual lots.
Multiple-family dwellings. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-7C-2: SPECIAL USES:
Churches.
Clinics.
Daycare centers.
Governmental uses.
Mobile home parks where mobile home densities exceed eight (8) units per acre or where the park
exceeds two (2) acres in one or cumulative parcels.
Nursing homes; assisted living, supportive living, or age restricted housing; sanatoriums; and shelter
care homes; provided, that no sex offenders or penal or correctional inmates are housed therein.
Offices of civic, religious, or charitable institutions; financial or insurance companies; physicians,
dentists, architects, engineers, attorneys, real estate, or allied professions; provided, that:
A. The applicant can demonstrate adequate off street parking facilities;
B. Selling of merchandise extraneous to the profession will not occur on the premises; and
C. Structures originally constructed to serve as residences remain unaltered.
Schools.
Utility substations with screening. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 2130, 2-19-2007)
11-7C-3: ACCESSORY USES:
See section 11-12-3 of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-7C-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 415/460
A. Minimum lot area: Five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet or three thousand (3,000) square
feet per family in multiple-family structures.
B. Height of main building: Twenty five feet (25'); may be increased to thirty five feet (35') with
reciprocal front and rear yard setback of twenty five feet (25') each.
C. Minimum yards and setbacks:
1. Front: Twenty feet (20').
2. Side: Ten feet (10'). Lots legally platted prior to 1950 may utilize a five foot (5') setback on one
side yard if the side yards combined equal at least fifteen feet (15').
3. Rear: Twenty feet (20').
D. Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50').
E. Maximum lot coverage: Thirty three percent (33%). (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
Chapter 8
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
11-8-1: COMMERCIAL OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section:
OCCUPY, REOCCUPY, AND CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY: The term "occupy" shall mean to put a
commercial premises or commercial structure to its intended use. The term "reoccupy" shall mean
the occupancy of a commercial premises or commercial structure by a new or different user than
the previous occupant. The terms "occupy" and "reoccupy" shall include the movement of furniture,
equipment, or other property onto or into a commercial premises, commercial structure, residential
premises or residential structure with the purpose of using as a commercial business. A "change of
occupancy" shall mean to reoccupy an existing commercial premises or commercial structure.
B. Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in the zoning regulations, no commercial land shall
be occupied, reoccupied, or used and no commercial building shall be occupied, reoccupied, or
used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a commercial occupancy permit for such
occupancy is issued by the city, stating that the building and use comply with the provisions of title
10 of this code and this title. The use or occupancy of any commercial premises or commercial
building or part thereof shall not be changed without a commercial occupancy permit being issued
therefor by the city. No permit shall be issued to make a change unless such changes are in
conformity with the provisions of title 10 of this code and this title. No business, individual or other
entity shall connect to the city utilities without first obtaining a commercial occupancy permit. It
shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, occupant, or agent for an owner or occupant, to
occupy or permit the occupancy of, any commercial premises or commercial structure in the city
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 416/460
without first obtaining an inspection and commercial occupancy permit. Each separate use,
tenancy or unit in a commercial structure, shall require a separate occupancy permit.
C. Application; Making False Statements Prohibited:
1. Original commercial occupancy permits shall be applied for coincidentally with or without the
application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the lawful erection,
reconstruction or alteration of the building is completed.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement on an application for
an occupancy permit.
D. Amendment Of Occupancy Permit Required: Occupancy of a commercial premises or commercial
structure by one or more occupants not named on the occupancy permit then in force is prohibited
unless an application for amendment of the occupancy permit is filed and approved. No fee shall
be charged to amend a commercial occupancy permit so long as such amendment does not
constitute a change of occupancy.
E. Inspections, Notices; Issuance Of Occupancy Permits:
1. The director of code enforcement shall receive all applications for commercial occupancy
permits and shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the premises or structure within
five (5) working days. Any fees required for a commercial occupancy permit shall be paid at the
time the application is filed. No application for which a fee is required shall be deemed complete
or filed unless the required fee is paid.
2. If the director of code enforcement or fire chief finds that the premises or structure does not
meet the requirements of the standards adopted by ordinance, he shall notify the owner or agent
of such deficiencies in writing, informing him that the premises or structure may not be occupied
until the deficiencies are corrected.
3. When the director finds that the premises or structure does comply with the standards most
recently adopted by the city and other applicable standards, he shall issue an occupancy permit.
F. Certificate Invalid; When: Any certificate of commercial occupancy shall become invalid if the lawful
use of the premises or structure is not commenced within ninety (90) days after it is issued. The
director of code enforcement or fire chief is authorized to grant extension of this period when, in his
opinion, an extension is warranted and provided also that an application for such extension is
received within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the certificate.
G. Fees: The fees for commercial occupancy inspections and permits required by this section shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00) for occupancies under two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for occupancies of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or
more.
H. Appeals: Any person or corporation who feels that an error has been made in an inspection
performed by the city may request a review by the director of code enforcement. If the director of
code enforcement, after review of the file and such additional information as he may deem
appropriate, feels that the citation of the violation is valid, he shall require that the violation be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 417/460
corrected. Any decision of the director of code enforcement may be appealed to the city council
upon a written request within ten (10) days of the decision of the director of code enforcement.
I. Certificates Not A Warranty: In issuing a certificate of commercial occupancy, the city does not
intend to, nor does it warrant, insure or guarantee to the holder thereof, to his or her assignee or to
any other person, that there are no violations of any provision of this section or any other
ordinance. The city makes no warranty or representation, whatsoever, as to the condition of any
building.
J. Penalty For Violation: Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 3329, 5-23-2016)
ARTICLE A. C-1 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-8A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Churches.
Clinics.
Clubs or lodges.
Commercial establishments.
Commercial group or multi-family housing developments.
A. Permitted Uses: Nursing homes, assisted living, supportive living or age restricted housing;
sanatoriums; and shelter care homes; provided, that:
1. No sex offenders or penal or correctional inmates are housed therein; and
2. The development size shall be no less than five (5) acres and contain a minimum of forty (40)
units. Additionally, duplex or multiplex housing, adjacent and contiguous to the primary
development and serviced by the primary permitted use as part of a community living plan of
development, shall be considered a permitted use.
B. Support Services And Uses: All support service uses required or convenient for the operation of
any of the permitted uses including, but not limited to, barbershops, beauty shops, laundry
facilities, restaurants or cafes, general stores or convenience stores, and the like shall be
allowed when exclusively operated for the benefit of the residents, family, guests, and
employees of the housing development.
C. Limitation On Retail And Services Establishment Space: Other than support services and uses
as described in subsection B of this use, commercial uses for general public access which are
located within the designated area for the housing development shall be limited in floor space to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 418/460
no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total square footage of the housing unit within the
development, except as may be granted a special use permit within the provisions of this title.
D. Area, Height, Setbacks, And Yard Regulations: All requirements as shown in section 11-7B-4 of
this title for the R-2 general residential district shall be applicable for the permitted uses under
this entry.
Governmental services.
Halfway house for penal and correctional inmates; provided, that no sex offenders are housed therein.
Hospitals.
Offices.
Retailing and wholesaling activities including public and private professional services provided within
the confines of an office type environment.
Second floor residences so long as the first floor activities fit all other applicable regulations set forth in
this article and that at least one off street parking stall is provided per residence.
Service establishments. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 1636, 10-22-1996; Ord.
2130, 2-19-2007; Ord. 2235, 11-24-2008)
11-8A-2: SPECIAL USES:
Automobile banking facilities.
Automobile dismantling (junkyards) with screening.
Buildings with heights in excess of fifty feet (50').
Coin operated amusement centers or establishments where coin operated game machines occupy
more than fifteen percent (15%) of the floor area of the building.
Combined retail or wholesale and manufacturing operations where the manufacturing portion of the
use is incidental to the principal use and involves not more than five (5) persons employed in the
manufacturing activity.
Commercial establishments with drive-through accommodations.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Taverns, bars, or other establishments that serve alcoholic beverages on the premises.
Utility substations with screening. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-8A-3: ACCESSORY USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 419/460
See section 11-12-3 of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-8A-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area: None.
B. Height of main building: Fifty feet (50').
C. Minimum yards and setbacks:
1. Front: None when the lot front abuts a local street, and thirty feet (30') when the lot front abuts a
state maintained highway.
2. Side: None, except when the lot abuts a residential district, then ten feet (10') is required. The
city fire department must verify that access to all points of the structure is possible if less than
five feet (5') is proposed. The city engineer must be contacted to verify that intersection
sightlines will not be obstructed on corner or through lots. The city engineer will establish the
necessary setbacks in that regard.
3. Rear: Same as side yard.
D. Minimum lot width: Thirty feet (30').
E. Maximum lot coverage: Fifty percent (50%). (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
ARTICLE B. C-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-8B-1: PERMITTED USES:
Automobile and truck sales and service centers.
Gasoline service stations.
Motels.
Restaurants. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-8B-2: SPECIAL USES:
All permitted and special uses listed in article A of this chapter. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-8B-3: ACCESSORY USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 420/460
See section 11-12-3 of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-8B-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B. Height of main building: Fifty feet (50').
C. Minimum yards and setbacks:
1. Front: Thirty feet (30') from the abutting street right of way and seventy five feet (75') from any
state maintained highway right of way.
2. Side: None, except where a lot abuts a residential district, then ten feet (10') is required. The city
fire department must verify that access to all points of the structure is possible if less than five
feet (5') is proposed. The city engineer must be contacted to verify that intersection sightlines will
not be obstructed on corner or through lots. The city engineer will establish necessary setbacks
in that regard.
3. Rear: Same as side yard.
D. Minimum lot width: Seventy five feet (75').
E. Maximum lot coverage: Fifty percent (50%). (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
Chapter 9
I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-9-1: PERMITTED USES:
Assembly, manufacturing, or processing of any commodity from semifinished materials, provided
explosives, flammable gases or liquids, or live animals are not involved.
Full service recycling facility with automatic shredder.
Governmental uses.
Research and development facilities not involving explosives, flammable gases or liquids, or live
animals.
Service stations (exception: Only by special use permit when affected by the airport overlay district).
Transportation facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 421/460
Warehousing or wholesaling of goods except explosives, flammable gases or liquids, or live animals.
(Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 2094, 7-17-2006)
11-9-2: SPECIAL USES:
Assembly, manufacturing, processing, warehousing, or wholesaling involving explosives, flammable
gases or liquids, or live animals.
Automobile dismantling but only in accordance with the following conditions:
A. No part of any automobile dismantling operation, which includes any lot on which three (3) or
more inoperable vehicles are stored, shall be closer than five hundred feet (500') to the
boundary of any residential district.
B. All vehicles, parts, and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed structure or
within an area screened by a wall or solid fence at least ten feet (10') high or of a sufficient
height greater than ten feet (10') to screen the view from adjacent property.
Research and development facilities involving explosives, flammable gases or liquids, or live animals.
(Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-9-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B. Height of main building: Sixty feet (60').
C. Minimum yards and setbacks:
1. Front: Ten percent (10%) of the lot width or depth, whichever is greater.
2. Side: None, except ten feet (10') when adjacent to any other zone district. The city fire
department must verify that access to all points of the structure is possible if less than five feet
(5') is proposed. The city engineer must verify that intersection sightlines will not be obstructed
on corner or through lots and will establish necessary setbacks in that regard.
3. Rear: Same as side yard. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
D. Minimum lot width: As provided in section 11-4-4 of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987;
amd. 2013 Code)
E. Maximum lot coverage: Fifty percent (50%). (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-9-4: NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 422/460
No production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, sale, or storage of goods, materials, or
equipment shall unreasonably interfere with the use, occupancy, or enjoyment of neighboring
properties or the community as a whole. Unreasonable interferences include, but are not limited to,
excessive traffic congestion, loud or shrill noises, excessive emission of smoke, emission of toxic
gases, excessive glare, and noxious odors. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 2094, 7-
17-2006)
Chapter 10
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. FPO FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
11-10A-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
The city participates in the national flood insurance program as administered by the federal
emergency management agency (FEMA). FEMA has prepared a set of maps entitled "City Floodway -
Flood Boundaries (Effective September 15, 1983)" which depicts the extent of the 100-year flood. The
maps are incorporated into this title by reference, and the extent of the 100-year flood boundaries
constitute the boundaries of the floodplain overlay district. No development is permitted in the
floodplain overlay district, regardless of the underlying zone district, except in conformity with title 13,
chapter 1 of this code. The administrator will interpret the extent of the floodplain overlay district at the
time of zone clearance (see section 11-3-2 of this title). (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
ARTICLE B. APO AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT
11-10B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the APO airport overlay district is to coordinate the land use control functions of the
city and the county regional airport. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-10B-2: CITY ZONING REGULATIONS AND COUNTY AIRPORT ZONING
ORDINANCE APPLY:
Uses proposed in areas designated as APO airport overlay district on the official zoning map are
additionally subject to the provisions of the county regional airport zoning ordinance as enabled by the
airport zoning act of 1945. In this regard, all requests for development permits, including building
permits, planned unit development permits, or special use permits, or requests for zone changes,
amendments, or variances within the APO district shall receive the concurrent review of the city and
the county airport authority. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-10B-3: REQUEST FOR ZONING ACTION; REVIEW BY CITY AND COUNTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 423/460
A. Upon receipt of a request for a development permit of any kind, zone change, amendment, or
variance under the provisions of this title located within the APO district by the city, the city will
forward a copy of the request in its entirety to the airport authority. The airport authority will be
extended up to fifteen (15) days to review the request for conformity with the provisions of the
airport zoning ordinance, during which period the city will take no further action.
B. A statement of consistency from the airport authority or a lapse of fifteen (15) days without
comment will release the city to continue the routine processing of the request.
C. Should the airport authority determine, upon review, that the request is not in compliance with the
airport zoning ordinance, an objection may be filed with the city. Upon receipt of an objection, the
administrator will arrange a timely joint meeting of the zoning board of appeals and duly authorized
representatives of the airport authority which will investigate the circumstances of the objection and
seek alternative approaches to the requested action, if any, that could be employed to satisfy the
objection.
D. All parties affected by the request, including counsel, may attend and participate in said joint
meeting. The zoning board of appeals will record all comments and will attach said comments to
an advisory report, including findings of fact, to be forwarded to the city council.
E. Should the objection not be resolved by this method, the city council will uphold the objection and
deny the request if the objection is based on a more restrictive regulation. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987,
eff. 6-1-1987)
11-10B-4: INTERPRETATION:
In all cases of interpreting any differences between the two (2) ordinances, the more restrictive
regulations will apply so long as the regulations are based on safety hazards or noise considerations
as identified by the airport zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
Chapter 11
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
11-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the planned unit development district is to offer a zoning district whereby land may be
designed and developed as a unit for residential, commercial, and/or industrial uses by taking
advantage of current up to date site planning techniques. (Ord. 1287, 8-28-1989)
11-11-2: APPLICATION FOR PUD:
An applicant may submit an application to create a planned unit development district to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 424/460
administrator. The application shall set forth the proposed permitted and special uses within the
planned unit development district. A complete set of scaled development plans shall accompany the
application which show the proposed uses of the property including the proposed dimensions and
locations of all proposed structures, parking areas and spaces, landscaped areas, streets and internal
circulation systems, parks, playgrounds, school site, open spaces, and other features found to be
appropriate by the administrator. If the development is to be phased, the development sequences
shall be depicted. (Ord. 1287, 8-28-1989)
11-11-3: PUD STANDARDS:
A. The administrator shall be available to meet informally with the prospective developer prior to the
submission of the application and development plan in order to explain the planned unit
development process and standards. The applicant will adhere to the following standards in the
preparation of the development plan:
1. Residential Planned Developments: In residential planned developments:
a. There will not be more than the average number of units per acre than that permitted in the
residential zones for single-family developments or more than sixteen (16) units per acre for
multiple-family developments.
b. The parking standards established in this title shall be maintained.
c. No structure shall be constructed less than twenty feet (20') from any perimeter street, and if
any unit in the planned development exceeds twenty five feet (25') in height, the perimeter
street setback shall be increased by five feet (5') for each additional ten feet (10') in height or
portion thereof.
2. Commercial And Industrial Planned Developments: In commercial and industrial planned
developments:
a. The standards for parking, loading and unloading, and circulation as established by this title
shall be maintained.
b. Roof mounted equipment, ground mounted equipment, and trash storage areas shall be
screened.
c. Signage shall be integrated into the architectural design of the development.
d. Perimeter plantings shall be in raised beds at least five feet (5') in width bordered by a six inch
(6") raised concrete curb.
B. All applicants for a planned unit development district will demonstrate how the proposed
development will minimize land use conflicts with surrounding properties and/or how the proposed
development can be integrated into an existing neighborhood without disruption of the existing
environment. (Ord. 1287, 8-28-1989)
11-11-4: PROCEDURE:
A. Administrator Report: Upon receipt of the planned unit development district application, the
administrator shall assign the planned unit development district a number and make a report
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 425/460
identifying how the proposal complies with the standards as set forth in this title. The report shall
also include proposed conditions to be appended to the permit.
B. Hearing:
1. The administrator shall give the application, development plan, and report to the zoning board of
appeals who will conduct a public hearing on the proposed planned unit development district
upon advertising that such a meeting will be held not less than fifteen (15) days or more than
thirty (30) days from the date of publication within a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
2. Owners of real property abutting the planned unit development district, the Marion school
district, the county soil and water conservation district, and the county regional airport authority
(when the airport overlay district is involved), by right, will be extended the opportunity to present
testimony at the public hearing.
C. Zoning Board Of Appeals Recommendation:
1. The zoning board of appeals will maintain a set of minutes from the public hearing and will
prepare a summary report including its own recommendations for the mayor and city council. In
considering the planned unit development district application, the zoning board of appeals shall
review the proposed list of permitted uses and determine their suitability based upon the
following criteria:
a. The diversity of ownership within the proposed planned unit development district.
b. The intensity of use of the proposed planned unit development district.
c. The quantity and location or common open space and presence of plazas, parks and
walkways.
d. Protection and enhancement of use for the public.
e. Effects of the proposed uses upon the surrounding built and natural environment as well as
upon the subject site itself including, but not limited to, provisions for public utilities, parking,
traffic, noise from traffic and other activities, pedestrian convenience and safety, and provision
of landscaping, open space and recreation facilities.
2. The zoning board of appeals shall set forth in its report to the city council recommended
permitted and special uses within the proposed planned unit development district.
D. Mayor And Council Action: The city council shall review the report of the zoning board of appeals
and the foregoing criteria, and determine the permitted and special uses for the planned unit
development district. All permitted uses shall be set forth in the planned unit development district
ordinance for such proposed planned unit development district. The mayor and city council may
approve creation of the planned unit development district with the administrator's proposed
conditions, add additional conditions that it finds appropriate or deny the creation of the district.
E. Modification Of Zoning Map: In the event the district is created, the administrator shall cause the
zone district map to be modified to reflect the district in accordance with Illinois law and shall
modify the summary of zoning regulations of the city. (Ord. 1287, 8-28-1989)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 426/460
Chapter 12
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES
11-12-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter establishes lot and structure requirements, design standards, and use limitations for
specific, potentially troublesome structures and uses. These regulations apply to every zoning district
where the specified structure or use is permitted or allowed by special use permit; but if more stringent
regulations are applicable in any particular district, such regulations shall prevail. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-
1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-12-2: NUMBER OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS PER LOT:
Not more than one principal detached residential dwelling shall be located on a lot, nor shall any
principal detached residential dwelling be located on the same lot with any other principal building.
(Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-12-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any accessory use shall be deemed permitted in a particular zoning district if such use:
A. Is subordinate in size and purpose to the principal structure or use which it serves;
B. Is accessory to a principal structure or use that is allowed in a particular zoning district as a
permitted or special use; and
1. Height: No accessory use shall be higher than:
a. Twenty feet (20') in the R-1 district; or
b. Fifteen feet (15') in all other residential districts; or
c. Twenty five feet (25') in any other zoning district except the rural-agricultural district where,
due to the special needs of farm operations, there shall be no height limit on accessory
structures.
2. Setbacks: No accessory use shall be located in any part of a required yard; except, that in
residential zone districts, an accessory use may be located as close as three feet (3') to a side
or rear lot line when said structure is also located in the rear one-third (1/3) of the subject lot.
3. Yard Coverage: In any residential district, accessory uses shall not cover more than thirty
percent (30%) of a required yard.
4. Use As A Dwelling: Use of an accessory structure as a dwelling is prohibited in the city. (Ord.
1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 427/460
C. 1. Permitted As Accessory Use: A pet boarding facility shall be permitted in commercial zoning
categories only as an accessory use to a permitted primary pet oriented use.
2. Requirements: All pet boarding facilities shall:
a. Be established only in conjunction with another pet oriented use, including a veterinary clinic,
grooming parlor, pet oriented retail shop or a pet daycare facility.
b. Board all animals within a fully enclosed structure designed to limit noise and odor.
c. Provide boarding for no more than one animal per ten (10) square feet of indoor boarding
area.
3. Attached Outdoor Yard: A pet boarding facility may include an attached outdoor exercise yard
for animal exercise or animal recreation so long as such yard complies with the following:
a. Be located at least two hundred feet (200') from any residential zone category, unless a
conditional use permit is granted upon a demonstration that a lesser separation will not
adversely affect the surrounding properties.
b. Be fully enclosed by a masonry wall, wooden or a vinyl fence at least six feet (6') in height.
c. No animal shall be permitted in such yard between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless accompanied by a trainer or handler.
d. No animal shall be kept in the yard for more than twelve (12) hours per day.
e. Yard waste, including solid excrement shall be removed daily.
4. Penalties For Violation: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this subsection
C shall be fined no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues. (Ord. 3142, 12-9-2013)
11-12-4: ANIMALS:
A. Horses:
1. No horse keeping is permitted on any lot existing prior to the effective date hereof which is less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Two (2) horses are permitted on lots exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet but do not
exceed thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. One additional horse is permitted for each
additional five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area.
3. For the purposes of this subsection, two (2) ponies shall count as one horse; except, that each
pony in excess shall be counted as one horse.
4. A foal less than one year old, maintained in the company of its mother, will not be counted in
determining compliance with this subsection.
5. Horses up to twice the number normally allowed on a parcel of land may be kept on a temporary
basis of up to one week but not more frequently than every thirty (30) days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 428/460
6. Any area where horses are kept shall not be less than fifty feet (50') from any habitable dwelling
on the same parcel, two hundred feet (200') from any habitable dwelling(s) on adjacent parcels,
and two hundred feet (200') from any church, school, hospital/clinic, or where foods are
processed, stored, kept, manufactured, or served to the public.
7. The design of the horse keeping facility will be reviewed by the city council as part of the special
use permit process.
B. Other Animals:
1. Any area where animals other than horses are kept for hobby purposes, agricultural projects, or
home occupations shall not be located within two hundred feet (200') of any habitable
dwelling(s) on adjacent parcels, any church, school, hospital/clinic, or where foods are
processed, stored, kept, manufactured, or served to the public.
2. The design of any animal keeping facility shall be reviewed by the city council as part of the
special use permit process. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-12-5: KENNELS1:
A. The lot on which any kennel is situated shall have a minimum area of three (3) acres.
B. Every kennel shall be located at least fifty feet (50') from a habitable dwelling on the same lot, at
least two hundred feet (200') from the nearest dwelling on an adjacent lot, and at least one
hundred feet (100') from any lot line. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-12-6: MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS:
A. Mobile Homes On Individual Lots:
1. Not more than one mobile home shall be placed on any individual lot, nor shall any mobile home
be placed on any individual lot wherein another principal building exists.
2. Every mobile home shall be placed on a four inch (4") or greater reinforced concrete slab to
provide it with adequate support. A comparable alternative support system is permissible upon
certification by the city engineer.
3. Anchors capable of withstanding a vertical tension force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800)
pounds shall be installed at the corners of every mobile home support slab or as otherwise
necessary for protection against high winds. Every mobile home shall be tied down to such
anchors.
4. Every mobile home shall be skirted with a weather resistant material. The skirting shall be
equipped with an inspection door at least twenty four inches (24") wide to allow access to the
underside of the home.
B. Mobile Home Parks:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 429/460
1. Regulations that apply to mobile homes placed on individual lots, as specified in subsection A of
this section, also apply to mobile homes placed within mobile home parks.
2. A coin operated laundromat which is solely intended to serve the mobile home park is permitted
within the confines of the park. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-12-7: FENCES AND WALLS:
A. General Requirements:
1. No fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be erected in violation of the Illinois drainage code2.
(Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
2. Every fence, wall, or other obstruction shall conform to the special height restrictions applicable
in areas near intersections. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
B. Fences In Residential Districts:
1. Location: Within residential districts and for residential purposes, no fence, wall or other
obstruction shall be erected within any public right of way, except by permission of the
administrator, and no fence or wall shall be erected, placed or maintained between the front
boundary line of a lot and a line which is coextensive with and extends along the front line of the
principal dwelling or building located on said lot. Such extended line shall be deemed to exist
from the respective front corners of said principal building to the side boundary lines of said lot,
said extended line being measured parallel to the front line of said lot.
2. Fences On Corner Lots: Any decorative fence or wall used for lot corner or other decoration may
be allowed; provided, that the placement and dimensions of any such decorative obstruction (not
exceeding two 6-foot sections at a right angle and less than 36 inches in height) do not impede
access to the lot by emergency personnel, do not create a line of sight or other traffic
obstruction, or do not violate any provision of this title or any other ordinance of the city. (Ord.
2191, 4-14-2008)
3. Height: No fence shall exceed thirty six inches (36") in height when placed in the front third of
any residentially zoned lot. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
C. Barbed Wire, Wire, And Electric Fences:
1. Outside of any residential district and in connection with agricultural uses on parcels in excess of
five (5) acres, metal mesh fences, wire strand or other wire fences customarily used for
agricultural purposes and uses are permitted.
2. In connection with commercial, industrial, and other nonagricultural uses, except as provided by
subsection C3 of this section, barbed wire fence and electrically charged wire fence, metal
mesh, wire strand or other wire fencing customarily used for agricultural purposes and uses may
be allowed by special use permit in accordance with section 11-3-3 of this title.
3. Within residential districts or for residential purposes and for agriculture purposes on tracts less
than three (3) acres, no barbed wire fence, electrically charged wire fence, metal mesh, wire
strand or other wire fencing customarily used for agricultural uses shall be allowed. (Ord. 2191,
4-14-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 430/460
11-12-8: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A. Special Use Permit Required: Within the city, every home occupation shall be considered a special
use.
B. Regulations: No home occupation shall be established or conducted except in conformity with the
following regulations:
1. Unrelated Employees: A home occupation shall not employ any individuals who are unrelated to
the family residing on the premises.
2. Floor Area: The total area used for a home occupation conducted in a dwelling shall not exceed
twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of said dwelling, or three hundred (300) square
feet, whichever is less.
3. Dwelling Alterations: In any residential district, a dwelling shall not be altered to accommodate a
home occupation in such a way as to materially change the residential character of the building.
4. Outdoor Storage: Outdoor (unenclosed) storage on the premises of equipment or materials used
in connection with a home occupation is prohibited.
5. Nuisances: A home occupation shall not generate any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
odors, heat, glare, or electrical interference noticeable at or beyond the lot lines.
6. Parking: See chapter 13 of this title.
7. Signs: A home occupation may display only one nonilluminated flat mounted identification sign.
The area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987;
amd. 2013 Code)
11-12-9: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS, ACCESSWAYS AND PRIVATE STREETS:
A. New Driveways And Accessways: After the effective date hereof, all new construction creating
driveways or accessways serving as access to residential dwellings within the corporate limits of
the city within the R-1 or R-2 district shall be made of hard surface material (concrete, brick,
asphalt, or other surfacing customarily used as hard surface roadway material as may be approved
by the administrator), except temporarily during construction, and shall provide adequate drainage
to existing drainageways. For the purposes of this section, "temporarily" shall mean less than
twelve (12) consecutive months following initiation of construction activity on any tract or parcel, or
such shorter time as may be prescribed by any covenant or restriction on the property.
B. Private Streets, Driveways And Accessways: New construction creating private streets, driveways
or accessways serving as access to any residential dwelling within the R-1 or R-2 district where
the dwelling is located in excess of one hundred feet (100') from the nearest hard surface street or
highway or other governmentally maintained road may be allowed with nonhard surface material
only as a special use. In addition to the requirements for a special use enumerated in section 11-3-
3 of this title, the applicant must also show:
1. That the driveway or accessway is not an attempt to circumvent the requirements of any
ordinance of the city providing for construction methods, materials, and placement of streets, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 431/460
is in violation of any covenants or restrictions applicable to the property;
2. That the materials used are of sufficient grade and depth to provide assurance of access for
emergency vehicles, personnel, and equipment; and
3. That the drainage caused by such driveway, accessway or private street and its elevation is
adequately planned so as to divert any such drainage occasioned by its construction and
maintenance from the property of adjoining neighbors to existing drainageways.
C. Private Streets And Driveways Upon Annexation: The annexation of any property into the city as an
R-1 or R-2 district shall be conditioned upon:
1. The compliance with the provisions of subsection A or B of this section, as may be applicable,
for all new construction; or
2. The resurfacing or reconstruction of any existing driveways with hard surface material (concrete,
brick, asphalt, or other surfacing customarily used as hard surface roadway material as may be
approved by the administrator) on such timetable as may be prescribed by the city, or obtaining
a special use permit in accordance with the provisions of subsection B of this section, as may be
applicable. (Ord. 2190, 4-14-2008)
Chapter 13
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
11-13-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. New Facilities: Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with this chapter for
all structures and uses erected or established after the effective date hereof.
B. Existing Facilities:
1. Existing off street parking or loading facilities located on the same lot as the use served shall not
be reduced, or further reduced, below the requirements and standards for similar new structures
or uses per this title.
2. When an existing structure or use is damaged or destroyed and subsequently repaired or
rebuilt, parking/loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or
destruction shall be restored, but additional parking/loading facilities need not be provided.
3. Whenever the use of any structure or premises is intensified through the addition of dwelling
units, increased floor area, greater seating capacity, etc., additional parking and loading facilities
commensurate with such increases in use intensity shall be provided.
4. Whenever the existing use of a structure is changed to a different use, parking or loading
facilities shall be provided as required herein for such new use. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-
1987)
11-13-2: PARKING LOT STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 432/460
A. Spaces: Each required off street parking space shall be at least ten feet (10') wide and twenty feet
(20') long and shall have at least seven feet (7') of vertical clearance. Every space shall be situated
so that no part of any parked vehicle overhangs the public right of way.
B. Interior Aisles: Aisles within parking lots shall be sufficiently wide to permit safe and efficient
vehicular movement in the aisles and into and out of the parking spaces. Aisles designated for twoway
traffic shall be at least twenty five feet (25') wide. One-way aisles designated for sixty degree
(60°) parking shall be at least eighteen feet (18') wide.
C. Accessways:
1. Parking lots shall be designed so that ingress to or egress from a parking space is from an aisle
or driveway, not directly from the public right of way.
2. No accessway to any parking lot shall be located within thirty feet (30') of any corner formed by
the intersection of the rights of way of two (2) or more streets. At intersections where traffic
control devices are installed, the administrator may increase this requirement as necessary to
prevent hazards.
3. Parking area accessways and public streets shall be aligned to form, as closely as feasible, right
angles.
4. The accessway to every parking lot containing sixteen (16) or more parking spaces shall be at
least twenty four feet (24') wide unless two (2) one-way drives, each twelve feet (12') wide, are
provided. The accessway to any parking lot containing fewer than sixteen (16) parking spaces
shall be at least eighteen feet (18') wide.
D. Surfacing: Parking lots shall be graded and improved with a compacted stone base at least four
inches (4") thick. A permanent all weather surface is recommended. The city council will permit the
city engineer to recommend surface materials and make appropriate surface drainage
recommendations upon request. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-13-3: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES:
A. Dwellings: Parking spaces accessory to dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling.
Such parking spaces shall not be located in any required front yard except in the driveway, but
may be located in the side or rear yards. Each parking space accessory to a multiple-family
dwelling shall be constructed so that no vehicle need be moved in order to allow another vehicle to
enter/exit the parking area.
B. Commercial/Industrial Uses: In the commercial or industrial districts, off street parking facilities for
different buildings or uses may be provided collectively, but only if the total number of spaces
located together is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use. (See section
11-13-5 of this chapter.) (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-13-4: COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 433/460
In computing the number of parking spaces required by this title, the administrator shall apply the
following rules:
A. In computing parking space requirements based on the number of employees, the maximum
number of employees on the premises at any period of the day shall be used. "Employee parking"
means one parking space shall be required per one and one-half (1.5) employees, unless
otherwise stated.
B. In computing parking space requirements on the basis of building floor area, the gross floor area
shall be used. (See section 11-13-5, table 3 of this chapter.)
C. Whenever it is necessary to translate gross parking lot area into number of parking spaces, three
hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross area shall be deemed one parking space.
D. If computation of the number of parking spaces required by this title results in a fractional space,
any fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall be counted as one space.
E. No space or portion thereof needed to satisfy the minimum applicable requirement for number of off
street parking spaces shall be counted as part of the off street parking spaces required for another
structure or use. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-13-5: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES:
Off street parking spaces shall be provided as indicated in the table below. For any use that is not
listed in the table, the same number of parking spaces shall be provided as is required for the most
similar listed use. The administrator shall make the determination of similarity.
TABLE 3
PARKING STANDARDS
Use Parking Spaces Required
Commercial, office, service:
All commercial, office, or service uses
unless specifically indicated
otherwise below
1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Banks, savings and loans:
Walk in 1 per 300 square feet of floor area, plus employee
parking
Drive-through 1 per teller window
Beauty shops and barbershops 2 per chair, plus employee parking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 434/460
Furniture and appliance stores 1 per 600 square feet of floor area
Home occupations 1 which is optional but not more than 1
Mortuaries 1 per 5 seats, plus 1 per funeral vehicle, but not less
than 20 per chapel
Offices, medical/dental 1 per 200 square feet of floor area or 3 per
professional, whichever is greater
Restaurants:
Sit down 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 50 square feet of floor area,
whichever is greater
Drive-in 1 per 25 square feet of floor area
Service stations 2 per service stall, plus employee parking
Taverns 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 50 square feet of floor area,
whichever is greater
Theaters:
Indoor 1 per 4 seats
Drive-in On review by the administrator
Vehicle sales (automobiles, boats,
trailers, etc.)
1 per 600 square feet of enclosed floor area, plus 1
per 2,500 square feet of open lot area
Dwellings, lodgings:
Hotels, motels, boarding houses,
lodges
1 per lodging unit, plus employee parking
Mobile homes 2 per mobile home
Multiple-family dwellings:
1 bedroom or less 1.5 per dwelling
2 or more bedrooms 2 per dwelling
Single-family dwellings 2 per dwelling
Educational, institutional, and recreational:
Churches 1 per 4 seats in the largest seating area
Hospitals 1 per 2 beds, plus employee parking
Libraries, museums 1 per 500 square feet of floor area
Nursing homes 1 per 5 beds
Schools 1 for every 10 students that the building is designed
to accommodate, plus employee parking
Industrial:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 435/460
Related to personnel 1 for each managerial, clerical, or administrative
employee, plus 1 for each 2 employees not
otherwise classified; or
Related to floor area 1 for each 600 square feet of gross floor area
(either method optional to the industry)
(Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-13-6: DESIGN OF LOADING FACILITIES:
If provided, all off street loading facilities shall conform to the following minimum standards:
A. Size Of Space: Every off street loading space shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide and sufficiently
long to accommodate the type of vehicle expected to use the space. In no case shall a vehicle
being loaded or unloaded overhang into the public right of way.
B. Accessway: Every off street loading space shall have a safe means of vehicular access to a street
or alley. Such accessway shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide.
C. Surfacing: Every off street loading area shall be improved with a compacted stone base at least
seven inches (7") thick. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
Chapter 14
NONCONFORMITIES
11-14-1: PURPOSE:
The requirements imposed by this title are designed to guide the use of land by encouraging the
development of structures and uses that are compatible with the predominant character of each of the
various districts. Lots, structures, and uses of land or structures that do not conform to the
requirements of the district in which they are located tend to impede appropriate development. For
example, nonconformities are frequently responsible for heavy traffic on residential streets, the
overtaxing of parking facilities, the creation of nuisances, and/or the lowering of property values. The
regulations of this chapter are intended to alleviate such existing/potential problems by encouraging
the gradual elimination of nonconformities. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-14-2: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
A. Any vacant lot that does not conform to one or more of the lot size (area, dimensions) requirements
of the district in which it is located may, nonetheless, be developed for any use permitted in that
district if such vacant lot:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 436/460
1. Was recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds prior to the effective date hereof; and
2. Is at least thirty feet (30') wide.
B. If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots with continuous street frontage were of record and in
common ownership on the effective date hereof, and if one or more of those lots does not meet the
minimum lot width, depth, or area requirements of the district in which it is located, the land
involved shall be considered an undivided parcel. No portion of any such parcel shall be developed
(used) except in compliance with this title, nor shall any such parcel be divided so as to create a lot
that does not meet the requirements of this title. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-14-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Any otherwise lawful structure which exists on the effective date hereof but which could not be erected
under the terms of this title because of requirements/restrictions concerning lot size, height, setbacks,
or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot may lawfully remain, subject to the
following provisions:
A. Maintenance: A nonconforming structure may be maintained by ordinary repairs.
B. Enlargement, Alterations: A nonconforming structure may be enlarged and/or altered; provided,
that:
1. Such enlargement and/or alteration is confined within the lot lines of the property in question as
such lot lines existed on the effective date hereof; and
2. Such enlargement and/or alteration does not increase or worsen the nonconforming
characteristics of the structure.
C. Reconstruction:
1. A nonconforming structure that is damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt; provided, that:
a. Reconstruction commences within one year from the date of damage/destruction and is
diligently pursued to completion; and
b. The structure, when reconstructed, will not be more nonconforming than it had been.
2. If reconstruction does not commence within one year or is not diligently pursued to completion,
as determined by the administrator, the damaged structure shall be considered abandoned.
Reconstruction at that point shall be allowed only if the structure will be rebuilt in conformity with
the provisions of this title which are applicable to new structures.
D. Relocation: A nonconforming structure shall not be moved to another lot unless, after relocation, it
will conform to all the regulations of the district where it will be situated. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff.
6-1-1987)
11-14-4: NONCONFORMING USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 437/460
Any otherwise lawful use existing on the effective date hereof that would not be permitted under the
terms of this title may lawfully continue, subject to the following provisions:
A. Expansion/Intensification:
1. A nonconforming use which does not occupy a structure (such as a plant nursery) may be
expanded/intensified, but only within the confines of the lot lines as such lot lines existed on the
effective date hereof.
2. A nonconforming use which occupies a structure may be expanded or intensified, but only within
that structure and/or within any conforming addition to said structure. (For rules concerning
expansion of nonconforming structures, see subsection 11-14-3B of this chapter.)
B. Reestablishment: A nonconforming use which is destroyed or damaged may be reestablished.
However, if the owner of said damaged/destroyed use proposes to expand, relocate, or change it,
then the other pertinent provisions of this section shall control. Moreover, if no significant steps
have been taken to reestablish the use within one year from the date the damage occurred, then
the use shall be considered abandoned and subject to the provisions of subsection E of this
section.
C. Relocation: A nonconforming use shall not be moved, in whole or in part, unless, upon relocation, it
will conform to all pertinent regulations of the district in which it will be relocated.
D. Change Of Use: A nonconforming use may continue, but shall not be changed except to a use that
is permitted under the applicable district regulations.
E. Discontinuance: When a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, it
shall not thereafter be resumed. Any subsequent use shall conform to the uses permitted in the
applicable zone district. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
11-14-5: EXISTING PERMITS:
The regulations of this chapter shall not affect the terms of any permit issued prior to the effective date
hereof or any pertinent amendment hereto; provided, that the work authorized by such permit is
completed within a reasonable time. (Ord. 1148, 4-27-1987, eff. 6-1-1987)
Title 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 438/460
12-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms used in this title are defined as set forth in this section.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The city code enforcement officer.
IMPROVEMENTS: Water and sanitary sewer systems, streets and alleys, storm sewers and drainage
systems.
LARGE TRACT SUBDIVISION: The division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2), three (3), or four
(4) lots, plots, sites, or other divisions of land, or the consolidation of the same number of parcels into
a lesser number, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development when:
A. The smallest resulting parcel is ten (10) acres or more;
B. No new street construction is required; and
C. No new easement of access is required.
LOT: A parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership on building development, whether immediate
or future. A lot shall have frontage on a public street.
PLAN COMMISSION: The city plan commission.
PROJECT INSPECTOR: The inspector present during construction of improvements.
STREET: Any street intended to serve or provide access to the properties in the subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plots, sites, or other
divisions of land, or the consolidation of parcels, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or building development; provided, however, that this definition shall not include
bona fide large tract subdivisions which result in parcels of ten (10) acres or more not involving any
new street construction or easement of access. (1977 Code §§ 16.08.010 - 16.08.080; amd. Ord.
1162, 7-14-1987; 2013 Code)
12-1-2: JURISDICTION:
The rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land contained in this title shall apply to
that land located within the corporate limits of the city and to land located within one and one-half
(11/2) miles of its corporate limits. (1977 Code § 16.04.010)
12-1-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. Within the territorial limits of this title, no person, firm or corporation shall change, resubdivide, or
rearrange the boundary or division line of any lot or parcel of land, or divide the same into building
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 439/460
lots for the purpose of sale, or for lease for a period of more than five (5) years, without meeting
the requirements of this title. Nor shall any such person, firm or corporation begin with any
construction work in a proposed subdivision, including grading, without complying with the
provisions of this title and before obtaining the approval of the plat of the proposed subdivision as
provided in this title. (1977 Code § 16.04.020)
B. Unless the plat is so approved, no subdivision shall be entitled to record in the county recorder's
office, nor have any validity; the code enforcement officer will not issue building or repair permits
for any structure on a lot in any such subdivision; and the city will not permit any public
improvements or allow any city service to be extended to any such subdivision. (1977 Code
§ 16.04.020; amd. 2013 Code)
12-1-4: VARIANCES:
The general principles of design and minimum requirements for the laying out of subdivisions, set forth
in chapter 4 of this title, may be varied in a particular case where the subdivider can show that, by
reason of exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, strict compliance with any requirement
of this title could cause practical difficulty or exceptional and undue hardship. Such variation shall be
made by the city council only upon receiving from the plan commission a recommendation that such
variation be allowed. Before making such recommendation, the plan commission must find that such
relief may be granted without detriment to the public good and without impairing the intent and
purpose of this title or the desirable general development of the neighborhood and community. (1977
Code § 16.24.010; amd. 2013 Code)
12-1-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this title is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of proper jurisdiction, that
decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this title. (Ord. 1162, 7-14-1987)
12-1-6: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no official, city council member, agent,
commission or board appointee, or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any
damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of duties under this title. Any such person made a party to a civil action, civil rights or
constitutional rights damage action, or antitrust action by reason of the discharge of said duties shall
be held harmless and indemnified by the city for all damages and attorney fees incurred; provided,
that: a) the person makes a timely disclosure of the litigation or threatened litigation to the city; and b)
the person authorizes the city to provide primary representation through the city attorney in such
litigation or threatened litigation and cooperates with the city in the primary presentation. The city will
not indemnify such person for punitive damages assessed against the person nor pay attorney fees
incurred by the person for counsel not retained by the city. Said indemnification shall be against all
judgments, fines, amounts paid in settlements, and reasonable expenses incurred resulting from any
such action or proceeding, or any appeal, to the fullest amount permitted by the laws of the state of
Illinois. The foregoing statement of indemnification is deemed to be a contract between the city and
each city official, city council member, agent, commission or board appointee, or employee with
explicit or implied responsibilities under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1162, 7-14-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 440/460
12-1-7: PENALTY:
For the violation of any of the provisions of this title, the one so violating shall, upon conviction, be
fined in any amount up to and including the amount provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code
§ 16.16.080; amd. 2013 Code)
Chapter 2
SUBDIVISION PLAT; APPROVAL PROCEDURE
12-2-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
In planning and developing a subdivision, the general principles and requirements set forth in chapter
4 of this title shall be observed, and in every case, the procedure set forth in this chapter shall be
followed. (1977 Code § 16.12.010)
12-2-2: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL:
A. Application For Approval; Fee:
1. The subdivider shall submit to the plan commission application for approval of the plat of the
proposed subdivision which shall have attached thereto two (2) copies of the plat and two (2)
copies of the construction plans, if any, for public improvements or improvements for future
dedication to the city to be installed conforming with the requirements set forth in chapter 3 of
this title. The application shall be filed with the plan commission at least two (2) weeks prior to a
meeting thereof. (Ord. 1162, 7-14-1987)
2. At the time of filing an application for approval, the subdivider shall pay to the city clerk a fee of
one dollar ($1.00) for each lot in the subdivision, which shall be deposited into the city general
fund to be used to defray the expenses for the administration of this title. (1977 Code
§ 16.12.110; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Code Enforcement Officer Review: The commission chair, immediately upon receipt of such
application, shall deliver one copy of the application to the code enforcement officer who will make
an on site inspection of the area to be subdivided, review the application, plat and plans, and
report his recommendations and advice within ten (10) days to the plan commission. (1977 Code
§ 16.12.030; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Plan Commission Decision: The plan commission, upon receipt of the code enforcement officer's
report, shall approve or disapprove the application within two (2) weeks.
D. City Council Approval: If the application is approved by the commission, the commission will
recommend approval of the plat by the city council at its next meeting following the action of the
commission. Approval of the plat by the city council will authorize the subdivider to proceed with
the proposed improvements in accordance with the general standards set forth in chapter 3 of this
title, unless waived by the city council. The commission will return one copy of the plat and plans to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 441/460
the subdivider with the date of approval. One copy will be kept by the commission for the use of
the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 1162, 7-14-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
E. Disapproval: If the application is disapproved by the commission, the subdivider must be furnished
with a letter stating the reason for disapproval and in what manner the plat and/or plans fail to
conform with this chapter or other city ordinances or regulations. Such letters shall be given to the
subdivider within the two (2) week period mentioned in subsection A1 of this section. (1977 Code
§ 16.12.060)
12-2-3: IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Permit Or Security Required For Streets And Sanitary Improvements: The subdivider, after
approval of the application, may: 1) secure from the proper city authorities the necessary permits
to proceed with the street and sanitary improvements, or, in lieu of this, 2) post with the
commission a surety bond, or other security, in the form prescribed by the city council, sufficient to
cover the full cost of improvements based upon estimates submitted to and approved by the code
enforcement officer, unless waived by the city council. (Ord. 1162, 7-14-1987; amd. 2013 Code)
B. Inspection Of Improvements; Issuance Of Certificate: Upon the satisfactory installation of
improvements in accordance with this title, the code enforcement officer will make a twofold
certificate showing that the technical details of the plat itself have been checked and found
satisfactory and all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, or, in lieu thereof, a
surety bond has been posted with the commission assuring their installation. (1977 Code
§ 16.12.080; amd. 2013 Code)
C. City Council Approval: When the improvements have been certified as provided in subsection B of
this section, or when a surety bond or other security has been provided or waived as so specified
in subsection A of this section, the commission will transmit the plat to the city council for approval.
Such plat shall bear an official notation reading:
Recommended for approval and acceptance this day of . (Signed) Chair of the Plan
Commission.
Thereupon, the city council may approve and accept the plat. (Ord. 1162, 7-14-1987; amd. 2013
Code)
D. Maintenance Bond Or Security Required: The subdivider shall post a maintenance bond or other
security acceptable to the city council covering ten percent (10%) of the cost of any improvement
to be accepted for maintenance by the city unless waived by the city council. Such bond shall be
held by the city clerk and shall become effective upon acceptance of the plat by the city, unless
otherwise stipulated. Maintenance bonds shall run for one year on such improvements. (Ord. 1162,
7-14-1987)
12-2-4: REQUIRED INFORMATION ON PLAT:
The plat shall be drawn at the scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or less, and shall
clearly show the following features and information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 442/460
A. Legal description of the property, including reference to the section, township and range; section
lines and corners; quarter section lines.
B. Names and addresses of the owner or owners of record, the subdivider, and of the registered
Illinois land surveyor who prepared the plat.
C. The proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name
of any other subdivision in the city or environs.
D. Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions.
E. Lots numbered in numerical order, and blocks also numbered in numerical order; the proposed lots
to have dimensions indicated.
F. The layout, proposed names and widths of proposed streets and alleys, and the width of
easements.
G. Proposed front yard setback or other setback lines.
H. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, or to be reserved in the
deeds for the common use of property owners in the subdivision, with the purpose, conditions, or
limitations of such dedication or reservation indicated.
I. Existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto, with the pipe sizes and grades indicated.
J. North point, scale and date.
K. The accurate location and material of all permanent reference monuments. There shall be located
at each of the extreme corners of the subdivision a concrete cylinder or rectangular prism not less
than four inches (4") in diameter or square, and twenty four inches (24") long. There shall be
located at all street corners, at all points where street lines intersect the plat boundary lines, steel
rods not less than three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter and twenty four inches (24") long. At all lot
corners, there shall be one-half inch (1/2") square iron pins, twenty four inches (24") in length.
L. Dedication.
M. Certification by the registered Illinois land surveyor who prepared the plat to the effect that the plat
represents a survey made by him, that all monuments indicated thereon actually exist, and that
their location, size and material are correctly shown.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 443/460
N. Other certificates required by law, including certificate of title showing ownership of the tract of land
included in the subdivision; also certificate from the county clerk showing that all taxes have been
paid. (1977 Code § 16.20.010)
Chapter 3
IMPROVEMENTS
12-3-1: REQUIRED; REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PLANS:
A. Minimum improvements must be installed, unless a surety bond is filed, prior to approval and
acceptance of the plat, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (1977 Code
§§ 16.16.010, 16.16.020)
B. The code enforcement officer shall review the construction plans for improvements with the
superintendents of the city water, sewer and street departments upon the delivery of such plans to
him from the plan commission. (1977 Code §§ 16.16.010, 16.16.020; amd. 2013 Code)
C. Such plans shall be revised by the subdivider as may be necessary to comply with this chapter and
all other city ordinances. Failure to make such revisions will be grounds for nonapproval and
nonacceptance of the plat. (1977 Code §§ 16.16.010, 16.16.020)
12-3-2: CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
A. All the improvements required by this chapter shall be constructed or installed in accordance with
the plans submitted to and approved by the plan commission.
B. None of the improvements will be installed or constructed unless there is an inspector present on
the project. Such project inspector shall have been previously approved by the superintendent of
the city department under whose jurisdiction the particular improvement falls. The expenses of the
project inspector shall be borne by the subdivider. (1977 Code § 16.16.030)
C. All such improvements shall be completed prior to approval and acceptance of the plat; or in lieu of
the completing the required improvements, the subdivider must furnish the plan commission with a
surety bond, sufficient to cover the cost of any or all of the required improvements not then
completed, based upon an estimate submitted to and approved by the code enforcement officer,
thereby to secure the construction or installation of such improvements within one year after the
acceptance of the plat. (1977 Code § 16.16.030; amd. 2013 Code)
D. When the construction or installation of the improvements has been completed, the subdivider shall
file an affidavit with the commission certifying that such improvements have been completed
without variation from the plans previously approved. (1977 Code § 16.16.030)
12-3-3: STREETS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 444/460
A. Streets shall be planned and constructed taking into account the best possible manner of disposal
of surface water and the location of water mains and sanitary sewers.
B. All streets shall have an improved surface at least twenty seven feet (27') in width.
C. The streets shall have a crushed rock or stone base of six inches (6") when compacted for streets
with asphalt surface.
D. There shall be curb and gutter on each side of the street in compliance with subsection 8-1-1A4 of
this code. (1977 Code § 16.16.040; amd. 2013 Code)
12-3-4: WATER SUPPLY:
A. Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system adequate to serve
the area being platted, including appropriately spaced fire hydrants, with steam nozzles. The
spacing of the hydrants is to be approved by the city fire chief, and the entire water system shall be
designed to meet the approval of the Illinois department of public health and the superintendent of
the city water department.
B. All water mains in the distribution system shall be flushed and sterilized in the presence of the
project inspector, and they shall not be put into use until approved for use by the Illinois
department of public health.
C. All water mains in the distribution system shall be subjected to a pressure test whereby the mains
will be under ordinary main pressure plus fifty (50) pounds per square inch for a period of eight (8)
hours without interruption. The mains must maintain such pressure for such period, the prescribed
allowance for leakage being permitted, before the mains will be considered as completed.
D. No water shall be used from the city system for flushing, sterilizing or testing without prior approval
of the superintendent of the city water department. (1977 Code § 16.16.050)
12-3-5: SEWER SYSTEM:
A. Required: In every subdivision, provision shall be made for the satisfactory disposal of sanitary
sewage. (1977 Code § 16.16.060)
B. Use Of City Sanitary Sewer System:
1. Where a city sanitary sewer main is accessible, the subdivision shall be provided with a
complete sanitary sewage collection system connected to such sewer main. Such collection
system shall be adequate in size to serve the area platted and/or the most advantages for future
development of adjacent tracts. The entire system, including layout, construction plans, profiles
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 445/460
and specifications, shall be designed to meet the approval, first, of the superintendent of the city
sewer department, and second, the environmental protection agency.
2. All sewer mains in the collection system shall be subjected to either infiltration or exfiltration
leakage tests for an uninterrupted period of twenty four (24) hours in the presence of the project
inspector. The prescribed allowance for leakage must be met before the mains will be
considered complete. The system shall not be put into use until approved for use by the
superintendent of the city sewer department and the environmental protection agency. (1977
Code § 16.16.060; amd. 2013 Code)
3. The sewer collection system shall include a connection for each lot, extended from the main
sewer to the lot line. The superintendent of the city sewer department shall be furnished with a
complete and accurate record, by measurement, of the location of the point of intersection of the
extended lot connection and the lot line, for a permanent record. (1977 Code § 16.16.060)
C. Use Of Private System: Where a city sanitary sewer main is not accessible, proper provision shall
be made for the collection and disposal of sanitary wastes, subject to the approval of the
environmental protection agency, the Franklin and Williamson bi-county health department and the
superintendent of the city sewer department. (1977 Code § 16.16.060; amd. 2013 Code)
12-3-6: UTILITIES:
Poles or underground conduits for electric lights, telephone lines or other utilities must be placed in
easements provided along rear or side lot lines, wherever this is practicable. (1977 Code § 16.16.070)
12-3-7: MONUMENTS:
Monuments must be placed in accordance with the requirements of section 12-2-4 of this title. (1977
Code § 16.16.070)
Chapter 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
12-4-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
In laying out a subdivision, the subdivider must comply with the general principles and requirements
set forth in this chapter. (1977 Code § 16.28.010)
12-4-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The street layout of the subdivision must, in general, conform with the most advantageous
development of adjoining areas and the entire neighborhood. The criteria for such layout shall be as
follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 446/460
A. Where appropriate to the design, proposed streets shall be continuous and in alignment with
existing planned or platted streets with which they connect. (1977 Code § 16.28.020)
B. Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented
by topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the plan commission, such
extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with
existing layouts for the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. Dead end
streets (courts) of reasonable length may be approved where topography necessitates or where
they are appropriate for the type of development contemplated. (1977 Code § 16.28.020; amd.
2013 Code)
C. Proposed streets should intersect one another as nearly at right angles as topography and other
limiting factors of good design permit. Not more than a ten percent (10%) deviation from a right
angle will be allowed without prior written permission of the plan commission.
D. Wherever there exists, adjoining the tract to be subdivided, a dedicated or platted and recorded half
width street or alley, the other half width shall be platted.
E. Alleys shall be platted in the rear of all lots to be used for business and in the rear of residential lots
fronting on primary streets as a means of safe access to such lots. (1977 Code § 16.28.020)
12-4-3: BLOCKS:
A. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth, unless, in
the opinion of the plan commission, prevented by exceptional topography or other physical
conditions.
B. In any block over nine hundred feet (900') in length, the plan commission shall require that a
crosswalk or pedestrianway not less than ten feet (10') wide be provided near the center and
entirely across such block. (1977 Code § 16.28.020; amd. 2013 Code)
12-4-4: EASEMENTS:
A. Right Of Way Easements:
1. Streets: The right of way for all streets shall be forty feet (40'). All dead end streets shall
terminate in a circular runaround having a minimum right of way diameter of one hundred feet
(100'). (1977 Code § 16.28.030; amd. 2013 Code)
2. Alleys And Service Drives: The right of way for alleys and service drives shall be twenty feet
(20').
B. Utilities Easements: Utilities easements, where required, shall be at least fifteen feet (15') wide
centered on rear or side lot lines. (1977 Code § 16.28.030)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 447/460
12-4-5: LOTS:
A. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the proposed
subdivision and for the type of development contemplated, the zoning ordinance requirements to
be complied with in all respects.
B. Excessive depth in relation to width ordinarily shall be avoided.
C. Every lot must abut upon a street.
D. Lots for residence purposes must be at least sixty feet (60') wide at the building setback line.
E. Corner lots for residential use shall be ordinarily platted wider than interior lots.
F. Double frontage lots and reversed frontage lots will be ordinarily avoided.
G. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the right of way line of the street on which the
lot fronts. Not more than a ten percent (10%) deviation from a right angle will be allowed without
prior written permission of the plan commission. (1977 Code § 16.28.040)
Chapter 5
LARGE TRACT SUBDIVISIONS
12-5-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Within the territorial limits of this title, a parcel or tract of land may be divided into two (2), three (3), or
four (4) lots, plots, sites or other divisions of land, or consolidation of the same number of parcels into
a lesser number, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development when: a) the smallest resulting parcel is ten (10) acres or more; b) no new street
construction is required; and c) no new easement of access is required. Large tract subdivisions are
subject to the procedures and standards set forth in this chapter and are exempt from the procedures
and standards for subdivisions as established in other sections of this title. (Ord. 1162, 7-14-1987)
12-5-2: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
A. Authority Of Code Enforcement Officer: The code enforcement officer is authorized to receive
applications for large tract subdivisions, review said applications, and approve large tract
subdivisions for recording.
B. Application For Subdivision; Fee: Applications for large tract subdivisions will be filed with the code
enforcement officer on a prescribed form. The fee for said filing shall be twenty five dollars
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 448/460
($25.00). The application will include a legal description of the proposed subdivision with reference
provisions to sections, townships and range. A scaled sketch of the proposed subdivision shall
accompany the application that contains sufficient information for the code enforcement officer to
determine: 1) that the smallest resulting parcel is ten (10) acres or more; 2) that no new easement
of access will be required; 3) that no new street construction will be necessary; and 4) that the
resulting subdivision will comply with the current provisions of title 11 of this code.
C. Review And Approval Of Application:
1. If the code enforcement officer determines it appropriate and necessary to the review of the
application, the services of a registered civil engineer may be secured, at the expense of the
subdivider, to assist in the verification of the standards stated above.
2. Upon determination of the application's compliance with the provisions of this title, the code
enforcement officer may approve the application and authorize recording without further action
by the city.
3. All review functions of the code enforcement officer pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted
and concluded within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the receipt of the application.
D. Request For Additional Information: Should the code enforcement officer determine that insufficient
information exists to make a final decision on the application, a formal request for the additional
information will be forwarded to the applicant. The review period may be extended an additional
fifteen (15) calendar days upon request of additional information by the code enforcement officer.
E. Denial Of Application; Appeals: Incomplete applications and/or applications that fail to meet all of
the qualifications for a large tract subdivision will be denied by the code enforcement officer.
Applicants may appeal any decision of the code enforcement officer pursuant to this chapter to the
city council. The city council will hear and decide the appeal at the next meeting. (Ord. 1162, 7-14-
1987; amd. 2013 Code)
12-5-3: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
No penalties shall be imposed for violation of this chapter; except, that the city council may seek
injunctive relief to stop or prevent violations within the jurisdictional boundaries of this title. (Ord. 1162,
7-14-1987)
Title 13
FLOOD CONTROL
Chapter 1
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
13-1-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 449/460
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the city by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2, in order to accomplish the following
purposes: (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
A. To prevent unwise development from increasing the flood or drainage hazards to others;
B. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
C. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
D. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public
facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
E. To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for creating flood
blight areas;
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the city; and
G. To provide for the orderly growth and development pursuant to the city's comprehensive plan of an
environment that is especially sensitive to changes from human activity. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
13-1-2: PROVISIONS FOR ACCOMPLISHING PURPOSE:
All new development proposals in the special flood hazard areas shall be reviewed and approved by
the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer's review is to ensure the following: (Ord.
1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
A. New development will not change the flow of flood or other surface drainage waters so that other
properties become more susceptible to damage;
B. New development will not create special hazards or nuisances when flooded; and
C. New buildings and major improvements to existing buildings will not be subject to damage by the
base flood. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
13-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base flood elevation at any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 450/460
location is defined in section 13-1-4 of this chapter.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term
includes a gas or liquid storage tank in order that such tanks will be constructed to the same flood
damage protection standards. The term includes a mobile home or prefabricated building which is
affixed on a permanent site and connected to the required utilities. The term does not include
recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
DEVELOPMENT: A. Any manmade change to real estate, including:
1. Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a building or an addition to a building valued at
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
2. Installing a mobile home on a site or preparing a site for a mobile home;
3. Drilling, mining, installing utilities or facilities, construction of roads, bridges or similar projects
valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
4. Construction or erection of levees, walls, or fences;
5. Filling, dredging, grading, excavating, or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground
surface;
6. Storage of materials; or
7. Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
B. "Development" does not include:
1. Maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing roads.
2. Gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or
construction of levees.
3. Agricultural development activities on farms including farm residences as exempted by law.
FPE OR FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The elevation of the base flood (plus 1 foot) at any
given location in the SFHA.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow,
the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the SFHA required to store and convey the base flood. If not prohibited,
building or placing obstructions in a floodway will increase flood damages to other properties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 451/460
SFHA OR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Marion
that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The SFHAs of the city of Marion are generally
identified as such on the flood insurance rate map of the city prepared by the federal insurance
administration and dated September 15, 1983, as the effective date. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd.
2013 Code)
13-1-4: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
The protection standard of this chapter is the base flood according to the best data available to the
Illinois state water survey's floodplain information repository. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, he may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with
better data and submit it to the state water survey.
A. The base flood elevation for the SFHAs of the following streams:
Campground Creek
Crab Orchard Creek
East Fork Campground Creek
Fairground Creek
High School Tributary
Mule Creek
North Fork High School Tributary
North Fork Westend Creek
West Fork Campground Creek
West Fork Westernaire Creek
Westend Creek
Westernaire Creek
shall be delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the city prepared
by the federal insurance administration and dated March 15, 1983.
B. The base flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an AH zone/AO zone shall be that elevation
delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the city.
C. The base flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an A zone on the flood
insurance rate map shall be the 100-year flood depth calculated by the Illinois state water survey
according to the formulas presented in "Depth & Frequency Of Floods In Illinois", published by the
U.S. Geological Survey, 1976. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
13-1-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A. Permit And Compliance Required: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not
exempted by law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer shall not
issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this
chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 452/460
B. Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by
the code enforcement officer. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn
to scale, showing property line dimensions and those parts of the site that are below the base flood
elevation. For those parts below the base food elevation, the drawing shall also show: (Ord. 1033,
9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
1. Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling;
2. The direction of flow of surface drainage and flood flows;
3. The location of all watercourses and drainage facilities;
4. The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and
5. The elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings subject to the requirements
of section 13-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
C. Review Of Application: Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the code
enforcement officer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any
development located on land higher than the base flood elevation is not in the SFHA and,
therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
D. Additional Required Permits: The code enforcement officer shall inform the applicant of any and all
other local, state, and federal permits that may be required for this type of development activity.
The development permit will only be issued on the condition that the other specified permits are
obtained. The code enforcement officer shall not issue a use permit or occupancy permit unless all
required permits have been obtained. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
13-1-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND DAMAGES:
A. 1. No development in the SFHA shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
2. For development proposals located in an identified floodway or within a riverine SFHA where the
floodway has not yet been identified, the following rule shall apply: The code enforcement officer
shall review the development plans to discern if: (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
a. A new obstruction to flood flow would be created;
b. The project will involve a channel crossing such as a bridge or pipeline; or
c. The project will modify the shape of the channel. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
If any of these three (3) situations will result from the project, the applicant shall be required to
obtain a permit from the Illinois department of natural resources, issued pursuant to 615
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/23. The code enforcement officer shall not issue a development
permit unless the applicant has obtained either a section 5/23 permit or a "waiver of permit
required" from the department of natural resources. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
3. For development proposals located in a flood fringe, AO zone, or AH zone, identified as such on
an SFHA map or in a lakefront floodplain, ponding area, area of sheet flow, or other SFHA not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 453/460
subject to overbank flooding from an identified channel, the requirements of this subsection shall
not apply.
B. No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE
unless such materials are stored in a storage tank or floodproofed building constructed according
to the requirements of subsection 13-1-7B3 of this chapter.
C. New and replacement sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted,
provided all manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight. (Ord.
1033, 9-12-1983)
13-1-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
A. Application Of Provisions: In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section 13-1-6 of
this chapter, all buildings to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below
the FPE. This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:
1. Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00);
2. Improvements made to an existing building that increase the first floor area by more than twenty
percent (20%);
3. Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged building that are valued at or more than fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the building before the damage occurred; and
4. Installing a mobile home on a new site or a new mobile home on an existing site. This building
protection requirement does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it formerly
lawfully occupied.
B. This building protection requirement may be met by any one of the following methods:
1. A building may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance with the following:
a. The area to be filled shall be cleared of all standing trees, brush, down timber, trash, and other
growth or objects unsuitable for use as foundation material.
b. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') deep before compaction.
c. The surface of the fill shall be at or above the FPE. The fill shall extend at least ten feet (10')
beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the FPE.
d. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, rip
rap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical (3:1).
e. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring
properties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 454/460
f. The bottom of the lowest floor, including joists, if any, and all utility meters shall be located at
or above the FPE. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
g. The code enforcement officer shall maintain a record of the as built elevation of the lowest
floor of the building. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
2. A building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls, crawl space, or other
foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic
pressures.
b. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, shaped and aligned so as to
minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, and floating debris.
c. Mobile homes shall not be permitted in the SFHA.
d. All areas below the FPE shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The
bottom of the lowest floor, including joists, if any, and all utility meters shall be located at or
above the FPE. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
e. The code enforcement officer shall maintain a record of the as built elevation of the lowest
floor. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
f. No area below the FPE shall be used for storage of items or materials subject to flood damage
unless such items or materials are declared "property not covered" by a standard flood
insurance policy of the national flood insurance program. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
g. Any future alteration of the area below the FPE that violates the requirements of this
subsection B2 shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The code enforcement officer shall
inform the applicant that such alteration is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages
and, therefore, will cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
(Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
h. No mobile home may be placed on a new site located within an identified floodway.
3. A nonresidential building may be floodproofed in accordance with the following:
a. A registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been designed so that
below the FPE, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the base flood. The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy,
and impacts from debris or ice.
b. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside
source of electricity. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
c. The code enforcement officer shall maintain the engineer's certificate and a record of the as
built elevation to which the building was floodproofed. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013
Code)
13-1-8: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 455/460
A. The city council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all
official actions related to land management, use and development. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
B. The city council shall not approve any annexation agreement or plat of subdivision located outside
the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The code enforcement officer shall obtain the best available SFHA maps and data for the
unincorporated area.
C. New subdivisions, mobile home parks, and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall meet the
requirements of sections 13-1-6 and 13-1-7 of this chapter. Plats or plans for new subdivisions,
mobile home parks, and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of
surface waters in accordance with the plat act1. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks, and planned unit developments (PUDs)
shall display the following flood data:
1. The boundary of the SFHA;
2. The boundary of the floodway, if shown on available SFHA maps;
3. Easements of lands dedicated to the city for access for channel maintenance purposes; and
4. The FPE for each building site. Where the base flood elevation is not available from an existing
study filed with the state water survey, the applicant shall be responsible for submitting it to the
state water survey for review and approval as best available elevation data. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-
1983)
E. Plans for the development activities to be undertaken by the city in the SFHA shall be reviewed by
the code enforcement officer to ensure that they comply with this chapter. Except as exempted by
law, no other local government shall commence any development activity in the SFHA without first
obtaining a development permit from the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd.
2013 Code)
F. The city plan commission shall take the following into consideration when preparing or revising the
comprehensive plan, community development program, housing assistance plan, and other land
use or development programs:
1. Preserving SFHA land for open space uses such as farming or recreation;
2. Acquiring and removing frequently flooded buildings;
3. Prohibiting hospitals, water treatment plants, natural gas storage and other critical or especially
hazardous facilities from locating in the SFHA;
4. Identifying the elevations of the base flood and past floods at entrances to public buildings, on
street signs, or other prominent locations; and
5. Other flood hazard mitigation or floodplain management activities that could help accomplish the
purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 456/460
13-1-9: VARIANCES:
A. Authority: Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development
proposal, the applicant may apply to the city plan commission for a variance. The plan commission
shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the city
council.
B. Standards For Variance Request: No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
2. A substantial economic hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health or safety or creation of a nuisance;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief operations,
policing or repairs to roads, utilities, or other public facilities; and
6. The provisions of subsection 13-1-5D of this chapter can still be met. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
C. Variances From Specific Provisions:
1. The code enforcement officer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of section 13-1-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a
building will: (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
a. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
b. Increase the risk to life and property; and
c. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge
in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
2. A variance from the requirements of section 13-1-7 of this chapter may be granted to permit a
"wet floodproofed" building, that is, a building to be intentionally flooded during a flood, provided:
a. No part of such a building below the FPE may be subject to flood damage.
b. The variance shall be conditioned on the contents being:
(1) Of materials resistant to flood damage; or
(2) Items declared "property not covered" by a standard flood insurance policy of the national
flood insurance program. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
c. Any future alteration of the area below the FPE that violates the conditions of the variance
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The code enforcement officer shall inform the
applicant that any such alteration is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, will cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 457/460
D. Historic Landmarks: Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or building
documented as worthy of preservation by the Illinois department of natural resources may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsection B of this section. (Ord.
1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
13-1-10: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of
study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the SFHA will be free from
flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully hereunder. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
13-1-11: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord.
1033, 9-12-1983)
13-1-12: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
A. Violation: Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution
shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
B. Determination And Notice Of Violation; Injunction: The code enforcement officer may determine,
upon due investigation, that a violation of this chapter exists, and after the owner fails, after ten
(10) days' notice, to correct his property, the city may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the court sees
necessary to secure compliance herewith.
C. Penalty: Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided
in section 1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983; amd. 2013 Code)
D. Other Remedies; Costs: Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action to
prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or
persons responsible. (Ord. 1033, 9-12-1983)
Chapter 2
STORMWATER DETENTION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 458/460
13-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The growth in and around the city and the associated development and construction of buildings,
paved surfaces, roads and other improvements have altered in the past and continue to alter the
natural flow of surface waters on the land, which, together with the construction of gutters, culverts,
drains and channels for the carrying off of surface waters, have both increased the quantity of
stormwater and amplified the peak flow rates of runoff, thus leading to present and potential
flooding of property and homes, dangerous flows within and over public roadways and streets, and
soil and channel erosion.
B. It is the intention of the city council to protect the health and safety of the citizens and visitors of the
community and to prevent damage to private property and public facilities through the proper
design and construction of both on site and regional stormwater detention facilities that prevent or
adequately reduce increases in peak flow rates of runoff that may otherwise increase the risk of
flooding and associated risk of public endangerment, property damage and erosion.
C. It is the intention of the city council, through this chapter, to establish a water detention pond
program for the design and construction of stormwater detention facilities so that, where practical,
the most cost effective protection from flooding may be accomplished.
D. It is the intention of the city council to protect the health and safety of the citizens of and visitors to
the community and to prevent damage to private property and public facilities through the
installation and use of temporary and permanent erosion control practices that prevent or
adequately reduce increases in erosion and siltation that may otherwise increase the risk of
flooding and the associated risk of public endangerment and property damage by clogging and/or
partial filling of constructed or natural drainageways as well as drainage structures and detention
ponds. (Ord. 2212, 7-14-2008)
13-2-2: APPLICATION AND JURISDICTION:
A. This chapter shall apply to all property within the corporate city limits and the one and one-half
(11/2) mile zoning jurisdiction by the city.
B. Subsection 13-2-3B and section 13-2-5 of this chapter shall not apply to:
1. Single-family or duplex residential lots of subdivisions approved prior to the effective date
hereof, unless specifically required by prior agreement between the city and the owners or
developers of such subdivisions, or to new one or two (2) lot subdivisions for single-family or
duplex residential lots, and this chapter is intended to be implemented for entire subdivisions at
the time of platting and construction of streets and drainage improvements and not on an
individual lot basis for single-family and duplex residential subdivisions.
2. Residential lots in the nonsubdivided areas that create no more impervious ground cover than
twenty percent (20%) of the gross lot surface area exclusive of any area within the 100-year
floodplain. (Ord. 2212, 7-14-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 459/460
13-2-3: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. It is prohibited to place fill material or construct impervious cover or construct or place any other
structure on a person's property or perform any excavation or grading in a manner which alters the
flow of surface water across said property in a manner which damages any adjacent property.
No final subdivision plat, subdivision construction plan, or site plan shall be approved by the city
unless it can be demonstrated by the owner or developer of such property that the proposed
development will not result in damage to any adjacent or downstream property. This will be
certified by a professional engineer's submittal of sufficient data and calculations.
B. The requirement of subsection A of this section shall be accomplished through one of the following
means: Design and construction of an on site stormwater detention facility or facilities by the
landowner or developer which limits the peak flood flows from the proposed development to the
existing peak flood flows from the subject tract.
C. Acceptance of requests from the landowner or developer to meet the stormwater detention
requirements through measures listed in subsections A and B of this section is solely at the
discretion of the city and shall not relieve the owner of responsibility under civil law to adjacent and
downstream properties.
D. Acceptance by the city of on site stormwater detention plans will be based on the suitability and
adequacy of the engineering and technical design of the proposed stormwater detention facility, as
described in section 13-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2212, 7-14-2008)
13-2-4: ENGINEERING AND TECHNICAL DESIGN:
A. A registered professional engineer, licensed in the state of Illinois and qualified and experienced in
the design and operation of stormwater detention ponds and related stormwater management
facilities, shall perform the hydraulic and structural design of stormwater detention ponds and
related stormwater management facilities, including the development of engineering and technical
information required for evaluation by the city.
B. Any design for stormwater detention shall adhere to the planning and design drainage criteria
adopted by the city engineer and approved by the city council as attached to the ordinance codified
herein and made a part hereof. Such criteria will be available for copy at the office of the city
engineer and the office of the city code enforcement officer.
C. All design and technical information necessary to thoroughly evaluate the suitability and adequacy
of the engineering and technical design of proposed on site stormwater detention facilities and, if
proposed, off site facilities, shall be provided to the city for review. All detention and runoff
calculations, including computer model simulations, if used, shall be provided.
D. All on site stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to adequately and safely pass all
stormwater inflows, including flood flows and runoff from upstream and adjacent properties that
have natural and/or existing overland flows toward and onto the subject tract. The on site
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=972 460/460
stormwater detention facilities should not impound stormwater onto or cause backwater to
inundate any upstream or adjacent properties in excess of existing conditions.
E. On site stormwater detention facilities shall not be placed such that they encroach into the
regulatory 100-year floodplain as established by the city, and/or the federal emergency
management agency, unless it can be satisfactorily demonstrated to the city through the use of
hydraulic modeling that such encroachment will not cause any rise in the 100-year flood level on
other off site properties or that the increase in the 100-year flood level caused by such
encroachment will occur entirely on site on the owner's or developer's property.
F. Additional engineering and technical rules and guidance with respect to the application and review
of the stormwater detention requirements of this chapter may be provided by the city. (Ord. 2212,
7-14-2008)
13-2-5: PENALTIES:
A. Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter shall result in the denial of all city building and
related permits and refusal to accept dedication of a plat when proffered.
B. Violation of the terms of this chapter may subject the violator to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1
of this code. (Ord. 2212, 7-14-2008; amd. 2013 Code)