6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 1/348
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there
are any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Franciscan Alliance Network
Attention: Accounts Payable Dept.
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1891_
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 1, CHAPTER 6A, SECTION 1 AND SECTION 3
OF THE VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF
GOVERNMENT, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE
THIS _23rd___ DAY OF _January___, 2019
Published in Pamphlet Form by Authority of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Monee,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 2/348
Will County, Illinois,
This _23rd___ day of _January___, 2019
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1891
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 1, CHAPTER 6A, SECTION 1 AND SECTION 3
OF THE VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF
GOVERNMENT, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
WHEREAS, Title 1, Chapter 6A, Section 1, calls for the appointment of the Village Clerk by the President with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees; and
WHEREAS, a referendum was on the March 20, 2012 Primary Election ballot calling for the election of the Village Clerk as opposed to
the appointment; and
WHEREAS, the voters of the Village of Monee voted in favor of the election of the Village Clerk; and
WHEREAS, Title 1, Chapter 6A, Section Three calls for the Village Clerk to be compensated for his/her services at a flat rate of Two
Thousand Two Hundred Dollars on an annual basis; and
WHEREAS, it has been determined that the present compensation due the Village Clerk should be increased to reflect her duties and
responsibilities.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Monee as follows:
Section One—Preambles. That the preambles above set forth are incorporated herein as if set forth in full.
Section Two – Title 1, Chapter 6A, Section 1. That the current provision of the Title 1, Chapter 6A, Section 1 of the Village Code be
repealed in its entirety and replaced with the following terms:
1-6A-1 The Village Clerk shall be elected to said position. The Village Clerk must be a qualified elector of the Village of Monee.
Section Three – Title 1, Chapter 6A, Section 3. That the current provision of Title 1, Chapter 6A, Section 3 of the Village Code be
repealed in its entirety and replaced with the following terms:
1-6A-3 The salary of the Village Clerk shall be the sum of Two Hundred (200) Dollars per regular Village Board meeting plus
any other additional compensation as approved by the President and Village Board.
Section Four – Repealer. That all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are expressly repealed.
Section Five — Savings Clause. That in the event any portion of this Ordinance is declared to be void, that such other parts or
remainder of this Ordinance shall not be adversely effected and shall otherwise remain effective and valid.
Section Six — Adoption Clause. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its approval, adoption and
publication as required by law.
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1891_
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 1, CHAPTER 6A, SECTION 1 AND SECTION 3
OF THE VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF
GOVERNMENT, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
AYES: NAYS: ABSTAIN: ABSENT: PRESENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 3/348
Blue
Gray
Horne
Raczek
Youdris
Gonzalez
PASSED and APPROVED this __23rd day of January____ , 2019.
_______________________________
James Popp, Village Mayor
ATTEST: _______________________________
Doneshia Codjoe, Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1892_
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 3, CHAPTER 3, SECTION 6, OF THE VILLAGE
CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 4/348
ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE
THIS _23rd___ DAY OF _January___, 2019
Published in Pamphlet Form by Authority of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Monee,
Will County, Illinois,
This _23rd___ day of _January___, 2019
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1892_
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 3, CHAPTER 3, SECTION 6, OF THE VILLAGE
CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS
WHEREAS, Title 3, Chapter3, Section 6 of the Village Code sets forth the liquor classifications pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor
and beer and wine within the Village of Monee (“Village”); and
WHEREAS, upon review of the aforesaid classifications, it has been determined that an additional classification should be established;
and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Monee, a Home Rule Unit of
Government, Will County, Illinois, that Title 3, Chapter 3, Section 6 of the Village Code be amended as follows:
Section One - Preambles. That the preambles above set forth are incorporated herein as if set forth in full.
Section Two - Title 3, Chapter 3, Section 6(A). That Title 3, Chapter 3, Section 6(A) be amended to include the following
classification:
A-1(a) A Class A-1(a) license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of alcoholic liquor from the premises which is primarily used
to serve alcoholic liquor and not food sales. The license also authorizes the sale of alcoholic liquor in its original package not for
consumption on the licensed premises. No more than five such licenses shall be issued at any time.
Section Three -Title 3, Chapter 3, Section 6(B). That Title 3, Chapter 3, Section 6(B) be amended to include the following
classification:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 5/348
B-1(a) A Class B-1(a) license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of beer and wine from the premises which is primarily used
to serve beer and wine and not food sales. The license also authorizes the sale of beer and wine in its original package not for
consumption on the licensed premises. No more than five such licenses shall be issued at any time.
Section Four – License Fees. The annual fee for an A-1(a) or B-1(a) liquor license shall be One Thousand (1,000) Dollars.
Section Five – Repealer. That all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are expressly repealed.
Section Six - Savings Clause. That in the event any portion of this Ordinance is declared to be void, that such other parts or
remainder of this Ordinance shall not be adversely effected and shall otherwise remain effective and valid.
Section Six - Adoption Clause. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its approval, adoption and
publication as required by law.
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1892_
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 3, CHAPTER 3, SECTION 6, OF THE VILLAGE
CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS
AYES: NAYS: ABSTAIN: ABSENT: PRESENT:
Blue
Gonzalez
Gray
Horne
Raczek
Youdris
__________ __________ ___________ __________ __________
PASSED and APPROVED this _23rd day of January_ , 2019.
_______________________________
James Popp, Village Mayor
ATTEST: _______________________________
Doneshia Codjoe, Village Clerk
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 6/348
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1893 ___ _
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 11, CHAPTER 6, SECTION 5 OF THE VILLAGE CODE THEREBY AMENDING
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONSWITHIN THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS
ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE
THIS __23rd__ DAY OF __Jauary__________, 2019
Published in Pamphlet Form by Authority of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Monee,
Will County, Illinois,
This _23rd___ day of _January___, 2019
ORDINANCE NUMBER _ ____ _
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 11, CHAPTER 6, SECTION 5 OF THE VILLAGE CODE THEREBY AMENDING
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONSWITHIN THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS
WHEREAS, The Village of Monee (“Village”) is a Home Rule Unit of Government under the guidelines of the State of Illinois; and
WHEREAS, as such the Village has the authority to perform any function pertaining to its government and officers to protect the public health and safety of its citizens; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 7/348
WHEREAS, all development, stormwater management activities, soil erosion practices and floodplain protection measures within Will County must comply with the Will
County Stormwater Ordinance; and
WHEREAS, it has been determined that it is in the best interest of the Village to amend its current provisions relative to Flood Plain regulations and replacing the same with
the Stormwater Management restrictions as set forth herein.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Monee as follows:
Section One—Preambles. That the preambles above set forth are incorporated herein as if set forth in full.
Section Two – Title 11, Chapter 6, Section 5. That Title 11, Chapter 6, Section 5 of the Village Code entitled Floodplain Regulations be repealed in its entirety and
replaced with the following provisions:
01/15/19
General. The following chapter is extracted from the Will County, IL Code of Ordinances (Will County Code) and is identified in the Will County Code as
Chapter 55. It will be renumbered accordingly to be consistent with the Village of Monee Code of Ordinances numbering system and includes amendments.
Amendments highlighted in yellow were previously approved amendments from 2004. Amendments highlighted in blue are new/current amendments desired
by the Village. Appendix A was amended to list only those effective FEMA FIRM maps that include the Village of Monee corporate limits and the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village that may be annexed into the within VillageWill County.If any other Village ordinances conflict with this chapter, the
more conservative application will apply. The Superintendent of Public Works will act as the Administrator to administer and enforce this chapter. Such
administration and enforcement of this chapter may be delegated to others (which may includea consultant) at the discretion of the Administrator.
Section 11-6-5 Floodplain Regulations associated with the current Village Code of the Village of Monee should be repealed in lieu of the below Stormwater
Management Ordinance.
CHAPTER 55: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
Authority, Purpose and Definitions
55.001 Statutory authority
55.002 Will County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater Management Plan
55.003 Purposes of this chapter
55.004 Reference to watershed plans
55.005 Definitions
55.006 Amendments
Requirements for Stormwater Management
55.020 General information
55.021 General stormwater requirements
55.022 Site runoff requirements
55.023 Site runoff storage requirements (detention/extended detention)
55.024 Stormwater requirements for agricultural land use including croplands, pasture lands and farmsteads
55.025 Amendments
Sediment and Erosion Control
55.035 Site planning
55.036 Standards and specifications
55.037 General requirement
55.038 Extended construction shutdown periods
55.039 Hydraulic and hydrologic design requirements
55.040 “As-needed” practices on the plans
55.041 Sediment and erosion control plan requirements
55.042 Conveyance of off-site flow
55.043 Stockpiles
55.044 Storm sewer inlets
55.045 Construction dewatering
55.046 Protection of public/private roadways
55.047 Temporary stream crossings
55.049 Amendments
Protection of Special Management Areas
55.060 General
55.061 Floodplain, regulatory floodplain, base flood elevation (BFE) and regulatory floodway locations
55.062 General performance standards
55.063 Compensatory storage volume standards
55.064 Floodway standards
55.065 Riverine floodplain
55.066 Bridge and culvert standards
Stormwater Management Permit Submittal Requirements
55.080 General requirements
55.081 Duration and revision to permits
55.082 Required submittals
55.083 Submittals prior to permit issuance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 8/348
55.084 Record drawings
55.085 Issuance or denial of permit and appeal of permit denial
55.086 Amendments
Long Term Maintenance
55.100 Long-term maintenance
55.101 Transfer to permitting authority or other public entity
55.102 Transfer to homeowner’s or similar association
55.103 Conveyance to one or more persons
55.104 Incorporation of maintenance obligations in stormwater management permit
55.105 Funding of long term maintenance of stormwater facilities
General Provisions
55.120 Scope of regulation
55.121 Exemptions
55.122 Community’s list of proposed exempt developments
55.123 Interpretation
55.124 Warning and disclaimer of liability
55.125 Choice of planning jurisdiction
55.126 Violations
55.128 Effective date
Variances
55.140 Purpose
55.141 Application for variance
55.142 Application fee
55.143 Public hearing
55.144 Granting of variances
55.145 Recommendations
55.146 Decision
55.147 Conditions
55.148 Amendments
Administration
55.160 Responsibility for Administration
55.161 Duties of Director
55.162 Duties of Administrator
55.163 Representative capacity
55.164 Oversight Committee
55.165 Non-certified communities
55.166 Service
55.167 Publication
Certified Community Enforcement
55.180 Authority
55.181 Petition for certification and waiver of enforcement
55.182 Filing and contents of petition for certification
55.183 Committee consideration of petition for certification
55.184 Standards for grant of petition
55.185 Certified community records
55.186 Committee review of enforcement by a certified community
55.187 Investigations; complaints
55.188 Hearing on complaint
55.189 Committee decision
Performance Security
55.200 General security requirements
55.201 Development security
55.202 Sediment and erosion control security
55.203 Letters of credit
Fee-in-Lieu of On-Site Detention
55.215 Fee-in-lieu of on-site detention
55.216 Amendments
Enforcement
55.230 Inspection and maintenance authority
55.231 Required inspections
55.232 Offenses
County Stormwater Management Technical Guidance Manual
55.245 Adoption by reference
55.999 Penalty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 9/348
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
§ 55.001 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
(A) This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Will County Stormwater Management Ordinance (the “WCSMO”).
(B) The County Board adopts this chapter pursuant to its authority to regulate stormwater management and governing the location, width, course and release rate of
all stormwater runoff channels, streams and basins in the county, in accordance with the County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater Management Plan. The
statutory authority for this chapter is contained in ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-1041, 5-1049, 5-1063, 5-1104, 5-12001, 5-15001 et seq. and 5-40001 and other applicable
authority, all as amended from time to time.
(C) As applicable, the communities within the county adopt and enforce this chapter or in the alternative adopt and enforce a municipal ordinance that is consistent
with and at least as strict as the county regulations, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-1062, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-8 and 11-31-2
and ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, §§ 4.9 et seq., including § 18g.
§ 55.002 WILL COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE COUNTYWIDE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
The County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater Management Plan was recommended by the County Stormwater Management Committee and adopted by the
County Board, after review by the appropriate agencies and a public hearing, by Resolution 98-20 on October 15, 1998. The Plan is available for public inspection in
the office of the County Clerk.
§ 55.003 PURPOSES OF THIS CHAPTER.
(A) The principal purpose of this chapter is to promote effective, equitable, acceptable and legal stormwater management measures by establishing reasonable rules
and regulations for development.
(B) Other purposes of this chapter include:
(1) Managing and mitigating the effects of urbanization on stormwater drainage throughout the county through planning, appropriate engineering practices and
proper maintenance;
(2) Protecting from, and reducing the existing potential for, loss of human life, health, safety and property from the hazards of flooding damages on a watershed
basis;
(3) Preserving and enhancing the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions and natural characteristics of watercourses and floodplains to protect water quality,
protect aquatic habitats, reduce flood damages, reduce soil erosion, provide recreational and aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development;
(4) Controlling sediment and erosion in and from stormwater facilities, developments, agricultural fields and construction sites and reducing and repairing stream
bank erosion;
(5) Requiring that planning for development provide for water resource management, taking into account natural features such as vegetation, wildlife, waterways,
wetlands and topography in order to reduce the probability that new development will create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
(6) Protecting environmentally sensitive areas from deterioration or destruction by private or public actions;
(7) Requiring appropriate and adequate provision for site runoff control, especially when the land is developed with a large amount of impervious surface;
(8) Requiring the design and evaluation of each site stormwater management plan consistent with watershed capacities;
(9) Encouraging the use of stormwater storage and infiltration of stormwater in preference to stormwater conveyance;
(10) Lessening the taxpayers’ burden for flood-related disasters, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and relief operations;
(11) Meeting the State Department of Natural Resources-Office of Water Resources floodway permitting requirements delineated in ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, § 18g
(“An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the state”), as amended from time to time;
(12) Making federally subsidized flood insurance available to individual communities and for property throughout the county by fulfilling the requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program;
(13) Complying with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified in C.F.R. Title 44;
(14) Minimizing conflicts and incompatibilities between agricultural and urban drainage systems and maintaining agriculture as a viable and productive land use;
(15) Encouraging cooperation and consistency in stormwater management activities within and between the units of government having floodplain and
stormwater management jurisdiction;
(16) Restricting future development in the floodplain to facilities that will not adversely affect the potential for flood damage;
(17) Requiring regular, planned maintenance of stormwater management facilities;
(18) Allowing the use of simple technologies whenever appropriate and realistic, but requiring the use of more sophisticated techniques when necessary to ensure
the adequacy of stormwater controls;
(19) Providing a procedure by which communities throughout the county may petition the Committee for authority to implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter; and
(20) Requiring strict compliance with and enforcement of this chapter.
(C) The purposes of this chapter are consistent with and supercede the Plan.
§ 55.004 REFERENCE TO WATERSHED PLANS.
(A) This chapter recognizes the integrated nature of the watershed system and the need to study certain flood control alternatives and other stormwater management
functions on a watershed-wide basis. A generalized process for development of watershed plans was recommended in the adopted “County Comprehensive Stormwater
Management Plan”. This process includes a public hearing review and approval by the Committee, and adoption by the county.
(B) (1) Individual watershed plans or interim watershed plans which recognize the unique attributes of each watershed may be prepared and periodically updated
for the major watersheds, to identify management projects and establish criteria for development. These plans may also recommend changes to this chapter effective
within the study boundary.
(2) Watershed plans or interim watershed plans may be adopted which recommend more or less stringent criteria than the criteria in this chapter. When adopted by
the County Board, these watershed-specific criteria established in watershed plans or interim watershed plans shall be set forth as §§ 55.035 through 55.047 of this
chapter.
§ 55.005 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATION. Occurs when rules and procedures regarding permit applications and stormwater management permits are not followed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 10/348
ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated by the permitting authority to administer and enforce this chapter.
AGRICULTURAL REVIEW ADVISORY COMMITTEE. Shall be composed of at least three county residents who live and own and operate or tenant operate at
least 60 contiguous acres of farmland in the county and representatives appointed by the following agencies: Will and South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District
U.S.D.A., Natural Resource Conservation Service and the County Farm Bureau. The Stormwater Management Committee will appoint these individuals in accordance
with Article 3, § 1D of the bylaws. The Stormwater Committee will consider Committee member nomination recommendations from any active county agricultural not
for profit organization.
AGRICULTURAL SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE. A water management technique driven by economic and safety concerns, where the rate at which surplus ground
water should be removed is determined primarily by the moisture/air requirements of the vegetation (commonly called “tiles”, “field tiles” and the like).
APPLICABLE ENGINEERING PRACTICE. Procedures, methods or materials recommended in standard engineering textbooks or references as suitable for the
intended purpose.
APPLICANT. Any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to carry out
construction of a development from the county or appropriate certified local governmental unit.
APPROPRIATE USE. Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The list of permissible uses is
contained in §§ 55.060 through 55.066.
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The highest water surface elevation that can be expected during the base flood.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). A measure used to control the adverse stormwater-related effects of development. BMPs include structural devices
(e.g., swales, filter strips, infiltration trenches and detention basins) designed to remove pollutants, reduce runoff rates and volumes and protect aquatic habitats. BMPs
also include nonstructural approaches, such as public education efforts to prevent the dumping of household chemicals into storm drains.
BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home,
mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than 180 days, unless fully
licensed and ready for highway use.
BUFFER. An area of predominantly vegetated land located adjacent to channels, wetlands, lakes or ponds for the purpose of reducing contaminants in stormwater
that flows to those areas.
BULLETIN 70. Frequency Distributions and Hydroclimatic Characteristics of Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois by Floyd Huff and James Angel of the State Water
Survey (1989).
BYPASS FLOWS. Stormwater runoff or ground water from upstream properties tributary to a property’s drainage system but not under its control.
CERTIFIED COMMUNITY. A community which has met the requirements to be delegated the responsibility for ordinance enforcement as determined by the
Stormwater Committee.
CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash or
natural or human-made drainage way, which has a definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or into which surface, ground water, effluent or industrial discharges flow
either perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION
includes damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted vegetation
but does not include the clearing of debris or removal of trash or dredging to previously documented thalweg elevations and side slopes.
COMMERCIAL. Sale of goods to the public at large where the traffic generated warrants construction of site improvements.
COMMERCIAL REDEVELOPMENT. Development on a parcel upon which the existing condition is buildings, parking lots and infrastructure associated with
commercial activities. Additions to existing buildings and new impervious surfaces added after the effective date of the chapter are specifically excluded from this
definition.
COMMITTEE. The County Stormwater Management Committee.
COMMUNITY. The county or any city or village within the county.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An excavated, hydrologically and hydraulically equivalent volume of storage created to offset the loss of existing flood storage.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (CLOMA). A FEMA comment letter on a development proposed to be located in, and affecting only that
portion of, the area of floodplain outside the regulatory floodway and having no impact on the existing regulatory floodway or base flood elevations.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter that indicates that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM or FBFM after the record drawings are submitted and approved.
COE. The United States Army Corps of Engineers.
CONSERVATION PLANNING. The practices and procedures associated with the management of soil, water, plants, plant nutrients and other elements of
agricultural production. Documentation of the management system shall only be as required by the NRCS or in cases of a complaint, as requested by the Administrator
in response to a notification of a complaint.
CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to limit the rate of flow that passes through the structure to a specific rate, given a specific upstream and
downstream water surface elevation.
COUNTY. Will County, Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 11/348
CRITICAL DURATION. The duration of a storm event that results in the greatest peak runoff.
DAM. Any obstruction, wall embankment or barrier, together with any abutments and appurtenant works, constructed to store or divert water or to create a pool (not
including underground water storage tanks).
DEPARTMENT. The Will County Land Use Department.
DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE. The volume contained below a closed contour on a one-foot contour interval topographic map, the upper elevation which is
determined by the invert of a surface gravity outlet.
DETENTION BASIN (SITE RUNOFF STORAGE FACILITY). A constructed structure for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff with a controlled release
rate.
DEVELOPER. A person who creates or causes a development.
DEVELOPMENT.
(1) Any constructed change to real estate including:
(a) Construction, reconstruction, repair or replacement of a building or an addition to a building;
(b) Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than
180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on-site for less than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway use;
(c) Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges or similar projects;
(d) Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or culverts, channel modifications, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface, storage materials, deposit of solids or liquid waste;
(e) Any other activity of humans that might change the direction, height or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal; and/or
(f) Plowing and cultivation and other similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees as regulated in § 55.024.
(2) The following are not considered development: maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads with an impervious
surface when there is no increase in elevation.
DIRECT DISCHARGE SITE. Parcels of land, or portions thereof, which are immediately adjacent and naturally drain directly to the banks of the Des Plaines
River, Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, DuPage River and Kankakee River without crossing over other private or public property.
DIRECTOR. The County Executive or his or her designee charged with performing the duties specified in this chapter.
DRAINAGE AREA. The land area above a given point that may contribute runoff flow at that point from rainfall.
EFFECTIVE DATE. The date to be determined by the County Board.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES. A form published by FEMA, or its equivalent, that is used to certify the base flood elevation and the lowest elevation of usable
space to which a building has been constructed.
EPHEMERAL STREAM. A stream whose bed elevation does not intersect the ground water table, it carries flow only during and immediately after a runoff
producing rainfall event.
EROSION. The process whereby soil is detached by the action of water or wind.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1, 1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
EXTENDED DETENTION. A volume of runoff temporarily detained and released over a long period of time as specified in § 55.023.
FEE-IN-LIEU OF DETENTION. A fee paid by a developer to the permitting authority, commensurate with the costs and fee schedules adopted by the county
and/or the certified community based on the detention volume required for the development to meet the ordinance release rates. Rules and procedures for fee in lieu of
detention are contained in § 55.215 of this chapter.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The federal agency and its regulations, at 44 C.F.R. §§ 59 through 79, effective as of September
29, 1989 or as amended.
FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal ways or the unusual and
rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A floodplain management map issued by FEMA that depicts, based on detailed analysis, the boundaries
of the base flood, the 0.2% probability flood and the floodway.
FLOOD FREQUENCY. Normally expressed as a period of years, based on a percent chance of occurrence in any given year from statistical analysis, during which
a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. For example, the two-year flood frequency has a 50% chance of occurrence in any given
year. Similarly, the 100-year flood frequency has a 1% chance of occurrence in any given year.
FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the designated floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map issued by FEMA that is an official community map, which depicts generalized areas of floodplains,
replaced by a detailed flood insurance study.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map issued by FEMA that is an official community map, on which map FEMA has delineated both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map may or may not depict floodways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 12/348
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). A study of flood discharges and flood profiles for a community, adopted and published by FEMA.
FLOODPLAIN. The land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation
including detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas and the like. The floodplain is also known as the SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHA).
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the BFE plus one foot of freeboard for structures within the plan limits of the base flood elevation.
Outside the plan limits, the water table or 100-year design water surface elevation of any adjacent stormwater facility, whichever is higher, plus one foot of freeboard.
FLOODPROOF. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures or property which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the FPE.
FLOODWAY or DESIGNATED FLOODWAY. Includes the channel, on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or channel which is
needed to store and convey the critical duration 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth-foot increase in flood stage due to the loss of flood
conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10% increase in velocities.
FLOODWAY CONVEYANCE. The measure of the flow carrying capacity of the floodway section and is defined using Manning’s equation as:
K = 1.4863 AR2/3 /n
where “n” is Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is the effective area of the cross-section, and “R” is ratio of the wetted area to the wetted perimeter.
FREEBOARD. An increment of height added to the BFE or 100-year design water surface elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations,
unknown local conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
FUNCTIONAL. Refers to stormwater facilities, which serve their primary purpose of meeting developed release rate requirements but do not meet all the final
design conditions. For example, a detention basin, which has been excavated but has not, had the side slopes graded, nor the final landscaping placed, may be
considered FUNCTIONAL as a site runoff storage facility.
GOOD HUSBANDRY. Generally accepted agricultural practices found in good farm management.
GROUND WATER. Water that is located within soil or rock below the surface of the earth. Same as SUBSURFACE WATER.
GROUND WATER CONTROL SYSTEM. A designed system which may consist of tiles, under drains, French drains or other appropriate stormwater facilities
whose purpose is to lower the ground water table to a predictable elevation throughout the year.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminary determined by the Secretary
to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the State Historic Preservation Agency; and
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the State Historic Preservation Agency.
HYDRAULICS. The science and study of the mechanical behavior of water in physical systems and processes.
HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA. Consists of those areas of concrete, asphalt and gravel surfaces along with roof tops which convey
flows directly to an improved drainage system consisting of storm sewers or paved channels. Rooftops whose downspouts discharge to unpaved surfaces which are
designed for the absorption and filtration of stormwater runoff shall not be considered as HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS SURFACES. Roadways
whose primary conveyance is through open ditches and swales shall not be considered as HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Roadways
drained by curb and gutter and storm sewer, and driveways hydraulically connected to those roadways shall be considered as directly connected impervious surface.
HYDRAULICALLY EQUIVALENT COMPENSATORY STORAGE. Compensatory storage either adjacent to the floodplain fill or not located adjacent to the
development but can be shown by hydrologic and hydraulic analysis to be equivalent to compensatory storage located adjacent to the development.
HYDROLOGICALLY DISTURBED. An area where the land surface has been cleared, grubbed, compacted or otherwise modified that changes runoff, volumes,
rates or direction.
HYDROLOGY. The science of the behavior of water, including its dynamics, composition and distribution in the atmosphere, on the surface of the earth and
underground.
IDNR-OWR. The State Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources.
IMPERVIOUS. Surfaces that cause the majority of rainfall to be converted to direct runoff. Asphalt, concrete and roofing systems will be considered
IMPERVIOUS.
INDUSTRIAL REDEVELOPMENT. Development on a parcel upon which the existing condition is buildings, parking lots and infrastructure associated with
industrial activities. Additions to existing buildings and new impervious surfaces added after the effective date of the chapter are specifically excluded from
consideration as INDUSTRIAL REDEVELOPMENT.
INTERIM WATERSHED PLAN. A regional study of a watershed which does not address the entire range of purposes, goals and objectives outlined in the
Countywide Stormwater Management Plan approved by the Committee and adopted by the county.
INTERMITTENT STREAM. A stream whose bed intersects the ground water table for only a portion of the year on the average or any stream which flows
continuously for at least one month out of the year but not the entire year.
LAKE. A natural or artificial body of water encompassing an area of two or more acres, which retains water throughout the year.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). The official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a regulatory floodplain. A LOMA amends the
effective FHBM, FBFM or FIRM.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 13/348
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A letter from FEMA that revises base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as
shown on an effective FHBM, FBFM or FIRM.
MAJOR STORMWATER SYSTEM. The portion of a stormwater facility needed to store and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor stormwater system.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles
placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MASS GRADING. Development in which the primary activity is a change in topography affected by the movement of earth materials.
MINOR STORMWATER SYSTEM. Consists of all infrastructure including curb, gutter, culverts, roadside ditches and swales, storm sewers and subsurface
drainage systems intended to convey stormwater runoff at less than a 100-year flood frequency. The design frequency for MINOR STORMWATER SYSTEMS shall
be in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the local Community or Highway Department jurisdiction.
MITIGATION. Measures taken to offset negative impacts from development in wetlands or the floodplain.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). A federal program whose requirements are codified in C.F.R. Title 44.
NET BENEFIT IN WATER QUALITY. The institution of best management practices as part of a development that when compared to the pre-development
condition can be judged to reduce downstream sediment loading or pollutant loadings.
NET WATERSHED BENEFIT.
(1) A finding that, when compared to the existing condition, the developed project will do one of the following:
(a) Substantially reduce (more than 10%) downstream peak discharges;
(b) Reduce downstream flood stages (more than one-tenth foot); or
(c) Reduce downstream damages to structures occurring in the pre-development condition.
(2) The demonstration of one of these conditions must be through detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of watersheds on a regional scale as approved by the
Administrator.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April 1, 1990.
NON-RIVERINE. Areas not associated with a stream or river such as isolated depressional storage areas, ponds and lakes.
NRCS. The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service.
OBSERVATION STRUCTURES. Structures built on a field tile where the pipe inflow and outflow are visible upon removal of a lid.
OPEN CHANNEL. A conveyance system with a definable bed and banks carrying the discharge from field tiles and surface drainage. OPEN CHANNELS do not
include grassed swales within farm fields under agricultural production, which are ephemeral in nature.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic.
OVERLAND FLOW PATH. A design feature of the major stormwater system which carries flows in excess of the minor stormwater system design capacity in an
open channel or swale, or as sheet flow or weir flow over a feature designed to withstand the particular erosive forces involved.
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE. A certified community’s body of officials charged by the certified community with overseeing variance of the Stormwater
Management Ordinance within the certified community. The Oversight Committee may be a body of elected or appointed officials. See § 55.164.
PERENNIAL STREAMS. Riverine watercourses whose thalweg generally intersects the ground water table elevation and flows throughout the year.
PERMITTING AUTHORITY. The county or a certified community.
PLAN. The County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater Management Plan, adopted by the County Board on October 13, 1998, as amended from time to time.
POND. A body of water of less than two acres, which retains a normal water level year round.
PRIMARY GRAVITY OUTLET. The outlet structure designed to meet the release rate requirements of this chapter.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the state, under the State Professional Engineering Practice Act. (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1 et seq.), as
amended.
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the state, under the State Land Surveyors Act. (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 330, §§ 1 et seq.), as
amended.
PROPERTY. Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER. All open public streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft in whole or in part for commercial uses and purposes
and all lakes, rivers and streams, which in their natural conditions were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or discharge their
waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the state, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters and submerged lands that are open to the
main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project, which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing
buildings and structures, which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 14/348
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing in whole or in part of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
PUBLIC FLOOD EASEMENT. An easement acceptable to the appropriate jurisdictional body that meets the regulations of the OWR, the Department and the
community, and that provides legal assurances that all areas subject to flooding in the created backwater of the development will remain open to allow flooding.
RECORD DRAWINGS. Drawings prepared, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor representing the final “as-built”
record of the actual in-place elevations, location of structures and topography.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as a temporary living quarters for recreational camping travel or seasonal use.
REGISTERED STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the state as a structural engineer.
REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN. The floodplain as depicted on maps recognized by FEMA as defining the limits of the SFHA.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY. Those portions of the floodplain depicted on maps as floodway and recognized by the IDNR-OWR for regulatory purposes.
RETENTION FACILITY. Stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release.
RIVER FRONTAGE. The property that is immediately adjacent to and naturally drains directly to the Des Plaines River, Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, DuPage
River or Kankakee River without crossing over other private or public property.
RIVERINE. Related to, formed by, or resembling a channel (including creeks and rivers).
RUNOFF. The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of the soils of that basin.
SEASONAL HIGH GROUND WATER TABLE. The upper limits of the soil temporarily saturated with water, being usually associated with spring wetness
conditions. This may be indicated by soil mottles with a Munsell color of two chroma or less.
SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits hydraulically moved soils, debris and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
stormwater drainage systems.
SEDIMENT TRAP. A structure or area that allows for the temporary deposit and removal or disposal of sediment materials from stormwater runoff.
SEEPAGE. The movement of drainable water through soil and rock.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area having special flood, mudslide or mudflow, or flood-related erosion hazards and which area is shown on an
FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M or E.
STORMWATER FACILITY. All ditches, channels, conduits, bridges, culverts, levees, ponds, natural and human-made impoundments, wetlands, riparian
environment, tile, swales, sewers or other natural or artificial structures or measures which serve as a means of draining surface and subsurface water from land.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT. The permit issued under §§ 55.080 through 55.085.
STRUCTURE. The results of a built change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or
any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days unless they are fully licensed and ready for highway use.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
(1) The following three occasions, when work is performed on an existing building, is classified as a SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
(a) An improvement made to a building whose cost is equal to or exceeds 50% of the buildings’ market value before the improvement;
(b) Reconstruction or repair of a building, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the building before reconstruction or repair; or
(c) Additions to an existing building whose cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of a structure or increases the floor area by more than 20%.
(2) Note that if a building is substantially improved, then the entire building must comply with the building protection standards.
SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE. The removal of excess soil water to control water table levels at predetermined elevations for structural, environmental or other
reasons in areas already developed or being developed for agricultural, residential, industrial, commercial or recreational uses.
SUBSURFACE WATER. Water beneath the ground or pavement surface. Sometimes referred to as GROUND WATER or SOIL WATER.
T FACTOR. The soil loss tolerance. It is defined as the maximum amount of erosion at which the quality of a soil as a medium for plant growth can be maintained.
Erosion losses are estimated by Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE) and Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE).
TECHNICAL MANUAL. The manual adopted by the County Board, which refers to this chapter and provides additional explanations and examples.
THALWEG. A line along the lowest point in a channel.
TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section, or vice versa.
USABLE SPACE. Space used for dwelling, storage, utilities or other beneficial purposes, including without limitation basements.
WATER TABLE. The upper limit of a free water surface in a saturated soil or underlying material.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. As defined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers in their Federal Methodology for the Regulation of Wetlands. For
purposes of this chapter, WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES include wetlands, lakes, rivers, streams, creeks, bogs, fens and ponds. WATERS OF THE UNITED
STATES do not include maintained stormwater facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 15/348
WATERSHED. All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same stream, lake, stormwater facility or draining to a point.
WATERSHED BENEFIT. See NET WATERSHED BENEFIT.
WATERSHED CHARACTERISTICS. Include land use, physiology, habitat, climate, drainage system and community profile.
WATERSHED PLAN. A study and evaluation of an individual drainage basin’s stormwater management, floodplain management, water quality and flood control
needs and capabilities.
WETLAND. As defined in current federal methodology recognized by the United States Army Corps of Engineers for regulatory purposes.
§ 55.006 AMENDMENTS.
(A)This ordinance adopts and amends the Will County Stormwater Management Ordinance (WCSMO), as revised from time to time, and shall be known as the
Village of Monee Stormwater Management Ordinance.
(B) This ordinance shall take precedence over any other ordinance of part thereof that may be inconsistent, in conflict with, or less strict than this ordinance.
(C) Administrator. The Administrator of this ordinance on behalf of the Village of Monee shall be the Superintendent of Public Works for the Village of Monee.
(D)Minor Stormwater System. Minor stormwater systems in the Village of Monee shall be designed to convey at a minimum the stormwater runoff from the 10-
year storm event. Where stormwater runoff from undeveloped off-site areas are conveyed to the minor stormwater system, the minor stormwater system shall be
designed to convey the 25-year storm event.
(E) Oversite Committee. The Oversight Committee for the Village of Monee shall be comprised of the Village President and Board of Trustees.
(F) Armoring. A form of channel modification which involves the placement of materials (concrete, riprap, bulkheads, etc.) within a stream channel or along a
shore line to protect property above streams, lakes and ponds from erosion and wave damage caused by wave action and stream flow.
(G)Bounce. The difference between the Normal Water Level and the design High Water Level in a wet bottom pond, and the invert of the outlet control and the
design High Water Level for a dry bottom pond.
(H)Emergency Overland Flow Route. The flow path of stormwater runoff calculated assuming all enclosed storm sewers are inoperable.
(I) Lake. A natural or artificial body of water encompassing an area of two or more acres, which retains water throughout the year.
(J) Lot. Lot means an area of land, with defined boundaries, that is designated in official assessor's records as being one parcel.
(K)Natural. Natural in reference to watercourses means those stream channels, grassed waterways and swales formed by the existing surface topography of the earth
prior to changes made by unnatural causes. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank
has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no alteration of the course or cross-section of
the stream caused by filling or excavating.
(L) Natural Drainage. Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes caused by unnatural causes.
(M)Parcel. All contiguous land under common ownership or control including right(s)-of-way to be dedicated in conjunction with the proposed development.
(N)Site. A parcel on which development is proposed or has occurred. The area of the site shall include right-of-way to be dedicated in conjunction with the
development.
(O)Vegetation. Vegetation means all plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, mosses, and grasses.
(P) Add the following language “including emergency overland flow routes,” after “adjacent stormwater facility,” in the (FPE) Flood Protection Elevation definition.
REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT
§ 55.020 GENERAL INFORMATION.
(A) Other applicable regulations. All developments shall meet the requirements specified for general stormwater development (§ 55.020), site runoff (§ 55.022),
sediment and erosion control (§§ 55.035 through 55.047), performance security and maintenance (§§ 55.200 through 55.203).
(B) Applicability of site runoff storage requirements (detention).
(1) All developments shall comply with the site runoff storage requirements provided in § 55.023 of this subchapter in which:
(a) More than two single-family structures or one two-family structure are to be constructed on a site five or more acres in size;
(b) Multi-family or nonresidential land use is to be constructed on a site more than one acre in size;
(c) Existing multi-family or nonresidential land uses on a site one acre or more in size, on which new development after the effective date of this chapter in the
aggregate exceeds 25,000 square feet;
(d) Roadway developments in rights-of-way under the ownership or control of a unit of local governments when the contiguous area of new roadway
construction (excluding previously paved areas) exceeds two acres; and
(e) The developer of a commercial or industrial redevelopment may request that a fee-in-lieu of detention be approved provided that all of the following are
demonstrated to the sole satisfaction of the Administrator:
1. The drainage plan will not increase existing flood damages; and
2. The drainage plan provides a net benefit in water quality compared to the existing development.
(2) The Administrator shall determine the appropriate fee to be collected as defined in § 55.215, and his or her decision in the matter shall be considered final.
(C) Exemptions from site runoff storage requirements (detention). Site run-off storage is not required under the following circumstances:
(1) Direct discharge industrial sites; and/or
(2) Non-industrial direct discharge sites 160 acres or less having the following minimum river frontage:
Site Area Required
Frontage
0—2 acres 50 feet
Up to 5 acres 100 feet
Up to 10 acres 150 feet
Up to 40 acres 200 feet
Up to 80 acres 350 feet
Up to 160 acres 500 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 16/348
§ 55.021 GENERAL STORMWATER REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Requirements applicable to all developments. No development shall:
(1) Result in any new or additional expense to any person other than the developer for flood protection; or
(2) Increase flood elevations or decrease flood conveyance capacity upstream or downstream of the area under the ownership or control of the developer. This
requirement shall not prohibit the removal or reduction of built obstructions to flow, such as increasing culvert capacity or lowering roadway elevations.
(B) Building permits. Stormwater facilities shall be functional before building permits are issued for residential and nonresidential subdivision.
(C) Single parcel developments. Stormwater facilities shall be functional where practicable for single parcel developments before building construction begins.
(D) Overland flow paths. The development shall have an overland flow path at the downstream limit of the property that will pass the base flood flow without
increasing damage to structures or property. If the upstream drainage area is less than 20 acres, the storm sewer pipe and inlet sized for the base flood can be
constructed in lieu of providing an overland flow path. Overland flow paths internal to the site shall be considered as part of the major stormwater system and shall be
designed for conveyance of the base flood (critical duration) and shall be a minimum of one cfs per tributary acre without damage to structures.
(E) Protection of buildings. All usable space in new buildings or added to existing buildings hydraulically connected to a major stormwater system, site runoff
storage facility or overland flow path shall be elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected to at least one foot above the 100-year design elevation or current FIS
elevation, whichever is greater. The design elevation is the elevation associated with the design release rate as determined in § 55.022(C).
(F) Depressional storage. The function of existing on-site depressional storage shall be preserved for both on-site and off-site tributary flows in addition to required
detention. When depressional storage is removed it must be compensated for in the site runoff storage facility at a one to one ratio provided that offsite areas tributary
to the existing depressional storage are routed through the site runoff storage facility. This requirement is in addition to the site runoff storage required in § 55.022. The
Administrator may allow the function of depressional storage to be preserved if the applicant performs detailed pre- and post-project hydrologic and hydraulic
modeling to identify the effect of the depressional storage on discharges over a range of rainfall frequencies.
§ 55.022 SITE RUNOFF REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Stormwater facility discharges. Stormwater facilities shall be required and designed so that runoff exits the site at a point where it exited prior to the subject
development and in a manner so that flows will not increase flood damage to adjacent property except when otherwise approved by the Administrator. Concentrated
discharges from new developments must enter conveyance systems capable of carrying the design flow rate without increasing flood damages or maintenance costs
downstream.
(B) Minor stormwater system criteria. Minor stormwater systems shall be sized to convey runoff from the tributary watershed under fully developed conditions
consistent with the design requirements of the local jurisdiction.
(C) Major stormwater system criteria. Major stormwater systems shall be sized to carry the base flood without causing additional flood damage.
(D) Existing subsurface and surface drainage systems.
(1) Stormwater systems shall properly incorporate and be compatible with existing subsurface and surface drainage systems including agricultural systems.
Designs shall not cause damage to the existing drainage system(s) or the existing adjacent or tributary land including those with agricultural uses.
(2) The following principles and requirements shall be observed in the design.
(a) Off-site outfall. Agricultural subsurface and surface drainage systems shall be evaluated regarding their capacity and capability to properly convey low flow
ground water and site runoff storage facility release without damage to downstream structure and land use on the adjacent property. If the outfall drain tile and surface
drainage systems prove to be inadequate, it will be necessary to modify the existing systems or construct new systems which will not conflict with the existing systems
and will not impact the existing agricultural land use. Existing subsurface systems shall only be used with extended detention design.
(b) On-site. Agricultural drainage systems shall be located and evaluated on-site. All existing on-site agricultural drain tile not serving a beneficial use shall be
abandoned by trench removal prior to other development and recorded on record plans. If any existing drain tiles continue to upland watersheds, the developer must
maintain drainage service during construction until new sewers can be installed for a permanent connection.
(c) Off-site tributary. Existing drainage systems shall be evaluated with regard to existing capabilities and reasonable future expansion capacities. All existing
tributary drain tiles shall be incorporated into the new conduits including observation structures located at the property limits, shall provide a free flow discharge and
shall not allow surface runoff to enter the system.
(d) New roadway construction. New roadway construction shall preserve existing subsurface systems within the right-of-way. Inspection wells shall be placed
at the right-of-way (ROW) and tiles found to not be flowing between inspection wells at the end of the construction shall be replaced.
(E) Design runoff rate. Design runoff rates for conveyance may be calculated using the Rational Method.
(F) Design rainfall. Any design runoff rate calculation method for conveyance shall use State Water Survey Bulletin 70 based intensity-duration- frequency curves.
(G) Stormwater system easements. For projects involving subdivision major and minor stormwater systems shall be located within easements or rights-of-way
explicitly providing for public access for maintenance of the facilities. For all other projects requiring a permit, easements are required for public access for
maintenance of stormwater facilities only for new construction or modifications involving components of a drainage system that conveys runoff from off-site
properties. For I-2, I-3 or equivalent zoning property, the stormwater system does not have to be located within an easement or public rights-of-way. Instead, the
owner’s representative shall provide a signed agreement to the appropriate government entity authorizing it to enter the facility to maintain the stormwater system if the
owner fails to correct any deficiencies brought to the owner’s attention by the governmental entity.
(H) Flow depths. Maximum flow depths for new transverse stream crossings shall not exceed one foot at the crown of the road during the base flood condition. The
maximum flow depth on a roadway shall not exceed six inches at the crown for flow parallel to the roadway. For flow over a new roadway or parallel to a new
roadway, the product of the flow depth (in feet) and velocity (in feet per second) shall not exceed four for the base flood condition.
(I) Diversion of flow to another watershed. Transfers of waters between watersheds (diversions) shall be prohibited except when the transfers will not violate the
provisions of § 55.021(A) and are otherwise lawful. Watersheds for purpose of regulation under this section shall be the major watershed divides as defined in the
County Plan.
(J) Best management practices requirement. Developments shall incorporate all best management practices as may be required pursuant to the United States Clean
Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as amended.
§ 55.023 SITE RUNOFF STORAGE REQUIREMENTS (DETENTION/EXTENDED DETENTION).
(A) Release rate.
(1) If no release rate is specified in an adopted watershed plan in accordance with § 55.004, then sufficient flood storage shall be provided so that the site will not
discharge at a rate greater than 0.15 cfs/acre of development during and after a rainfall event with a 100-year frequency except for sites exempted in this section.
Unless exempted in this section, sites shall not discharge at a rate greater than 0.04 cfs/acre of development during and after a rainfall event with a two-year frequency.
(2) This area of hydrologic disturbance on the site shall be used to calculate the required site runoff storage volume. The on-site watershed area tributary to the
point of discharge shall be used to calculate the allowable release rate for the site runoff storage facility, which shall be the maximum release rate allowed considering
only the on-site watershed area runoff.
(B) Design methods.
(1) Event hydrograph routing methods or the modified rational method may be used to calculate design runoff volumes for site runoff facilities. The methods must
be HEC-1, (SCS methodology), HEC-HMS, TR-20 or TR-55 tabular method. Event methods shall incorporate the following assumptions:
(a) Antecedent moisture condition equals two;
(b) Appropriate Huff rainfall distribution; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 17/348
(c) Twenty-four-hour duration storm with a 1% probability (100-year frequency) of occurrence in any one year as specified by the State Water Survey Bulletin
70 Northeast Sectional rainfall statistics.
(2) When the modified rational method is used, rainfall statistics shall be from the State Water Survey Bulletin 70 and the volume determined shall be multiplied
by the following factor based on the date of final engineering approval:
(a) In the first year after the effective date of the chapter: 110%;
(b) In the second year after the effective date of the chapter: 120%; and
(c) After the third year following the effective date of the chapter: 130%.
(C) Existing release rate less than allowable. For sites where the undeveloped release rate is less than the maximum release rate in division (A) above, the
developed release rate and corresponding site runoff storage volume shall be based on the existing undeveloped release rate for the development.
(D) Downstream water surface elevations. All hydrologic and hydraulic computations must utilize appropriate assumptions for downstream water surface
elevations, from low flow through the base flood elevation, considering the likelihood of concurrent flood events.
(E) Extended detention requirement.
(1) The requirements of this section will apply only when an existing agricultural land use is downstream of and adjacent to a site runoff storage facility outlet.
The runoff from a 0.75-inch rainfall event over the hydraulically connected impervious area of the new development shall be stored below the elevation of the primary
gravity outlet (extended detention) of the site runoff storage facility. The facility may be designed to allow for evapotranspiration or infiltration of this volume into a
subsurface drainage system and shall not be conveyed through a direct positive connection to downstream areas.
(2) The hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation of required extended detention volume may be reduced by the Administrator if the soils
are prepared to maximize infiltration and deep-rooted grasses or other plants selected for their ability to promote infiltration or water absorption are planted in areas
appropriately dedicated. The reduction in hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation shall be equal to the area of the development meeting the
above soils/native planting requirement.
(3) Subsurface drainage systems may be designed as a component of the extended detention portion of the detention basin to assist in infiltration in accordance
with the following criteria.
(a) The extended detention volume shall be discharged at a rate no greater than that required to empty the calculated extended detention volume within five days
of the storm event.
(b) No subsurface drainage pipe shall be located within ten feet of drainage pipes directly connected to the detention basin.
(c) For purposes of meeting the maximum subsurface drainage discharge requirements, flow control orifices and weirs may be used.
(d) All design extended detention volume shall be provided above the seasonal high ground water table or the invert elevation of the ground water control
system.
(e) Farm field tile shall not be considered a subsurface drainage system.
(F) Site runoff storage facility design requirements. Storage facilities shall be designed and constructed with the following characteristics.
(1) The site runoff storage facility shall provide one foot of freeboard above the design high water elevation.
(2) The storage facilities shall be accessible and easily maintained.
(3) Storage facilities shall facilitate sedimentation and catchment of floating material. Unless specifically approved by the Administrator, concrete lined low-flow
ditches shall not be used in detention basins.
(4) Storage facilities shall minimize impacts of stormwater runoff on water quality by incorporating best management practices.
(5) Storage facilities shall maximize the normal flow distance between detention inlets and outlets, to the extent possible.
(6) Storage facilities shall be designed so that the existing conditions pre-development peak runoff rate from the 100-year, critical duration rainfall will not be
exceeded assuming the primary restrictor is blocked.
(7) Storage facilities with single pipe outlets shall have a minimum inside diameter of 12 inches. If design release rates necessitate a smaller outlet, structures such
as perforated risers or flow control orifices shall be used.
(G) Site runoff storage facility requirements. Within the regulatory floodplain storage facilities located within the regulatory floodplain shall:
(1) Conform to all applicable requirements specified in §§ 55.060 through 55.066 of this chapter;
(2) Store the required amount of site runoff to meet the release rate requirement under all stream flow and backwater conditions in the receiving stream up to the
ten-year flood elevation;
(3) Detention volume provided by enlarging existing regulatory floodplain storage without providing a structure controlling discharge (on-stream detention) will
be allowed only as a variance. The applicant must demonstrate that flood damages are not increased and the development will not increase flood flows for both the
two-year and 100-year floods on the stream with developed conditions on the site; and
(4) The Administrator may approve designs which can be shown by detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analysis to provide a net watershed benefit not otherwise
realized by strict application of the requirements in a through c above.
(H) Site runoff storage facility requirements within the regulatory floodway. Storage facilities located within the regulatory floodway shall:
(1) Meet the requirements for locating storage facilities in the regulatory floodplain;
(2) Be evaluated by performing hydrologic and hydraulic analysis consistent with the standards and requirements for any adopted watershed plans; and
(3) Provide a net watershed benefit.
(I) Off-site facilities. Site runoff storage facilities may be located off-site if the following conditions are met.
(1) The off-site storage facility meets all the requirements of this subchapter, §§ 55.020 through 55.024.
(2) Adequate storage capacity in the off-site facility is dedicated to the development.
(3) The development includes means to convey stormwater to the off-site storage facility.
(J) Cross-stream structures for site runoff storage facilities. Structures constructed across the channel to impound water to meet detention requirements shall be
prohibited on any perennial stream unless part of a public flood control project with a net watershed benefit. Those streams appearing as blue on a USGS quadrangle
map shall be assumed perennial unless better data is obtained. All cross-stream structures for the purpose of impounding water to provide detention in all cases on
perennial and intermittent streams must demonstrate that they will not cause short-term or long-term stream channel instability.
§ 55.024 STORMWATER REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL LAND USE INCLUDING CROPLANDS, PASTURE LANDS AND FARMSTEADS.
(A) Applicability. Regulations under this section apply only to croplands, pasturelands, farmsteads and outbuildings associated with those agricultural practices.
Compliance with the requirements of this section shall be construed as compliance with the stormwater chapter for the above land uses and no further regulation under
the chapter will apply. Any other land use, including greenhouses, nurseries, container grown plants, equestrian facilities, the sale of agricultural products to the public
or where commercial activities involving the new construction of gravel or paved parking facilities or buildings whose aggregate area is 25,000 square feet or more are
required to comply with all applicable sections of this chapter.
(B) Conservation planning and performance standards.
(1) To comply with this section, landowners shall practice conservation planning whose product shall be a management system, which addresses site runoff, soil
erosion and sediment control, surface and subsurface drainage. Any acreage with a signed and approved NRCS conservation plan is exempt from the requirements of
this section and the chapter.
(2) Applicable approved practices include:
(a) Vegetated grass waterways;
(b) Contour buffer strips;
(c) Critical area planting and cover crops;
(d) Terrace ridges and diversions;
(e) Contour strip cropping;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 18/348
(f) Contour farming;
(g) Crop rotation;
(h) Conservation tillage and crop residue management; and
(i) Other standard practices for conservation planning in accordance with the NRCS Field Office Technical Guide (current edition) or as otherwise approved by
the County NRCS District Conservationist or the County Agricultural Administrator.
(3) The performance standard for conservation planning shall be a management system which will develop a set of field practices which will reduce the calculated
actual soil loss to the “tolerable soil loss” (T) as calculated by the revised universal soil loss equation for the actual site conditions. Cropland tillage and resource
management methods shall be consistent with the Technical Guide Notice IL-108 and shall be considered evidence of compliance with the T performance standard.
(C) Drainage practices, requirements and design criteria.
(1) Drainage for agricultural purposes shall be consistent with those practices identified as appropriate for “good husbandry” given the soil types, slopes and
crops. An agricultural drainage system may consist of both subsurface drainage systems and surface drainage systems. Where active drainage districts maintain
drainage systems, they shall be consulted on surface and subsurface drainage within the district boundaries.
(2) Requirements applying to subsurface and surface drainage system shall be as follows.
(a) Subsurface drainage systems. Drain tile systems shall be maintained and constructed in accordance with subsurface drainage recommendations for the
appropriate soil drainage group as specified by the State Drainage Guide, University of Illinois Extension Service Circular No. 1226. Surface inlets into the subsurface
drainage system shall be allowed only to maintain good husbandry. Where their use cannot be practicably avoided due to topography, they shall be installed using flow
controls such as orifices and perforated risers with gravel filters and/or vegetative filters.
(b) Surface drainage systems. Surface drainage systems shall be maintained and constructed in accordance with surface drainage recommendations for the
appropriate soil drainage group as specified by the State Drainage Guide, University of Illinois Extension Service No. 1226. Surface drainage systems shall be built
with geotechnically stable slopes and the surface when applicable shall be further stabilized utilizing the establishment of cool and warm season grass mixes as
identified in Field Office Technical Guide (Illinois 108).
(c) Buffer strips. Open channels with a definable bed and banks shall use buffer strips in order to reduce the amount of erosion occurring from the conveyed
flows as well as to help filter the runoff from the site into the waterway. Buffer strips shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide from the top of bank except where smaller
widths are necessary due to site limitations and when approved by the Administrator.
(d) Agricultural drainage systems. Agricultural drainage systems shall also comply with all regulations regarding wetlands as enforced by federal, state and
local agencies.
(D) Sediment control for open channels.
(1) All open channel drainage systems shall maintain practices adjacent to the open outlet channel that will reduce the transportation of sediment off-site. Runoff
from agricultural fields must pass through a sediment control system prior to discharge into the open channel conveyance system.
(2) Approved sediment control systems may consist of the following:
(a) Vegetated buffer zones planted with permanent grasses appropriate for soil stabilization and filtering;
(b) Grade control structures for over fall stabilization;
(c) Sediment traps adjacent to the stream channel; and
(d) Other standard practices for conservation planning in accordance with the NRCS Field Office Technical Guide (current edition) or as otherwise approved by
the County NRCS District Conservationist or the Administrator.
(E) Maintenance and construction of drainage systems. Agricultural drainage systems shall be maintained so as to convey the expected flows for good drainage
practices. The existing agricultural surface drainage systems shall not be enlarged unless the enlargement is consistent with all other sections of this section.
Maintenance and construction of subsurface drainage systems will not be subject to the requirements of other sections of this chapter except as they are regulated by
other agencies. Maintenance projects by legally functioning drainage districts on existing agricultural drainage systems will not be subject to further permitting
requirements under this chapter except as they relate to the jurisdiction of other agencies.
§ 55.025 AMENDMENTS.
(A) Minor Stormwater System Criterial
Minor stormwater systems in the Village of Monee shall be designed to convey at a minimum the stormwater runoff from the 10-year storm event.
Where stormwater runoff from the undeveloped off-site areas are conveyed to the minor stormwater system, the minor stormwater system shall be
designed to convey the 25-year storm event.
Minor stormwater systems shall consist of storm sewers unless otherwise approved by the Administrator.
In residential subdivisions, storm sewer systems shall be installed along rear yards. Inlets shall be placed such that overland flow lengths do not exceed
300 feet and rear yard drainage is not conveyed overland across more than the length of one home site.
(B) Stormwater System Easements
Delete Section 55.022-G and replace it with the following:
All major and minor stormwater systems shall be covered by easements or right-of-way dedicated to the Village of Monee for access and for
maintenance of said systems. If said systems are on private property and otherwise not intended to be dedicated to the Village of Monee, easements for
access and maintenance of systems shall be granted to the Village of Monee authorizing the Village or its designated entity to access and maintain the
systems if the owner fails to correct any deficiencies brought to the owner’s attention by the Village of Monee.
(C) Requirements Applicable to All Development
Add the following to Section 55.021 (A):
(3) Increase runoff rates (from the 10-year event up to the 100-year event) to any downstream properties unless the developer can demonstrate that
the increased runoff rates can be safely conveyed via storm sewers, ditches (if allowed), or overland flow paths to the next downstream receiving
stream, lake or pond. If the developer is significantly raising runoff rates to downstream properties and cannot demonstrate downstream
conveyance capacity, some amount of on-site stormwater management may be required in order to reduce the proposed runoff rate down to
existing runoff rates.
D) Overland Flow Paths
Add the following to Section 55.021 (D):
For all overland flow routes, whether a part of the major drainage system or an emergency overland flow route, the water surface elevation for
determining the FPE (flood protection elevation) shall be calculated assuming that the storm sewers are inoperable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 19/348
Structures of any kind, including fences, shall not be permitted in overland flow paths draining more than 20 acres, unless the structures are otherwise
permissible and certified by a Professional Engineer or Professional Landscape Architect that the proposed structure will not cause any adverse
upstream impacts as a result of blocking or impeding the flow of stormwater.
) Major Stormwater System Criteria
Add the following to Section 55.022 (C):
Maximum ponding depths shall be nine (9) inches in streets, parking lots and driveways, except that parking lots and driveways intended for access
only by commercial trucks may permit maximum pondingdepths of twelve (12) inches. The maximum depth of ponding in non-paved drainage
easements shall be twelve (12) inches.
The tail water used for the major drainage system shall be the 10-year water surface elevation in the receiving system or, in the case of stormwater
detention facilities the 2-year design water surface elevation plus one (1) foot.
) Design Runoff Rate
Delete Section 55.022 (E) and replace with the following:
Design runoff rates for conveyance may be calculated using the Rational Method for drainage areas of less than twenty (20) acres. For drainage areas
greater than twenty (20) acres the Administrator may require the use of hydrograph routing.
G) Design Rainfall
Delete Section 55.022 (F) and replace with the following:
Any design runoff rate calculation method for conveyance shall use the data presented in Table 3: Will County Stormwater Technical Guidance Manual
Rainfall Depths and Intensities.
H) Site Runoff Storage Facility Design Requirements
Add the following to Section 55.023 (F) (2):
Side slopes above the NWL shall not exceed 4:1 (horizontal to vertical) unless approved by the Administrator.
The minimum width of the top of bank shall be 5’. A wider width may be required by the Administrator.
The Administrator may require that access roads or paths on the top of berms shall be provided with an H10 design load rating and meeting Village
design criteria.”
Site Runoff Storage Facility Design Requirements
Add the following to Section 55.023 (F):
(8) The following minimum criteria shall apply:
Wet Bottom Pond
Minimum Area: 1.0 acre at NWL unless approved by the
Administrator
Depth: Over 25 percent of the bottom area at least 10’
deep
Bounce: 100-year: 5.0 ft. – Residential
(Industrial/Commercial may be greater based on
approval by the Administrator.)
Safety Shelf: 10’ wide no more than 2’ below the NWL
Shoreline Protection: Natural vegetation (shall be used unless otherwise
approved); armoring (conditioned upon Village
review and approval); biotechnical stabilization
(depending on site-specific conditions); erosion
control measures
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 20/348
Water Quality Enhancements: Maximize distance between inlets and outlets; no
low-flow channel to be provided; energy
dissipation measures at outlets; measures such as
aerators, cascading streams, waterfalls, etc. are
recommended for aesthetic appeal and to promote
water circulation and aeration
Landscape Options: Natural, ornamental hybrid, low maintenance turf,
and turfgrass (depending on site conditions and
adjacent/adjoining land uses); public access via
stone outcroppings, groomed areas, etc. are
recommended
Naturalized Detention Basin
Minimum Area: 8,000 s.f. at NWL
Depth: Ranging from 0.5 to 5.0 ft. (average 3.0 ft.); at
least 5 percent of the area below NWL having
pockets up to 5.0 ft. deep
Bounce: 100-year: 5.0 ft. – Residential
(Industrial/Commercial may be greater based on
approval by the Administrator.)
Safety Shelf: 10’ wide no more than 2’ below the NWL
Shoreline Protection: Natural vegetation; biotechnical stabilization
(depending on site-specific conditions); erosion
control measures
Water Quality Enhancements: Maximize distance between inlets and outlets; no
low-flow channel to be provided; energy
dissipation measures at outlets; measures such as
aerators, cascading streams, water falls, etc. are
strongly recommended to maintain cooler water
temperatures, promote water circulation and
aeration, and provide aesthetic appeal
Landscape Options: Natural, ornamental hybrid, and low maintenance
turf; public access via stone outcroppings, groomed
areas, etc. are recommended. A planting and
maintenance report, provided by a recognized
wetlands firm, must be submitted and approved.
Dry Detention Basin
Minimum Area: No minimum
Maximum
Area:
8,000 s.f., unless approved by the Administrator
Safety Shelf: Not applicable
Maximum Bounce: 100-year: 5.0 ft. – Residential
(Industrial/Commercial may be greater based on
approval by the Administrator.)
Minimum Bottom Slope 1 percent (1%)
Landscape Options: Natural, ornamental hybrid, and low maintenance
turf that can be mowed and withstand drawdown
times.
Parking Facilities
Detention storage volume may be provided on the parking lot surface. The
maximum ponding depth within a parking lot is nine inches (9”) unless
otherwise approved by the Administrator.
Underground
Detention storage volume may be provided in underground stormwater
storage facilities with the approval of the Administrator. The underground
Stormwater storage facility must be designed for easy access in order to
remove accumulated sediment and debris and with a positive gravity outlet.
(9) The Administrator may request that the developer bear the burden of proof that the landscaping within the detention facility will be successful when
considering the detention facility drawdown times and other factors.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 21/348
(J) Requirements Applicable to All Subdivisions and Commercial Development
Add the following to the Requirements for Stormwater Management Section:
All developments shallinclude and meet the below criteria:
(1) A storm sewer system extendedthrough the proposed development to serve upstream properties in the natural drainage area. The storm sewer
system should reflect the ultimate development of the drainage area.
(2) A stormwater drainage system that consists of a minor drainage system, a major drainage system and an emergency overland flow route.
(3) The storm sewer drainage system is assumed to consist of such components as sewers, channels, swales, natural drainageways, inlets, catch
basins, manholes, streets, detention/retention basins, and other necessary facilities.
(4) The engineering plans shall have a drainage certification by a registered professional engineer similar to as follows:
“To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part
thereof or that is such surface water drainage will change, adequate provision has been made for the collection and diversion of such surface
waters into public areas or drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters will not be deposited on the property of
adjoining land owners in such concentrations as may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision.”
Dated at , this day of , A.D. 20 .
______________________________ (Seal)
Design Engineer
(5) The storm sewer system shall be entirely separate from the sanitary sewer system.
(6)Storm sewers shall be designed to convey the peak flow from a ten-year rainfall event with a hydraulic grade line that is entirely within the pipe
unless approved otherwise by the administrator.
(7) The storm sewers shall be a minimum of twelve inches (12”) in diameter and shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe onlyunless
otherwise approved by the Administrator.
(8) No ditch system shall be permitted on any new site developments unless approved by the Administrator. The minor drainage system shall be
constructed so that the drainage from each lot or parcel is conveyed entirely through storm sewer pipe.
(9) Rear yard and side yard swales shall meet the following conditions:
a. The maximum side slopes shall be a four to one (4:1) ratio.
b.The appropriate easements are provided, with minimum widths of 5’ on side yards and 10’ on rear yards.
(10) Inlets/Catch Basins on roadways shall be located as necessary to collect surface water, but spacing shall not exceed a maximum of 300 feet.
Inlets shall only be used for the first “run” and catch basins shall be placed before a storm sewer enters a manhole. Manholes shall be located at
the junction of two or more storm sewer pipes or at any change in grade alignment or size of pipe.
(11) All storm sewers shall use materials and be installed in the manner meeting or exceeding the requirements, standards, and specifications
contained in the “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,” the most current edition.
SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
§ 55.035 SITE PLANNING.
(A) Sediment and erosion control planning shall be part of the initial site planning process. In planning the development of the site, the applicant shall consider the
susceptibility of existing soils to erosion and topographic features such as steep slopes and stream corridors which must be protected to reduce the amount of sediment
and erosion which occurs. Where appropriate, existing vegetation shall be protected from disturbance during construction by fencing or other means.
(B) In the planning process, the applicant shall also address the following.
(1) For projects that involve phased construction, existing land cover for those areas not under current development shall be addressed. If existing land cover does
not consist of an appropriate ground cover then these phases shall be planted temporarily to reduce erosion from idle land.
(2) In planning the sediment and erosion control strategy, preference shall be given to reducing erosion rather than controlling sediment. In order to accomplish
this, the plan must carefully consider the construction sequence of the phases so that the amount of land area exposed to erosive forces is the minimum consistent with
completing construction.
§ 55.036 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
Specifications for erosion control measures shall be in accordance with the Illinois Urban Manual (1995) or latest edition. Sediment and erosion control planning
shall be in accordance with Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois (revised July 1988) by the Urban Committee of the
Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts (The Green Book) Chapters 1 through 5. Where the Illinois Urban Manual supercedes sections of The
Green Book, the Illinois Urban Manual shall prevail.
§ 55.037 GENERAL REQUIREMENT.
The runoff from disturbed areas shall not leave the development site without first passing through sediment control facilities. This requirement shall apply to all
phases of construction and shall include an ongoing process of implementation of measures and maintenance of those measures during both the construction season
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 22/348
and any construction shut down periods.
§ 55.038 EXTENDED CONSTRUCTION SHUTDOWN PERIOD.
The condition of the construction site for the winter shut down period shall address proper sediment and erosion control early in the fall growing season so that slopes
and other bare earth areas may be stabilized with temporary and/or permanent vegetative cover. All open areas that are to remain idle throughout the winter shall
receive temporary erosion control measures including temporary seeding, mulching and/or erosion control blanketing prior to the end of the fall growing season. The
areas to be worked beyond the end of the growing season must incorporate soil stabilization measures that do not rely on vegetative cover such as erosion control
blankets and heavy mulching.
§ 55.039 HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
(A) In the hydraulic and hydrologic design of major erosion control measures (those whose tributary drainage area is greater than three acres) such as sediment
basins and traps, diversions and the like, the design frequency shall be commensurate with the risk of the design event being exceeded.
(B) The following design frequencies shall be regarded as minimum design frequencies for the construction period.
(1) For those projects whose construction period is less than six months, then the storm event having a 50% chance (two-year event) of being exceeded in any year
shall be used for design purposes.
(2) For those projects whose construction period is greater than six months but less than one year, the design frequency for major sediment basins shall be a
rainfall event with a 20% (five-year event) chance of being exceeded in any one year.
(3) For those construction projects expected to last more than one year, major sediment basins shall be designed for a rainfall event with a 10% (ten-year event)
chance of being exceeded in any one year.
§ 55.040 “AS-NEEDED” PRACTICES ON THE PLANS.
(A) The sediment and erosion control plan shall designate a series of practices which shall be implemented either at the direction of the permittee or the permittee’s
representative on-site or at the direction of the Administrator should an inspection of the site indicate a deficiency in soil and sediment erosion control measures.
(B) As a minimum, these measures shall include the following:
(1) Sedimentation basins;
(2) Sediment traps;
(3) Diversion swales;
(4) Silt fences;
(5) Temporary seeding;
(6) Mulching; and
(7) Erosion control blankets.
§ 55.041 SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
Sediment and erosion control plans shall be in accordance with §§ 55.080 through 55.085 but shall include the following.
(A) Detailed construction phasing plan identifying sediment and erosion control measures to be in place for each phase shall be submitted prior to stripping the site
of existing vegetation or cover.
(B) Sediment and erosion control measures to be installed initially prior to stripping existing vegetation or mass grading shall be indicated on the plans.
(C) Permanent stabilization measures shall be indicated on a separate plan.
(D) The expected two-year and ten-year runoff rates from all off-site areas draining into the site shall be identified on the plan.
(E) Methods for conveying flows through the site during construction shall be indicated. These methods must include the temporary and permanent stabilization
measures to be used to reduce velocity and erosion from flow through the construction zone.
(F) A maintenance schedule of each measure used shall be indicated on the plan. As a minimum, all sediment and erosion control measures on-site shall be
inspected weekly and also by the applicant’s designee or after a one-half inch (0.5”) or greater rainfall event and any required repairs shall be made to keep these
measures functional as designed. All repairs and modifications shall be reviewed by the Administrator or his or her designee.
§ 55.042 CONVEYANCE OF OFF-SITE FLOW.
(A) To the extent practicable, proposed ditches and waterways which are to convey off-site flows through the site shall be stabilized upon construction.
(B) Where new waterways are constructed, they shall be stabilized to the extent practicable prior to their use to convey flood flows.
§ 55.043 STOCKPILES.
(A) Stockpiles of soil and other erodible or floatable building materials (sand, limestone and the like) shall not be located in floodplains, overflow routes or areas
subject to frequent inundation.
(B) If a stockpile is to remain in place for more than three days, then sediment and erosion control shall be provided for the stockpile.
§ 55.044 STORM SEWER INLETS.
Storm sewer inlets shall be protected with sediment trapping and/or filter control devices during construction.
§ 55.045 CONSTRUCTION DEWATERING.
Water pumped or which is otherwise discharged from the site during construction dewatering shall be filtered and a means provided to reduce erosion.
)
§ 55.046 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC/PRIVATE ROADWAYS.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 23/348
Graveled roads, access drives, parking areas of sufficient width and length and vehicle wash down facilities, if necessary, shall be provided to prevent soils from
being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any soil tracked onto a public or private roadway shall be removed before the end of each workday or sooner as
directed by the authority maintaining the roadway.
§ 55.047 TEMPORARY STREAM CROSSINGS.
Temporary stream crossings of intermittent and perennial streams used only for and during construction shall be designed to convey a two-year flood (minimum) or
other flood event approved by the Administrator without overtopping unless a more frequent design event is allowed by the Administrator. The entire crossing shall be
designed to withstand hydrodynamic forces and erosive forces up to the base flood event without washing out. Ephemeral streams may be crossed at temporary atgrade
crossings provided that the crossing point is stabilized with materials resistive to the erosive forces produced by runoff from the upstream drainage area, and the
design is approved by the Administrator. Temporary stream crossings shall be removed upon completion of construction activities. All temporary stream crossing shall
be completely removed, and the stream restored to its preconstruction condition upon completion of construction. Restoration shall incorporate appropriate vegetation
consistent with the adjacent existing vegetation prior to construction or in accordance with a restoration plan approved by the Administrator.
§ 55.049 AMENDMENTS.
(A) The following paragraph should be added to Section 55.036:
All work and erosion control measures should comply with the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) General NPDES Permit for Storm Water Discharges From Construction Site Activities (NPDES Permit No. ILR10).
) Add the following to Section 55.047:
§ 55.048 INSPECTIONS.
(A)The Developer/Owner shall be responsible for performing the inspections required by the NPDES Permit No. ILR10.
(B) The Administrator or persons designated by the Administrator shall be permitted on the site to inspect the erosion and sediment control measures
and records related to the NPDES permit at any time.
PROTECTION OF SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREAS
§ 55.060 GENERAL.
(A) This subchapter sets forth requirements for developments within floodplains and floodways. In addition, developments in the SFHA draining more than one
square mile with no designated floodway must meet IDNR/OWR Ill. Adm. Code Part 3700 Rules. References to IDNR/OWR permits or approvals in this section shall
be construed as “their designee” where a portion or all their authority has been delegated.
(B) Development that qualifies for any of the self-issuing statewide or regional permits administered by IDNR/OWR (Statewide Permit Nos. 1 through 14 and
Regional Permit No. 3) are similarly permitted under this subchapter. The developer need only submit to the Administrator information as shall show the Administrator
that the development qualifies for the particular statewide or regional permit in question under the regulations established by IDNR/OWR for the permit and no further
submittal need be made under this subchapter. All other provisions of this chapter applicable to the development, however, continue to apply. However, a permit from
the county or the certified community must still be issued.
C) All development shall meet the requirements set forth in Table 1. The table is intended only as a guide to indicate the applicable ordinance sections for
development in floodplains.
Table 1: Summary of Applicable Chapter Sections for Development in Floodplains
When This
Occurs on
Development
Site
All Development Must Meet the Requirements of Sections (Except as Noted)
55.061 55.062 55.062(B)
55.062
(C)
55.062
(D)
55.062
(E)
55.063 55.064 55.065 55.066
Floodplains X
(A)(6)
(A)(7)
only
— — — X — — — —
Regulatory
floodplains
X X X X X -- X(1) — —
Bridge
and
Culvert
Projects
Regulatory
floodways
X X X X(2) X — X X — —
Riverine
regulatory
floodplains
X X X X X — — — X —
Notes:
(1) Riverine, floodplains only
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 24/348
(2) For buildings meeting appropriate use criteria
§ 55.061 FLOODPLAIN, REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN, BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) AND REGULATORY FLOODWAY LOCATIONS.
(A) The BFE shall be delineated onto the site topography to establish the regulatory floodplain area limits for regulation under this chapter. Regulatory floodplains
shall be delineated onto the site map from the current FEMA FIRM (See Appendix A), FBFM or LOMR and include those areas of the SFHA which are not regulatory
floodplains. Each community, whether certified or not, remains responsible for maintaining the effective FIS and a list of FIRM panels for their respective
communities.
(B) The BFE shall be:
(1) The elevation of the 100-year profile corresponding to the location of the development as indicated in the flood profiles in the FEMA Flood Insurance Studies
listed in Appendix A, or as adopted by each community (which may be updated from time to time);
(2) In the case of FEMA delineated “AH Zones” the elevation noted on the map shall be the BFE. In the case of FEMA delineated “AO Zones” the BFE shall be
the depth number shown on the map added to the highest adjacent grade, or at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is provided;
(3) (a) When no BFE information exists and the upstream tributary drainage area is 640 acres or greater, the BFE shall be determined using a site specific
floodplain study by a professional engineer using appropriate hydrologic and hydraulic models as follows:
1. Hydrologic models: TR-20, HEC-1, HEC-HMS;
2. Hydraulic models: HEC-2, HEC-RAS, WSP-2; or
3. A technique approved by the Administrator and the IDNR/OWR.
(b) Where a channel has a tributary drainage area of 640 acres or more, the above analyses shall be submitted to the IDNR/OWR for concurrent approval.
(c) For a non-riverine regulatory floodplain, the historic flood of record plus three feet may be used for the BFE instead of performing a detailed hydrologic and
hydraulic study.
(4) For floodplains that are not regulatory, are not draining more than 640 acres, and with no BFE determined, the Administrator may require a site-specific
floodplain study for the purpose of establishing an FPE for the development.
(C) (1) The location of the regulatory floodway shall be as delineated on the current effective regulatory maps maintain by each community. The location of the
regulatory floodway boundary shall be scaled onto the site plan using references common to both the map and the plan (typically the center lines of adjacent
roadways). Where an interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted.
(2) Note: If an area of the site is located in the regulatory floodway that is higher than the BFE, that area is subject to the floodway standards of § 55.064,
including the appropriate use criteria, until a time as a LOMR is received from FEMA with concurrence by IDNR/OWR.
(3) General criteria for analysis of flood elevations in the regulatory floodway are as follows.
1. The flood profiles, flows and data in the current effective FIS must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or
conditions have changed, FEMA and IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use. The Director shall be
copied on all related correspondence.
2. If the BFE at the site of the proposed development is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed
development shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section with the receiving stream at both the normal water and BFEs.
3. If the applicant is informed by IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream or upstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled
to be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five years, the
proposed development shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions
when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built, removed or modified as applicable.
4. If the appropriate use will result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or a change in the BFE, the applicant shall submit the information required
to be issued a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) to IDNR/OWR and FEMA. A public notice inviting public comment on the proposed change in the BFE or
location of the regulatory floodway will be issued by IDNR/OWR or its designee before a CLOMR is issued. Filling, grading, dredging or excavating may take place
upon issuance of a conditional approval from IDNR/OWR and the Administrator. No further development activities shall take place in the existing or proposed
floodplain until a letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA unless the activities meet all the requirements of § 55.062 of this chapter. The Director shall be
copied on all related correspondence.
5. For those circumstances listed below and located in a regulatory floodway, at a minimum, the following information shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for
their review and concurrence:
a. Analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge, culvert crossings and roadway approaches;
b. An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge, culvert crossing or approach road is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile;
c. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage; and
d. Stormwater management permits to local units of government for regulatory floodway and floodplain development.
6. IDNR/OWR will issue permits for any IDNR/OWR projects, dams and the like all other state, federal or WCSMC or certified community projects.
§ 55.062 GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(A) Generally. The following general performance standards are applicable to all development in a regulatory floodplain. The standards of this section apply except
when superseded by more stringent requirements in the subsequent sections.
(1) No development except as allowed in § 55.066 shall be allowed in the regulatory floodplain that singularly or cumulatively creates an increase in flood stage
or velocity off-site, or a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity on-site or threat to public health, safety and welfare.
(2) For all projects involving a channel modification, fill, stream maintenance or a levee, the flood conveyance and storage capacity of the regulatory floodplain
shall not be reduced.
(3) If the proposed development would result in a change in the regulatory floodplain or BFE as indicated in Appendix A, or as adopted by each community, the
applicant shall obtain a LOMR from FEMA. No buildings may be built in the existing or proposed regulatory floodplain until the LOMR receives concurrence from
IDNR/OWR and is issued by FEMA and the building meets all the building protection standards (division (C) below). Proposed changes to the regulatory floodway
delineation and the BFE must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence.
(4) If the development is located in a public body of water, as defined by IDNR/OWR (Chapter 164, Appendix C), a permit or a waiver of a permit must also be
received from IDNR/OWR.
(5) Prior to the commencement of any construction, modification or removal of a dam the developer shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit or letter indicating a
permit is not required.
(6) (a) For public flood control projects, the Floodplain Management standards will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR and
WCSMC that each of the following conditions are met:
1. Demonstrate by hydraulic and hydrologic modeling that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the
project site or demonstrate that any increases will be contained in easements for all flood events up to and including the base flood event;
2. Demonstrate that the project will be operated and maintained by a public agency; and
3. Demonstrate that the project will reduce flood damage to an existing building or structure.
(b) These standards do not preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part of a public flood control project by persons who are
not public agencies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 25/348
(7) Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home park and additions to
subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations.
(B) Public health protection standards.
(1) New and replacement water supply systems, wells and sanitary sewer lines may be permitted if all manholes or other aboveground openings located below the
FPE are watertight.
(2) New on-site waste disposal systems, such as septic systems, are allowed in the regulatory floodplain only if they meet all of the following conditions.
(a) The invert of any wastewater distribution lines shall be a minimum of two-feet above the water surface elevation of the base flow of any perennial stream.
(b) The lateral distance from a ditch, creek or other riverine source to the wastewater distribution lines shall be a minimum of 75.
(c) The elevation of any areas which are to receive wastewater distribution shall be above the ordinary high water mark.
(d) The soil of the receiving field shall be of a type suitable for septic fields.
(e) The tank shall be placed out of the floodplain with the invert of the outlet above the BFE.
(3) New, substantially improved or replacement wastewater treatment plants shall have watertight openings for those openings located below the FPE. The
facilities should be located to avoid impairment to the facility or contamination of floodwaters during the base flood.
(C) Building protection standards. The building protection standards apply to all buildings located in the regulatory floodplain; however, it should be noted that
most new and replacement buildings are not appropriate uses of the regulatory floodway.
(1) The lowest floor including basements of all new residential structures, substantially improved structures and additions shall be elevated up to at least the FPE.
An attached garage for a structure must be elevated up to at least 0.1 feet above the BFE.
(a) If placed on fill, the top of the fill for the residential structure shall be above the FPE. The top of fill for an attached garage shall be at least 0.1 foot above the
BFE. The fill shall be placed at that elevation for a distance of ten feet out from the building unless the building design is certified by a registered structural engineer to
be protected from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. Additionally, the fill shall not settle below the FPE for the residential structure and not below 0.1 feet above
the base flood for an attached garage, and shall be adequately protected against erosion, scour and differential settlement. The fill should not adversely affect surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
(b) If elevated by means of walls, pilings or other foundation, the building’s supporting structure must be permanently open to flood waters and not subject to
damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. The permanent openings shall be no more than one foot above existing grade and consist of a minimum of two
openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the BFE. The
lowest inside grade must match the lowest existing outside grade adjacent to the structure. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in
relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris. All areas
below the FPE shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) for the residential structure and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the FPE. An attached garage must be elevated to at least 0.1 feet
above the BFE. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the FPE. No
area below the FPE shall be used for storage.
(2) The lowest floor including the basement of all new or substantially improved nonresidential buildings shall be elevated at least to the FPE as described above
or be structurally dry floodproofed to at least the FPE. A nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a professional
engineer or registered structural engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the FPE and the structure and attendant utility
facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity. (Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this division).
(3) Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days shall be at or above the FPE and shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement in accordance with the State Manufactured Home Tie-Down Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 870), as amended.
(4) (a) Accessory structures, such as tool sheds and detached garages which are not substantial improvements on an existing single-family lot, may be
constructed with the lowest floor below the FPE in accordance with the following criteria.
1. The building shall not be used for human habitation.
2. All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a regulatory floodway shall meet the floodway standards in §
55.064.
3. The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation and movement.
4. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the FPE.
5. The building shall be no greater than 600 square feet in floor size and be valued at less than $7,500. The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria
of division (C)(1)(b) above.
6. The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and may not contain basements or other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses.
(b) Accessory structures that do not meet all the above criteria may be constructed if they are dry floodproofed or elevated at least one-half of one foot above the
BFE.
(D) Nonconforming structures. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other disaster may be restored unless the damage meets or exceeds 50%
of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to the building protection standards of this chapter.
(E) LOMR-F. Certified communities may utilize FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 for the issuance of LOMR-Fs.
§ 55.063 COMPENSATORY STORAGE VOLUME STANDARDS.
The following standards apply within the regulatory floodplain.
(A) Hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage volume will be required for development in a riverine regulatory floodplain and shall be at least equal to the
regulatory floodplain flood storage volume displaced. The storage volume displaced below the existing ten-year frequency flood elevation must be replaced below the
proposed ten-year frequency flood elevation. The storage volume displaced above the ten-year existing frequency flood elevation must be replaced above the proposed
ten-year frequency flood elevation.
(B) Compensatory storage volume for development in a non-riverine regulatory floodplain area that is also adjacent to a lake shall be equal to the storage volume
displaced.
(C) Compensatory storage volume requirements for development in a non-riverine regulatory floodplain that is not adjacent to a lake shall be replaced in accordance
with the requirements for the loss of depressional storage in § 55.021(F).
(D) Compensatory storage areas shall be designed to drain freely and openly to the channel and shall be located adjacent to the development. This standard does not
apply to non-riverine regulatory floodplain.
(E) A recorded covenant running with the land is required to maintain the compensatory storage volume in areas modified to provide compensatory storage volume.
§ 55.064 FLOODWAY STANDARDS.
(A) The only development in a regulatory floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses which will not cause an increase in flood heights or velocities for all
flood events up to and including the base flood. Only those appropriate uses listed below will be allowed in the regulatory floodway.
(B) Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, fencing (including landscaping
or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined below as an appropriate use. If the development is proposed for the
regulatory floodway portion of the regulatory floodplain, the following standards apply in addition to the standards for the regulatory floodplain.
(1) Only the construction, modification, repair or replacement of the following appropriate uses will be allowed in the regulatory floodway:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 26/348
(a) Public flood control structures and private improvements relating to the control of drainage and flooding of existing buildings, erosion, water quality or
habitat for fish and wildlife;
(b) Structures or facilities relating to functionally water dependent uses such as additions, modifications and improvements to existing wastewater treatment
plants (except for additions to habitable structures on the site) and facilities and improvements relating to recreational boating (this does not include new wastewater
treatment plants);
(c) Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
(d) Underground and overhead utilities;
(e) Recreational facilities such as playing fields, open pavilions and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any one
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows;
(f) Detached garages, storage sheds, boat houses or other non-habitable structures without sanitary facilities that are accessory to existing buildings and will not
block flood flows nor reduce regulatory floodway storage;
(g) Bridges, culverts and associated roadways, sidewalks and railways, required for crossing the regulatory floodway or for access to other appropriate uses in
the regulatory floodway and any modification thereto;
(h) Parking lots built at or below existing grade provided that either:
1. The BFE is less than one foot above the proposed parking lot; or
2. The parking lot is accessory to short-term outdoor recreational facilities and the owner agrees to restrict access during periods of inundation and agrees to
accept liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during flooding events.
(i) Regulatory floodway grading, without fill, to create a positive non-erosive slope toward a channel;
(j) Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of water-tight window wells, elevating structures or the
construction of flood walls or berms around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall or berm shall be no more
than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered to be substantial improvements to the structure;
(k) The repair, replacement or reconstruction of a damaged building, provided that none of the outside dimensions of the building are increased and provided
that the cost of repair is less than 50% of the building’s value before it was damaged. When damage is 50% or more (a substantial improvement), the activity shall
conform to § 55.062(C) of this chapter; and
(l) Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the enclosed floor area of the building below the BFE and which will not block flood flows.
These modifications include fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios and second story addition. No enclosed floor areas may be built on stilts. The modifications may
not singularly or cumulatively equal 50% or more of the building’s market value.
(2) Additions or changes to the above list of appropriate uses must be approved by the Committee prior to the adoption by the County Board and IDNR/OWR.
(3) All development in the regulatory floodway shall require a permit from IDNR-OWR and must be in accordance with all provisions of this chapter.
(4) Construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria
and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data prepared and signed by a professional engineer.
(a) All effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the development of appropriate uses, other than bridge or culvert crossings or on-stream structures
or dams, shall be replaced for all flood events up to and including the base flood.
(b) The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used to determine transition sections in calculations of effective regulatory floodway conveyance.
1. Flowing water will expand no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length.
2. Flowing water will contract no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length.
3. Flowing water will not expand or contract faster than one foot vertical for every ten feet of flooded stream length.
4. All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.
5. Transition sections must be used to determine the effective conveyance areas on adjacent properties.
(c) Development of an appropriate use will not result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage. However, in the case of
bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the
structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
(5) In the case of on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water during normal or flood flows, the increase in flood stage when compared to
existing conditions for all storm events up to and including the base flood event shall be contained within recorded easements or the channel banks. A dam safety
permit or letter indicating a dam safety permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for the structures.
(6) IDNR/OWR will issue permits for any IDNR/OWR projects, dams and the like and for all other state, WCSMC or certified community projects.
§ 55.065 RIVERINE FLOODPLAIN.
(A) These standards apply to riverine regulatory floodplains without a regulatory floodway.
(B) The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR/OWR for all development any portion of which is located partially or completely within the regulatory
floodplain (without a delineated regulatory floodway) with a tributary drainage area of 640 acres or more.
(1) The development shall not singularly or cumulatively result in an obstruction of flood flows or potential flood damages outside the site due to an increase in
flood heights, velocities or loss of floodplain area storage.
(2) A professional engineer shall submit a study that demonstrates one of the following:
(a) Determine a floodway which meets the definition of a regulatory floodway and demonstrate that the proposed development meets the floodway standards in
§ 55.064; or
(b) Determine a BFE and demonstrate that the proposed development will maintain the existing conditions conveyance, will not increase flood velocities, will
not increase flood profiles and will compensate for any lost floodplain storage.
§ 55.066 BRIDGE AND CULVERT STANDARDS.
These standards are for the reconstruction, modification or new construction of bridges, culvert crossings and roadway approaches located in the regulatory
floodplain.
(A) A proposed new structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than one- tenth foot when compared to the existing conditions for all
flood events up to and including the base flood event unless contained within the channel banks or recorded easements. The evaluation must be submitted to the IDNROWR
for review and a permit obtained.
(B) If the proposed new structure will increase upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth foot, the applicant must contact IDNR/OWR for a dam safety permit or
waiver. The Director shall be copied on all related correspondence.
(C) Lost regulatory floodplain storage must be replaced as required in § 55.063, compensatory storage volume standards, except that artificially created storage lost
due to a reduction in head loss behind an existing bridge or culvert crossing shall not be required to be replaced, provided no flood damage will be incurred
downstream.
(D) Velocity increases must be mitigated by use of appropriate measures to avoid scour, erosion and sedimentation at the structure.
(E) For modification or replacement of existing structures, the existing structure must first be evaluated in accordance with IDNR/OWR Rules (17 Ill. Adm. Code
Part 3708) to determine if the existing structure is a source of flood damage. If the structure is a source of flood damage, the applicant’s engineer shall submit
justification to allow the damage to continue and evaluate the feasibility of relieving the structure’s impact. Modifications or replacement structures shall not increase
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 27/348
flood stages (0.0 feet) compared to the existing condition for all flood events up to and including the base flood event. The evaluation must be submitted to
IDNR/OWR, for review and concurrence before a permit is issued. The Director shall be copied on all related correspondence.
(F) If any work is proposed in, near or over a public body of water, a permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR.
(G) The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to IDNR/OWR
for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required.
(H) (1) Construction vehicles shall cross-streams by the means of existing bridges or culverts.
(2) Where an existing crossing is not available, a temporary crossing that has been issued a permit or waiver by IDNR/OWR shall be constructed in which:
(a) The approach roads will be 0.5 feet or less above existing grade;
(b) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall;
(c) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non-erosive material,
such as rip-rap or gravel; and
(d) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after installation, unless an extension of time is granted by the Administrator.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 55.080 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Stormwater management and other permits required.
(1) A stormwater management permit shall be required if:
(a) The development or a substantial improvement is located in the regulatory floodplain or there is regulatory floodplain within the property boundary; or
(b) The development disturbs more than one acre (43,560 square feet) of ground cover, unless the development solely involves one or more of the following:
1. Installation, renovation or replacement of a septic system, potable water service line or other utility to serve an existing structure;
2. Excavation or removal of vegetation in rights-of-way or public utility easements for the purpose of installing or maintaining utilities not including storm
sewers;
3. Maintenance, repair or at grade replacement of existing lawn areas not otherwise requiring a stormwater permit under this chapter; or
4. Maintenance of an existing stormwater facility, not requiring other state or federal permits or approvals.
(2) All development shall secure all appropriate stormwater management related approvals, including, without limitation, an IDNR-OWR floodway/floodplain
construction permit, a USACOE 404 permit and an IDNR-OWR dam safety permit if required, from all federal, state and regional authorities and other appropriate
federal, state and regional approvals prior to the issuance of a stormwater management permit for areas of a site requiring other approvals.
(B) Permit review fees. All permit fees shall be paid at the time of application. Permit fees shall be established by separate resolution of the permitting authorities.
Fees may include, but are not limited to, the cost of permit administration, review and inspections prior to construction, during construction and within the permanent
cover establishment period following construction.
(C) Professional seals and certifications required.
(1) The design of stormwater facilities, calculations for the determination of the regulatory floodplain or calculations of the impacts of development shall meet the
standards of this chapter and shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer. The professional engineer shall provide an opinion that the technical
submittal meets the criteria required by this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance.
(2) (a) For structures (not including earth embankments) that are subject to a differential water pressure greater than three feet, the submittal shall include
evidence that the subject design has been reviewed by a qualified professional who shall, as a minimum, have registration as a professional engineer. The reviews shall
include stability of the structure under design conditions considering the protection of downstream life and property in the event of a failure. When directed by the
Administrator, the calculations submitted for the structures shall be reviewed, signed and sealed by a registered structural engineer.
(b) For projects which include earth embankments which are subjected to a differential water pressure, the submittal shall include evidence that the embankment
design and construction specifications are adequate for the design conditions. This review shall include consideration of the existing foundation soils for the
embankment, the materials from which the embankment is to be constructed, compaction requirements for the embankment and protection of the embankment from
failure due to overtopping. Construction and materials specifications for all embankments shall be included with the plan set submittal. When directed by the
Administrator, or when the impounded water pressure differential exceeds three feet, or when appropriate considering the volume impounded and water surface
elevation differential to which the embankment is subjected, these calculations may be required to be reviewed, signed and sealed by a qualified geotechnical or
structural engineer.
(3) A topographical map of the site, record drawings and other required drawings shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor or
professional engineer and tied to NAVD88 and any FEMA benchmarks.
§ 55.081 DURATION AND REVISION TO PERMITS.
(A) Permit expiration. Permits expire December 31 of the third year following the date of permit issuance or upon expiration of state or federal permits required for
stormwater management.
(B) Permit extension. If the permitted activity has been started but is not completed by the expiration date of the permit, and the permittee intends to pursue the
permitted activity, then the permittee may submit a written request that the expiration date be extended. Upon receipt of the request, the Administrator may extend the
expiration date in one-year increments a maximum of three times for permitted activities outside regulatory floodplains and floodways. Expiration dates for permitted
activities in regulatory floodplains and floodways may be extended in one-year increments a maximum of three times provided the activity is in compliance with the
then current requirements of this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance.
(C) Permit revision. If, after permit issuance, the permittee decides to revise the approved plans, the permittee shall submit revised plans to the Director or the
Administrator, along with a written request for approval. If the Director or the Administrator determines that the revised plans are in compliance with the then current
requirements of this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance, an approval of the revised plans may be issued.
§ 55.082 REQUIRED SUBMITTALS.
(A) Generally. All permit submittals shall include the material listed in the sections noted in Table 2 for the applicable type of development, unless the submittal
requirements are specifically modified by the procedure in division (B) below.
Table 2: Permit Submittal Requirements
Required Submittals (refer to Sections listed for specific material)
Section No./Description
55.082(C) 55.082(D) 55.082(E) 55.082(F) 55.083(A) 55.083(B) 55.084
Application
and Project
Overview
Plan Set
Submittal
Stormwater
Submittal
Floodplain
Submittal
Performance
Security
Maintenance
Schedule and
Funding
Record
Drawings
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 28/348
All requiring a permit X X X X X
All developments on
sites with floodplains
X X X X X X
All developments on
sites with or adjacent to
waters of the United
States
X X X X X
All applications
requesting variances
X X X If on site X X X
All requiring
detention/retention
X X X X X X
Note: Corporations with a bond rating of “A” of higher from a major investment firm, (i.e. Standard and Poor, Moody or equivalent),
would be judged to have met the long-term maintenance funding requirement
(B) Modification of submittal requirements. The Administrator may, at his or her discretion, modify the submittal requirements on a case-by-case basis considering
the size, complexity and likelihood that a development will affect the discharge of stormwater. The modifications shall be requested and answered in writing. The
Administrator’s response shall note the relevant findings and be specific as to what submittal requirements are changed. The Director shall be copied on all related
correspondence. The Administrator may not modify submittal requirements for any aspect of the development requiring state or federal permits or approvals, nor for
any application in which any variance of the permitting authority’s ordinance is requested.
(C) Application and project overview. The applicant shall provide the following information as a minimum, on forms or in a format approved by the Administrator:
(1) The name and legal address of the owner(s) of the site and the permit applicant;
(2) The common address, legal description, property identification number (PIN) of the site;
(3) The name of the project, area of the site in acres, type of development;
(4) A general narrative description of the development, existing and proposed conditions, and project planning principles considered, including best management
practices used;
(5) Affidavits signed by the owner or the applicant’s authorized representative attesting to their understanding of the requirements of this chapter or the applicable
certified community ordinance and their intent to comply therewith;
(6) A statement of opinion by a qualified person either denying or acknowledging the presence of floodplain on the development site;
(7) Copies of other stormwater related permits or permit applications as required;
(8) A subsurface drainage investigation report; and
(9) An engineer’s estimate of probable construction cost of the stormwater facilities.
(D) Plan set submittal. All applicants for a stormwater permit shall provide the following basic plan exhibits: site topographic map, general plan view drawing,
sediment/erosion control plan and a vicinity topographic map. Each exhibit may be on more than one drawing for clarity. The specific information to be included on
each exhibit shall be as noted below.
(1) Site topographic map meeting the following requirements shall be submitted:
(a) Map scales as one inch equals 100 feet (or less) and accurate to +/- 0.5 feet;
(b) Existing and proposed contours on-site and within 100 feet of site;
(c) Existing and proposed drainage patterns and watershed boundaries;
(d) Delineation of pre-development regulatory floodplain/floodway limits;
(e) Delineation of post-development regulatory floodplain/floodway limits;
(f) Location of cross-sections and any other hydrologic/hydraulic computer modeled features;
(g) Location of all on-site drain tiles;
(h) Boundary of all wetlands, lakes, ponds and the like with normal water elevation noted;
(i) Location of all existing buildings and those to remain on the site noted;
(j) Nearest base flood elevations;
(k) FEMA and any site-specific benchmarks (tied to county benchmarks) used; and
(l) Highlight all contours used in the calculation of depressional storage.
(2) General plan view drawing meeting the following requirements shall be submitted:
(a) Drawing at the same scale as the site topographic map;
(b) Existing major and minor stormwater systems;
(c) Proposed major and minor stormwater systems;
(d) Design details for stormwater facilities (i.e. structure and outlet work detail drawings and the like);
(e) Scheduled maintenance program for permanent stormwater facilities including BMP measures;
(f) Planned maintenance tasks and schedule;
(g) Identification of entities responsible for maintenance;
(h) Permanent public access maintenance easements granted or dedicated to, and accepted by, a government entity;
(i) Proposed regulatory floodplain and floodway location (with the base flood and flood protection elevations noted); and
(j) Highlight all plan areas at elevations below the 100-year high water elevation of site runoff storage facilities.
(3) Sediment and erosion control plan meeting the following requirements shall be submitted:
(a) Drawings at the same scale as the site topographic map;
(b) Sediment/erosion control installation measures and schedule;
(c) Existing and proposed roadways, structures, parking lots, driveways, sidewalks and other impervious surfaces;
(d) Limits of clearing and grading;
(e) Floodplain/floodway locations;
(f) Proposed buffer location, existing soil types, vegetation and land cover conditions; and
(g) List of maintenance tasks and schedule for sediment/erosion control measures.
(4) Vicinity topographic map meeting the following requirements shall be submitted:
(a) Vicinity topographic map identifying all off-site areas draining to the development and downstream to the receiving intermittent or perennial stream. (A twofoot
contour map is preferred at a scale readable by the reviewer but a USGS quadrangle map is acceptable);
(b) Watershed boundaries for areas draining through or from the development;
(c) Soil types related to hydrologic soils group, vegetation and land cover affecting runoff upstream of the site for any area draining through the site;
(d) Location of development site within the major watershed(s); and
(e) Show the overland flow path from the downstream end of the development to the receiving intermittent or perennial stream.
(E) Stormwater submittal. The stormwater submittal shall include narrative discussion and calculations to support a finding that the proposed development
complies with the technical requirements of the permitting authority’s ordinance. The submittal shall consist of, at a minimum, the following material:
(1) A narrative description of the existing and proposed site drainage patterns and conditions. Include description of off-site conditions, which help to identify
stormwater issues considered in the design;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 29/348
(2) A schedule for implementation of the site stormwater plan;
(3) On-site and off-site runoff calculations which address the following:
(a) Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for sizing major and minor systems;
(b) Cross-section data for open channels;
(c) Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under design flow conditions; and
(d) Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under base flood flow conditions.
(4) Site runoff storage calculations, which address the following:
(a) Calculation of hydraulically connected impervious area and corresponding retention volume;
(b) Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the allowable release rate;
(c) Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate on-site depressional storage;
(d) Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the storage volume;
(e) Elevation-area-storage data and calculations for site runoff storage;
(f) Elevation-discharge data and calculations specifically related to the outlet control structure depicted in the plan exhibits; and
(g) The general plan view drawing of division (C)(2) above shall indicate the areas of directly connected impervious areas and any offsetting landscaped areas as
defined in § 55.022(E).
(F) Floodplain submittal. The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR-OWR and FEMA for all new base flood and floodway determinations for those cases in
which their permitting authority applies or as noted in § 55.061 of this chapter. The stormwater management permit will not be issued until approval is received.
Documentation supporting a finding that the proposed development is in compliance with §§ 55.060 and 55.061 shall be submitted with the application. At a minimum,
the following material shall be submitted for approval with the application:
(1) Regulatory floodplain boundary determination:
(a) Provide source of flood profile information; and
(b) Provide all hydrologic and hydraulic study information for site-specific floodplain studies, unnumbered Zone A area elevation determinations and floodplain
map revisions.
(2) Floodway hydrologic and hydraulic analyses for the following conditions:
(a) Existing conditions (land used and stream systems);
(b) Proposed conditions (land used and stream systems);
(c) Tabular summary of 100-year flood elevations and discharges for existing and proposed conditions;
(d) Calculations used for model development; and
(e) Hydraulic/hydrologic computer model input/output.
(3) Floodplain fill and compensatory storage calculations for below and above ten-year flood elevation up to the base flood elevation:
(a) Tabular summary for below and above ten-year flood elevation of fill, compensatory storage and compensatory storage ratios provided in proposed plan; and
(b) Cross-sections used for the above calculations.
(4) Floodproofing measures: narrative discussion of floodproofing measures including material specifications, calculations and design details, operation summary;
and
(5) Flood easements when required by this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance.
§ 55.083 SUBMITTALS PRIOR TO PERMIT ISSUANCE.
The following additional submittals as noted in divisions (A) and (B) below are required prior to issuance of the stormwater permit.
(A) Performance security. Performance security in accordance with §§ 55.200 through 55.203 shall be required prior to permit issuance.
(B) Maintenance schedule and funding. A completed maintenance schedule for the stormwater management facilities and special management areas, in accordance
with §§ 55.100 through 55.105 shall be submitted along with identification of the entity responsible for maintenance and funding and back-up funding sources for
maintenance in accordance with § 55.105.
§ 55.084 RECORD DRAWINGS.
The developer is required to submit record drawings of all permitted stormwater facilities. The record drawings shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer
or professional land surveyor who shall state that the project as constructed is substantially in conformance with the project as permitted. The record drawings shall
include calculations verifying that the volumes of detention and compensatory storage required in the permit have been provided.
§ 55.085 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT AND APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL.
(A) The Administrator shall either issue or deny a stormwater permit within 30 days of receiving a complete permit application and all required submittals and fees,
unless additional time is granted by both the Administrator and the applicant. When a permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the Administrator’s decision to the
Director provided the appeal is made in writing within 15 days of the date of the notification of denial. The Director shall render a decision to issue the stormwater
permit, issue the permit with conditions, or uphold the Administrator’s denial of the permit. The Director shall render his or her decision within 30 days of the appeal.
Failure to take action shall be deemed action to uphold the permit by the Administrator.
(B) Upon denial by the Director, the applicant may file an appeal in writing within 15 days of the denial or decision or the community’s action to the County Board.
§ 55.025 AMENDMENTS.
The following sections delete, modify, or add to the provisions of this article.
(A)The Village has no specific permit fees for a Stormwater Permit. Fee shall be paid for review of stormwater management plans for permitting in accordance
with fee requirements in the Village’s Code of Ordinances.
(B) Short Term Maintenance Plain
A short term maintenance plan shall be provided to the Village for approval prior to issuance of the Stormwater Permit. The short term maintenance plan shall
describe the process and schedule for construction of the stormwater storage facilities, provide planting schedules, describe professional installation and care of
plantings, and describe tending of plantings through full establishment of growth. This plan may be submitted as part of landscaping plans required under other
Village ordinances.
LONG TERM MAINTENANCE
§ 55.100 LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 30/348
(A) Unless maintenance responsibility has been delegated to and accepted by another qualified entity under this section, the owner shall maintain that portion of a
stormwater drainage system located upon his or her land. With the approval of the Administrator, the stormwater drainage system, or specified portions thereof, may
be:
(1) Dedicated or otherwise transferred to and accepted by the permitting community or other public entity;
(2) Conveyed or otherwise transferred to and accepted by a homeowner’s association, or similar entity, the members of which are to be the owners of all of the
lots or parcels comprising the development; or
(3) Conveyed to one or more persons or in one or more undivided interests to one or more persons.
(B) Except for those portions of a stormwater drainage system to be dedicated or otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other public entity, included in
the application for a stormwater permit shall be a plan for the long-term management, operation and maintenance of the stormwater drainage system and a description
of the sources of funding therefore. Amendments to the plan must be approved by the Administrator.
§ 55.101 TRANSFER TO PERMITTING AUTHORITY OR OTHER PUBLIC ENTITY.
If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be dedicated or otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other public entity under § 55.100(A)(1),
appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of the portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the entity on the final plat.
§ 55.102 TRANSFER TO HOMEOWNER’S OR SIMILAR ASSOCIATION.
If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be conveyed or otherwise transferred to a homeowner’s or similar association under § 55.100(A)(2) then:
(A) Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of the portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the association and the permitting authority
on the final plat;
(B) The association shall be duly incorporated and a copy of the certificate of incorporation, duly recorded and bylaws and any amendment to either of them, shall
be delivered to the Administrator;
(C) The bylaws of the association shall, at a minimum, contain:
(1) A provision acknowledging and accepting the association’s obligation to maintain certain portions of the stormwater drainage system as required by this
chapter;
(2) A mechanism for imposing an assessment upon the owners of all the lots or parcels comprising the development sufficient, at a minimum, to provide for the
maintenance of those portions of the stormwater drainage system as required by this chapter and the payment of all taxes levied thereon;
(3) A provision adopting the plan of long-term maintenance set forth in the application for a stormwater management permit, with approved amendments;
(4) A provision identifying the officer of the association responsible for carrying out the obligations imposed upon the association under this chapter, and an
obligation to inform the Administrator of the name, address and phone number of this officer and any changes thereto;
(5) A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to any amendment of the bylaws changing any of the provisions of the bylaws required by this
chapter; and
(6) A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to the dissolution of the association.
(D) Any conveyance or other instrument of transfer delivered under § 55.100(A)(2) shall include a covenant affirmatively imposing upon the association the
obligations set forth in this section and the association’s affirmative acceptance thereof.
§ 55.103 CONVEYANCE TO ONE OR MORE PERSONS.
If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be conveyed to one or more persons under § 55.100(A)(3), then:
(A) Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of the portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the permitting authority on the final plat;
(B) The final plat shall contain a legend imposing the maintenance obligations of this section upon the grantee and his or her successors in interest as a covenant
running with the land and incorporating by reference the plan of long-term maintenance set forth in the application for a stormwater management permit, with
approved amendments;
(C) The final plat shall contain a legend reserving the right of the permitting authority to enter upon the land to perform the maintenance required in this section if
the owner does not do so and to place a lien against the land for the cost thereof; and
(D) Any conveyance delivered under § 55.100(A)(3), and any subsequent conveyance, shall include a covenant affirmatively imposing upon the grantee the
obligations, restrictions and provisions set forth in this section and the grantee’s affirmative acceptance thereof.
§ 55.104 INCORPORATION OF MAINTENANCE OBLIGATIONS IN STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT.
The provisions of this subchapter shall be incorporated by reference in the stormwater management permit and the applicant’s acceptance of the permit shall be
deemed to be the applicant’s acceptance and assumption of the obligations imposed under this section. At the option of the Administrator, the stormwater management
permit may be recorded.
§ 55.105 FUNDING OF LONG TERM MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES.
(A) As a condition of approval of any application for a stormwater management permit, unless the maintenance responsibility for the stormwater drainage system to
be constructed or installed in connection therewith has been accepted by a public entity, the Administrator will require assurance of long-term funding in a form found
acceptable to the permitting authority. A corporation with a bond rating of “A” or higher from a major investment firm (i.e. Standard and Poor, Moody or equivalent)
will be considered to have met the long-term maintenance funding requirement. Absent some other form of agreement, then the Administrator shall require the
establishment of a special service area pursuant to ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200, §§ 27-5 et seq., either as the primary means of providing for the long term maintenance of the
facilities, or as a backup vehicle in the event the entity designated by the applicant as having primary maintenance responsibility fails to adequately carry out its duties.
(B) If the establishment of a special service area is required, the Administrator shall make consider and approve a good faith estimate by the applicant of the tax rate
required to produce a tax to be levied upon all taxable property within the area, sufficient for the long term maintenance of the facilities and submit the same to the
permitting authority which shall incorporate the rate into its enactment of the ordinances necessary for the establishment of the area. The ordinances to be enacted by
the permitting authority shall be substantially in the form set forth in Appendix F.
(C) On or before August 1 of each year thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to the permitting authority a good faith estimate of the amount of tax required to
be levied upon all taxable property within the area for the next fiscal year for the continued maintenance of the stormwater drainage system.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 55.120 SCOPE OF REGULATION.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 31/348
This chapter applies to all development within the county, including that under the control of any governmental entity, agency or authority. A certified community
undertaking development in the regulatory floodway, or regulatory floodplain where no regulatory floodway has been designated, shall obtain a permit from IDNROWR
prior to issuance of a stormwater management permit. All units of local government shall obtain stormwater management permits from the permitting authority
within whose boundaries the development is located.
§ 55.121 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) This chapter does not apply to:
(1) Development which has been substantially completed before the effective date of the chapter; and
(2) Development, which has been determined to be exempt by the permitting authority.
(B) Nonconforming structures shall not be replaced or enlarged in any manner unless the replacement or enlargement conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 55.122 COMMUNITY’S LIST OF PROPOSED EXEMPT DEVELOPMENTS.
(A) The county or a community may place a development or industrial site on its list of exempt developments only if:
(1) A site specific stormwater plan, master plan or a regional master plan has been submitted and substantially approved by the community engineer; or
(2) A contractual agreement, specifically exempting the development from the stormwater regulations of the community, was entered into before the effective date
of the chapter.
(B) A community’s list of exempt developments shall be adopted by an official action of the corporate authorities of the community. Prior to taking the action, the
Community shall publish in accordance with § 55.167, a notice in substantially the following form:
On [date], at [time], the [corporate authorities] of the [type of community] of [community] will consider and take formal action with respect to the approval of the
following list of developments proposed as exempt from the provisions of the county Stormwater Management Ordinance, adopted by the County Board on October
17, 2002. Any person wishing to do so, may attend the meeting and be heard prior to the [corporate authorities] taking the action.
[List of proposed exempt developments]
(C) At any time before January 1, 2004, upon similar notice and by similar official action, a community may revise the list by adding or deleting developments there
from. If a development is to be deleted from the list, an additional notice shall be served in the manner set forth in § 55.166 upon the affected developer. Revisions to
the list shall be submitted to the Director. After January 1, 2004, the list may not be changed without review and recommendation by the Committee, which shall be
forwarded to the County Board for approval.
§ 55.123 INTERPRETATION.
(A) This chapter shall be liberally construed to protect the health, welfare, safety and the environment of the residents of the county and to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter and the enabling legislation.
(B) Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to consent to, license, permit to locate, construct or maintain any structure, site, facility or operation, or to carry on any
trade, industry, occupation or activity.
(C) When provisions of this chapter differ from any other applicable law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, the more stringent provision shall apply.
(D) The provisions of this chapter are cumulative of all other laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations which relate to the subject matter hereof and, except as
otherwise expressly provided herein, nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation upon the application or enforcement of any law, statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent with the provisions of other laws, statutes, ordinances,
rules or regulations, and with each other, to the end that all provisions may be given their fullest application.
§ 55.124 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
(A) The degree of flood protection provided by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering experience and
scientific methods of study. Increased flooding may result from causes beyond the control of any governmental authority. This chapter does not, therefore, guarantee
that areas outside the floodplain or permitted land uses within the floodplain will be free from flooding and associated damages.
(B) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or applied in any manner to create liability on the part of or a cause of action against the county, any municipality or
other governmental authority, or any elected official, or any officer, agent or employee of any of the foregoing, or any certified review specialist for any flood damage
resulting from reliance on the provisions of this chapter.
§ 55.125 CHOICE OF PLANNING JURISDICTION.
(A) Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062(b), a community that is located in more than one county may choose, at the time of the formation of the committee,
and based upon watershed boundaries, to participate in the stormwater management planning program of either or both of the counties.
(B) The Committee shall include the community within the scope of its planning and enforcement jurisdiction unless the community provides evidence of its
participation or intent to participate in the stormwater management-planning program of another county.
§ 55.126 VIOLATIONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any development without first securing a stormwater management permit as required by this chapter.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect and refuse to comply with, or resist enforcement of any provision of this chapter or any
condition of a stormwater management permit.
§ 55.128 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This chapter shall take effect for all purposes and its effective date shall be January 1, 2004.
VARIANCES
§ 55.140 PURPOSE.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 32/348
In order to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted when strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter is impossible or
impracticable, variances from the specific provisions of this chapter may be granted according to the standards set forth in this subchapter.
§ 55.141 APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE.
(A) Generally. An application for a variance, signed by the owner or developer of the development to which it relates, shall be filed with the Administrator. No
application for a variance will be accepted for filing unless it relates to a previously or contemporaneously filed application for a stormwater management permit.
Applications for a variance shall be filed in the number of duplicate copies as the Administrator may designate by administrative order. No action will be taken on an
application for a variance unless it and the corresponding application for a stormwater management permit to which it relates are complete as determined by the
Administrator. The Administrator shall send a copy of the complete application to the Director and to all other certified communities within the same watershed.
(B) Form. Applications for a variance need not be made upon any specific form, but shall contain the information set forth in division (C) below.
(C) Application for variance. An application for variance shall set forth:
(1) The common addresses and legal descriptions of all lands comprising the development;
(2) The names and addresses of all owners of record of the legal title of all lands comprising the development;
(3) If title to any of the land comprising the development is held in trust, the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of the trust;
(4) The names and addresses of the developers of the land, if different from the owner;
(5) The names and addresses of all consultants retained by the developer in connection with the application for a variance;
(6) The names and addresses of all property owners within 250 feet of the development;
(7) The specific feature or features of the development that require a variance;
(8) The specific provision of this chapter from which a variance is sought and the precise extent of the variance there from;
(9) A statement of the characteristics of the development that prevent compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
(10) A statement that the variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to permit the development; and
(11) A statement as to how the variance requested satisfies the standards set forth in § 55.144 of this chapter.
§ 55.142 APPLICATION FEE.
With the filing of the application for a variance, the applicant shall pay the fee prescribed by a separate act of the permitting authorities.
§ 55.143 PUBLIC HEARING.
When the application is complete, the Administrator will so notify the applicant and will schedule a public hearing on the application before the Land Use or Oversite
Committee as applicable. Not more than 30 nor less than 15 days before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
applicant, to the Director, to all property owners within 250 feet of the development as disclosed in the application, and to each certified community within the same
watershed as the development and to the Committee. Within the same time period, notice of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper published
within the certified community having jurisdiction over the application, or within the county if the county has jurisdiction over the application. If no newspaper is
published within the certified community, then the notice shall be published in a newspaper with a general circulation within the certified community, which is
published in the county. The notices given under the section shall set forth the common name, address and legal description of the development and a brief description
of the variance is requested.
§ 55.144 GRANTING OF VARIANCES.
(A) The Land Use or Oversite Committee shall not recommend, nor shall the County Board or corporate authority grant a variance for a project from the provisions
of this chapter unless the variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter (§ 55.003) and meets the following standards based upon substantial evidence
submitted at the hearing.
(1) The variance will not increase measurably the probability of flood damage to insurable structures.
(2) The variance requested is the minimum required considering each of the following statements of underlying intent of this chapter and there are no means other
than the requested variance by which the alleged hardships can be avoided or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit the reasonable continuation of the development.
(a) Detention of stormwater shall also contribute to the improvement of the quality of stormwater runoff.
(b) The volume of detention storage provided in open air vegetated facilities is maximized consistent with other land use site constraints including zoning
requirements essential for the proposed development.
(c) Conveyance of stormwater from the project shall not increase peak discharges from existing offsite conveyance facilities beyond design capacity for any
storm event from the two-year to the 100-year flood frequency.
(d) High quality natural areas shall be preserved on the site, including without limiting the generality of the foregoing, stands of native trees, existing wetlands,
natural floodplain storage or other valuable environmental and biological resources.
(3) The variance is not requested solely for the purpose of increasing the density of the development nor impervious areas on the site.
(4) The variance is not requested solely as a result of economic hardship.
(5) If applicable, the variance is required due to unique, natural topographical features of the site.
(6) The applicant’s circumstances are not self-imposed.
(B) No variance shall be granted for any development in the regulatory floodway, the effect of which would be to create regulation less restrictive than the federal or
state minimum standards applicable to development in the areas.
(C) When a variance would lessen the degree of flood surface runoff protection to any structure, the Administrator shall notify the applicant that the variance, if
granted, may result in increased rates for flood insurance.
§ 55.145 RECOMMENDATIONS.
(A) The Administrator, or his or her designee, shall review the application for a variance and present his or her written recommendations to the Land Use or
Oversite Committee at the public hearing.
(B) Not more than 45 days after the close of the hearing, the Land Use or Oversite Committee shall forward the application with its written recommendations to the
County Board or Corporate Authorities. The written recommendations of the Land Use Committee, when forwarded, shall be accompanied by written findings of fact
with respect to each of the considerations set forth in § 55.144 with citations to the evidence taken at the public hearing.
§ 55.146 DECISION.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 33/348
(A) The County Board or Corporate Authorities shall grant the variation, grant the variation with modifications or conditions, or deny the variation in writing within
45 days after receipt of the written recommendations of the Land Use or Oversite Committee.
(B) In the event the County Board or Corporate Authorities do not act as aforesaid, then the application is denied.
§ 55.147 CONDITIONS.
(A) A variance less than or different from that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant’s right to some relief, but not to the relief requested.
(B) In granting a variance, the County Board or corporate authorities may impose specific conditions and limitations concerning any matter relating to the purposes
and objectives of this chapter on the applicant as may be necessary or appropriate.
(C) Whenever any variance is granted subject to any condition or limitation to be met by the applicant, upon meeting the conditions, the applicant shall file evidence
to that effect with the Administrator.
§ 55.148 AMENDMENTS.
The following sections delete, modify, or add to the provisions of this article.
(A)Public Hearing
The public hearing for variances shall be heard by the Plan Commission of the Village of Monee. It shall be the petitioner’s responsibility to mail notice of
public hearing as required under Section 55.143. It shall not be the Administrator’s nor the Village’s responsibility to mail proper notice. Improper notice shall
be grounds to cancel the public hearing.
(B) Granting of Variances
Variances requested for developments within the Village of Monee shall be reviewed by the Village of Monee Plan Commission and granted or denied by the
Village of Monee President and Board of Trustees.
ADMINISTRATION
§ 55.160 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
(A) The County Board shall determine policy related to this chapter.
(B) The Director and Administrator shall administer this chapter. In performing their duties, the Director and the Administrator may delegate and oversee
enforcement of responsibilities to any named designee.
(C) Each community shall remain solely responsible for its standing in the National Flood Insurance Program, including:
(1) The maintenance of all records and the submission of all reports required for eligibility in the program, including elevation certificates, floodproofing
certificates and lowest floor elevations; and
(2) The notification of the Director, FEMA and IDNR-OWR of any proposed amendment to this chapter.
§ 55.161 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
The Director shall:
(A) Supervise the enforcement of this chapter;
(B) Supervise the development, revision and implementation of the Plan for approval by the Committee and the County Board;
(C) Supervise the review of complex stormwater management permits for any community that requests assistance;
(D) Notify all the communities in the county, FEMA, IDNR-OWR, USACOE, the State Environmental Protection Agency and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency of any amendments to the Plan or to this chapter;
(E) Review variance requests for the Committee; and
(F) Assume the duties of the Administrator for the unincorporated county and non-certified communities.
§ 55.162 DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR.
The Administrator shall:
(A) Receive a listing of all required federal, state, regional and county permit applications filed for the project prior to issuing a permit under this chapter for areas
covered by other stormwater related jurisdictions. The Administrator may request copies of the stormwater related permit applications;
(B) Ascertain whether any floodplains/floodways exist on any site which is the subject of an application for a permit under this chapter and whether or not any new
development is within the SFHA;
(C) Review permit applications and determine whether to issue or deny permits;
(D) Ensure that the required notice of an application for a variance has been given in accordance with §§ 55.166 and 55.167;
(E) Notify an applicant for a variance that the variance may result in increased rates for flood insurance;
(F) Notify the Director of an application for a variance CLOMR or LOMR;
(G) Provide for inspections of developments as required by this chapter;
(H) Investigate complaints of violations of this chapter within his or her community;
(I) Notify violators within regulatory floodplains that failure to comply with the provisions of the National Flood Insurance Program could make them ineligible to
receive flood insurance;
(J) Initiate any proceeding necessary to enforce this chapter within his or her community;
(K) Advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies to promote the purposes of this chapter;
(L) Maintain copies of all applications and submittals, federal and state permits, variances, CLOMR, LOMR, CLOMA, LOMA and all documentation associated
with any of the foregoing for public inspection;
(M) Maintain documentation and data on the cost of any improvement to a structure in the floodplain in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter pertaining to
substantial improvements to the structures; and
(N) Notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to issuing a permit for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
§ 55.163 REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 34/348
In all cases when any action is taken by the Director or the Administrator, or his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the action
shall be taken either in the name of the county or the certified community as the case may be, and neither the Director nor the Administrator, nor his or her designee, in
so acting shall be rendered personally liable.
§ 55.164 OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.
The corporate authorities of each community within the county shall establish an oversight committee to oversee the implementation and enforcement of this chapter
within its jurisdiction and to perform the duties assigned to the Oversight Committee in this chapter. The Oversight Committee may be comprised of the corporate
authorities or any committee thereof, plan commission, zoning board of appeals, or other existing body, or the corporate authorities may, according to their own rules
and procedures, establish a separate Oversight Committee. The Land Use Committee shall act as the Oversight Committee for the county.
§ 55.165 NON-CERTIFIED COMMUNITIES.
The Director may delegate the duties of the Administrator for non-certified communities. The county may designate an oversight committee in these non-certified
communities.
§ 55.166 SERVICE.
Unless otherwise provided herein, service of any notice or instrument under this chapter may be made upon any person in one of the following manners:
(A) By certified mail/return receipt requested, postage prepaid and addressed to the address then on file for the person, if any, or if none, to the person’s last known
address; or
(B) By any method prescribed under the State Code of Civil Procedure.
§ 55.167 PUBLICATION.
Unless otherwise provided herein, publication of any notice or other instrument under this chapter shall be made by publishing the notice or other instrument once in
a newspaper published within the community having jurisdiction over the matter to which the publication relates (or, if no newspapers published within the community
then a newspaper published in the county and having a general circulation within the community), the publication being not less than 15 or more than 30 days before
the hearing or other event to which the publication relates.
CERTIFIED COMMUNITY ENFORCEMENT
§ 55.180 AUTHORITY.
Pursuant to § 5-1062 of the Counties Code (ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062), the provisions of this chapter shall not be enforced by the county in any certified
community.
§ 55.181 PETITION FOR CERTIFICATION AND WAIVER OF ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Any community that desires to enforce the provisions of this chapter within its borders shall file a petition for certification and waiver of enforcement (“petition
for certification”), on or before January 1, 2004.
(B) After January 1, 2004, petitions for certification may be filed during the month of June of each year.
§ 55.182 FILING AND CONTENTS OF PETITION FOR CERTIFICATION.
A petition for certification shall be filed with the Director. The petition need not be on any particular form but, at a minimum, shall set forth and be accompanied by:
(A) The agreement of the corporate authorities of the community to adopt, if certified, the provisions of this chapter by reference;
(B) The community’s plan for the implementation and enforcing of this chapter, including proposed staffing;
(C) The agreement of the corporate authorities of the community to include in any new annexation agreement a provision requiring every other party to the
agreement to affirmatively agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter as amended from time to time;
(D) The agreement of the corporate authorities of the community that the community will be bound by the rules and procedures of the Committee by which
certification is granted or revoked and county jurisdiction is reasserted over the enforcement of this chapter within the boundaries of the community; and
(E) The list of projects to which this chapter or some portion of this chapter do not apply (grandfathered projects) pursuant to the requirements of §§ 55.120 through
55.128.
§ 55.183 COMMITTEE CONSIDERATION OF PETITION FOR CERTIFICATION.
The Committee shall consider each properly filed petition for certification at a regular or special meeting called for the purpose not later than 60 days after the filing
of the petition. The meeting may be continued from time to time. The Committee may adopt rules for the taking of evidence and conduct of meetings.
§ 55.184 STANDARDS FOR GRANT OF PETITION.
Upon a finding of the Committee that the community has complied with §§ 55.181 and 55.182, that the community’s plan for the implementation and enforcement of
this chapter is reasonably feasible, the Committee shall grant the petition for certification. The Committee’s decision shall be in writing, and shall specify the reasons
for granting or denying the petition.
§ 55.185 CERTIFIED COMMUNITY RECORDS.
(A) Every certified community shall maintain adequate records of every stormwater management permit issued and every variance granted under this chapter for
development within its borders.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 35/348
(B) Every certified community shall retain record drawings of all structures erected or constructed pursuant to a stormwater management permit issued or variance
granted by the community.
(C) The records of each certified community maintained under this chapter may be periodically inspected by the Department.
(D) Every certified community shall report annually to the Director on forms provided by the Department regarding stormwater management permits issued in the
preceding year.
§ 55.186 COMMITTEE REVIEW OF ENFORCEMENT BY A CERTIFIED COMMUNITY.
The Committee shall periodically review the implementation and enforcement of this chapter by each certified community.
§ 55.187 INVESTIGATIONS; COMPLAINTS.
(A) The Director upon his or her own initiative or at the request of any person may conduct an investigation into a certified community’s implementation and
enforcement of this chapter. The investigation may include, without limitation, making an inspection of all relevant records maintained by the community and making
field inspections of relevant developments, structures or stormwater facilities. If, upon the investigation, the Director determines that the community has failed in some
significant way, or has repeatedly failed, to implement or enforce this chapter, then he or she shall prepare a report of his or her findings along with a complaint for the
revocation or partial revocation of the community’s certification and then file the same with the Committee. The complaint shall contain a short and plain statement
describing how the certified community has failed in some significant way, or has repeatedly failed, to implement or enforce this chapter.
(B) Upon receipt of a written complaint, the Committee shall serve a copy thereof along with a copy of the report of the Director upon the community named
therein. A copy of the complaint and report shall also be sent to IDNR-OWR, FEMA, all communities within the same watershed, and to any person who has requested
an investigation of the community’s enforcement of this chapter by the Director within six months immediately preceding the filing of the complaint. The Community
may file a written answer to the complaint within 30 days after being served.
§ 55.188 HEARING ON COMPLAINT.
(A) The Committee shall conduct a hearing on the complaint not less than 45 nor more than 90 days after service of the complaint upon the Community.
(B) Notice of the hearing shall be given to the community. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
(C) The Committee may adopt rules for the taking of evidence and conduct of the hearings.
§ 55.189 COMMITTEE DECISION.
Within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the Committee shall recommend to the County Board what action to be taken which may include whether or not to
revoke in whole or in part the certification of the community. The recommendation of the Committee shall be in writing and shall include the specific findings and
conclusions supporting its determination. The County Board shall decide appropriate remedies, and shall take any actions necessary to implement the remedies. A copy
of the decision County Boards and order, if any, shall be served upon the community. The decision of the County Board to revoke the certification of the community is
final, subject only to the right of the community to reapply for certification at or after a time as the county shall specify in its order of revocation.
PERFORMANCE SECURITY
§ 55.200 GENERAL SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
(A) As security to the county or the certified community for the performance by the developer of the developer’s obligations to complete the construction of any
stormwater facilities required by the stormwater management permit, to pay all costs, fees and charges due from the developer pursuant to the permitting authorities of
this chapter and to otherwise faithfully perform the developer’s undertakings pursuant to this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance, the developer
shall, prior to issuance of a stormwater management permit:
(1) Post a development security as provided in § 55.201 of this chapter; and
(2) Post a sediment and erosion control security as provided in § 55.202 of this chapter, if a sediment and erosion control plan is required pursuant to § 55.082 of
this chapter.
(B) The developer shall bear the full cost and responsibility of securing and maintaining the securities required by this section.
§ 55.201 DEVELOPMENT SECURITY.
(A) A development security shall be posted and shall include:
(1) A schedule, agreed upon by the developer and the Director or the Administrator, for the completion of the construction of any stormwater facilities required by
the permit;
(2) An irrevocable letter of credit, or other adequate security as the Director or the Administrator may approve, in an amount equal to not less than 110% of the
estimated probable cost to complete the construction of any stormwater facilities required by the stormwater management permit, which estimated probable cost shall
be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be approved by the Director or the Administrator. A corporation with a bond rating of “A” or higher from a
major investment firm (i.e., Standard and Poor, Moody or equivalent) would be deemed to have adequate credit worthiness and thus is not required to post a letter of
credit for projects that are not required to be located in public easements;
(3) A statement signed by the applicant granting the Director or the Administrator the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the development site to
complete required work in the event that work is not completed according to the work schedule; and
(4) A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify the community and the Department for any additional costs incurred attributable to the
concurrent activities of or conflicts between the applicant’s contractor and the community or Department’s remedial contractor at the site.
(B) The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant and shall be held in escrow by the Director or the Administrator until the
conditions set forth in this section or other applicable provisions are satisfied.
(C) The Administrator may approve periodic reductions in the letter of credit based on progress of construction. However, not more than 90% of the security
provided for in this section may be released prior to approval of record drawings and final inspection. A minimum of 10% of the security shall be retained for a period
of time not to exceed one year after completion of construction of all stormwater facilities required by the permit.
§ 55.202 SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL SECURITY.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 36/348
(A) If a sediment and erosion control plan is required pursuant to § 55.082 of this chapter, then a sediment and erosion control security shall be required. The
security shall include:
(1) An irrevocable letter of credit, or other adequate security as the Director or the Administrator shall approve, in an amount equal to not less than 110% of the
estimated probable cost to install and maintain the sediment and erosion control measures, which estimated probable cost shall be approved by the Director or the
Administrator; and
(2) A statement signed by the applicant granting the Director or the Administrator, as applicable, the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the
development site to complete sediment and erosion control measures in the event that the measures are not installed and/or maintained according to the established
schedule.
(B) The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant and shall be held in escrow by the Director or the Administrator, as
applicable, until the conditions set forth in this section are satisfied.
(C) After completion of construction, establishment of vegetation, removal of all sediment from stormwater facilities, and final inspection and approval by the
Director or Administrator, as applicable, 100% of the sediment and erosion control security shall be released.
§ 55.203 LETTERS OF CREDIT.
(A) Letters of credit posted pursuant to §§ 55.200 through 55.203 of this chapter shall be in a form satisfactory to the Director or the Administrator, as applicable.
(B) Each letter of credit shall be from a lending institution:
(1) Acceptable to the Director or the Administrator, as applicable;
(2) Having capital resources of at least $10,000,000, or another amount acceptable to the Director or the Administrator;
(3) With an office in the Chicago metropolitan area; and
(4) Insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
(C) Each letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide that:
(1) It shall not be canceled without the prior written consent of the Director or the Administrator; and shall not expire without written notification of the Director
or Administrator at least 45 days prior to expiration;
(2) It shall not require the consent of the developer prior to any draw on it by the Director or the Administrator; and
(3) If at any time it will expire within 45 or any lesser number of days, and if it has not been renewed and the renewal submitted to the Director or the
Administrator, and if any applicable obligation of the developer for which its security remains uncompleted or is unsatisfactory, then the Director or the Administrator
may, without notice and without being required to take any further action of any nature whatsoever, call and draw down the letter of credit and thereafter either hold all
proceeds as security for the satisfactory completion of all obligations or employ the proceeds to complete all obligations and reimburse the county or the certified
community for any and all costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by the county or the certified community, as the Director or the
Administrator shall determine.
(D) If at any time the Director or the Administrator determines that the funds remaining in the letter of credit are not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the
remaining unpaid cost of all stormwater facility construction or sediment and erosion control measures, then, within ten days following a demand by the Director or the
Administrator, the developer shall increase the amount of the letter of credit to an amount determined by the Director or the Administrator to be sufficient to pay the
unpaid costs. Failure to so increase the amount of the security shall be grounds for the Director or the Administrator to draw down the entire remaining balance of the
letter of credit.
(E) If at any time the Director or the Administrator determines that the bank issuing the letter of credit is without capital resources of at least $10,000,000, is unable
to meet any federal or state requirement for reserves, is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing or is otherwise in danger of being unable to honor the
letter of credit at any time during its term, or if the Director or the Administrator otherwise reasonably deems the bank to be insecure, then the Director or the
Administrator shall have the right to demand that the developer provide a replacement letter of credit from a bank satisfactory to the Director or the Administrator. The
replacement letter of credit shall be deposited with the Director or the Administrator not later than ten days following the demand. Upon the deposit, the Director or the
Administrator shall surrender the original letter of credit to the developer.
(F) (1) If the developer fails or refuses to meet fully any of its obligations under this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance, then the Director or
the Administrator may, in his or her discretion, draw on and retain all or any of the funds remaining in the letter of credit.
(2) The Director or the Administrator thereafter shall have the right to take any action he or she deems reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the effects of the
failure or refusal, and to reimburse the county or the certified community from the proceeds of the letter of credit for all of its costs and expenses, including legal fees
and administrative expenses, resulting from or incurred as a result of the developer’s failure or refusal to fully meet its obligations under this chapter or the applicable
certified community ordinance.
(3) If the funds remaining in the letter of credit are insufficient to repay fully the county or the certified community for all costs and expenses, and to maintain a
cash reserve equal to the required letter of credit during the entire time the letter of credit should have been maintained by the developer, then the developer shall, upon
demand of the Director or the Administrator therefore, immediately deposit with the Director of the Administrator additional funds as the Director or the Administrator
determines are necessary to fully repay costs and expenses and to establish the cash reserve.
FEE-IN-LIEU OF ON-SITE DETENTION
§ 55.215 FEE-IN-LIEU OF ON-SITE DETENTION.
(A) The Director or the Administrator may require the payment of a fee-in-lieu of on-site detention to fulfill all or part of the on-site detention requirement for a
development. Fee-in-lieu of on-site detention shall be the lesser of:
(1) The fee computed for each acre-foot or part thereof of detention required and approved in accordance with the procedures and schedules as approved and
adopted by the county or the certified community; or
(2) The estimated construction cost, as approved by the county or the certified community of the applicant’s proposed and approved on-site detention, including
land costs.
(B) The following fee-in-lieu of detention procedures apply to communities with adopted procedures for requiring and collecting fee-in-lieu of revenues for
detention requirements.
(1) The Director or the Administrator may require, or the applicant may submit, a written request for the payment of a fee-in-lieu of on-site detention to fulfill all
of part of the on-site detention requirement in accordance with § 55.022(B) a request for fee-in-lieu of on-site detention shall be either rejected or approved within 45
days of the written request unless additional engineering studies are required.
(2) Approval of a request for fee-in-lieu of on-site detention on a development site shall be determined by the Director or the Administrator.
(3) A fund will be maintained by the certified community or the county for non-certified communities for each of the major watersheds for the purpose of
identifying and controlling all revenues and expenses related to stormwater drainage services resulting from fee-in-lieu of on-site detention approvals. All moneys
collected for fee-in-lieu of on-site detention shall be deposited in these funds and may only be used for purposes related to stormwater management as noted in division
(B)(4) below.
(4) Fee-in-lieu of on-site detention revenues from development site may be used to plan, design or construct an upgrade to existing or future stormwater
management systems if the upgrade is consistent with a basin plan, floodplain study or stormwater system improvement that has been approved by the county for noncertified
communities or the community elected board of officials in a certified community.
§ 55.216 AMENDMENTS.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 37/348
The following sections delete, modify, or add to the provisions of this article.
(A)Fee-in-Lieu of On-Site Detention
Section 55.215 is deleted in its entirety. No fee shall be accepted in lieu of on-site detention as required under this ordinance.
ENFORCEMENT
§ 55.230 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE AUTHORITY.
Pursuant to the authority granted by ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-1104 and 5-1062, the county may, after 30 days’ notice to the owner or occupant, enter upon any lands
or waters within the county for the purpose of inspecting and/or maintaining stormwater facilities or causing the removal of any obstruction to an affected watercourse.
§ 55.231 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
Any development constructed pursuant to a stormwater management permit shall be subject to periodic inspections by the Administrator, Director or their designee to
ensure conformity with permit provisions and conditions.
§ 55.232 OFFENSES.
(A) Generally. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any provision of this chapter (“ordinance
violation”) or any requirement or condition in any permit issued pursuant to this chapter (“permit violation”), and, in the case of a permit violation, fails to correct the
violation, omission or neglect, or cease the disobedience, refusal or resistance after notice and reinspection as provided in division (B) below, shall be guilty of an
offense under this chapter.
(B) Permit violation; notice. Whenever the Administrator or Director determines that a permit violation exists, he or she shall give notice of the violation in the
manner prescribed in § 55.166 to the permittee. The notice shall state the nature of the violation and fix a date not less than ten days after the date of the notice when
the site will be reinspected.
COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT TECHNICAL GUIDANCE MANUAL
§ 55.245 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
(A) The purpose of the Technical Guidance Manual is to help applicants better understand the intent of this chapter and to allow for technical discussions and
example to be given to help guide development in a manner that is consistent with this chapter.
(B) The Will County Stormwater Management Technical Guidance Manual, copies of which are on file in the office of the Will County Clerk, is adopted and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 55.999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person found guilty of an offense under this chapter shall pay a civil fine in an amount not less than $25 and not more than $750. Each calendar day during
which the violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Where monetary penalties are imposed for violations of § 55.024 by regional, state or federal
agencies, the amount of these other agency fines will be offset against the monetary penalties for violation of this chapter.
(B) In addition to any fine imposed under division (A) above, the Administrator or the Director may revoke any stormwater management permit issued to the
person.
(C) In addition to any fine imposed under division (A) above or action taken under division (B) above, the Administrator or the Director may issue an order
requiring the suspension of any further work on the site. The stop-work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for its issuance, and shall specify the action,
if any, required to be taken in order to resume work. One copy of the stop-work order shall be posted on the site in a conspicuous place and one copy shall be delivered
in the manner prescribed in § 55.166 to the permittee, if any, or if none, to the person in whose name the site was last assessed for taxes as disclosed by the records of
the Supervisor of Assessments.
(D) In the enforcement of this chapter, the Administrator or the Director may bring any action, legal or equitable, including an action for injunctive relief that may
be necessary.
(E) (1) An advisory committee, called the Agricultural Review Advisory Committee, shall be appointed by the WCSMC. The Committee shall be comprised of
three members actively farming 60 or more contiguous acres in the county. The Committee will also include representatives of the Soil and Water Conservation
District, the Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Farm Bureau.
(2) All complaints and ordinance violations related to § 55.024 shall be reviewed by the Agricultural Review Advisory Committee, who shall render an opinion to
the WCSMC on the validity of the complaint, remedies and penalties to be imposed.
APPENDIX A
FEMA FIRM MAPS AND FLOOD INSURANCE STUDIES (FIS)
COMMUNITY COMMUNITY
NUMBER
DATE OF CURRENT EFFECTIVE
MAP
WILL COUNTY PANEL
NUMBERS DESCRIPTION
Village of Monee 171029 February 15, 2019 17197C03345G Will County FIRM
February 15, 2019 17197C0345G Will County FIRM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 38/348
February 15, 2019 17197C0353G Will County FIRM
February 15, 2019 17197C0361G Will County FIRMFIRM
February 15, 2019 17197C0362G Will County FIRMFIRM
February 15, 2019 17197C0365G Will County FIRMFIRM
February 15, 2019
17197CIND0B Map
Index
17197CIND0B Will Co. FIRMMap Map
Index
August 19, 2008 17031C0801J Cook County FIRM
Will County Flood Insurance Study dated February 15, 2019
Cook County Flood Insurance Study dated August 19, 2008
Section Four – Repealer. That all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are expressly repealed.
Section Five — Savings Clause. That in the event any portion of this Ordinance is declared to be void, that such other parts or remainder of this Ordinance shall not be
adversely effected and shall otherwise remain effective and valid.
Section Six — Adoption Clause. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its approval, adoption and publication as required by law.
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1893____ _
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 11, CHAPTER 6, SECTION 5 OF THE VILLAGE CODE THEREBY AMENDING
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONSWITHIN THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS
AYES: NAYS: ABSTAIN: ABSENT: PRESENT:
Blue
Gray
Horne
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 39/348
Raczek
Youdris
Gonzalez
PASSED and APPROVED this _23rd___ day of January_________ , 2019.
_______________________________
James Popp, Village Mayor
ATTEST: _______________________________
Doneshia Codjoe, Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
`
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1908_
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 7 (C) OF THE VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A
HOME
RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 40/348
THIS _10th _ DAY OF _April_, 2019
Published in Pamphlet Form by Authority of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Monee,
Will County, Illinois,
This _10th day of _April___, 2019
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1908_
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 7 (C) OF THE VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A
HOME
RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
WHEREAS, the proper storage of garbage, recycling containers and bins help safeguard the public health and safety; and
WHEREAS, it has been determined that it will be in the best interest of the Village of Monee to amend certain hours relating to the
placement of garbage containers and bins.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village President and Board of Trustees that Title 4, Chapter 1, Section 7 (C) be
amended as follows:
Section One. Preambles. That the preambles above set forth are incorporated herein as if set forth herein in full.
Section Two. Title 4, Chapter 1, Section 7 (C). That the current provision of Title 4, Chapter 1, Section 7 (C) be repealed and
replaced with the following:
Placement of Containers for Collection: Time Period: It shall be the duty of the person having household garbage or rubbish to comply
with all provisions of this Chapter, and on each day of garbage, rubbish or recycling collection to place the containers as aforesaid on the
curb in front of the residential premises receiving said disposal services no earlier than 12:00 Noon on the day before collection and
should be removed by seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. the day of collection. All garbage, rubbish, or recycling containers shall not be stored in
the front yards on non-trash days. All garbage, rubbish, or recycling containers shall be stored behind a privacy fence or out of view
from public areas.
Section Three: Repealer. That all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are expressly repealed.
Section Four: Savings Clause. That in the event any portion of this Ordinance is declared to be void, that such other parts or
remainder of this Ordinance shall not be adversely effected and shall otherwise remain effective and valid.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 41/348
Section Five: Adoption Clause. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its approval, adoption and
publication as required by law
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 42/348
ORDINANCE NUMBER _ 1908 _
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 7 (C) OF THE VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, A
HOME
RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
AYES: NAYS: ABSTAIN: ABSENT: PRESENT:
Blue
Gray
Horne
Holston
Raczek
Gonzalez
PASSED and APPROVED this _10th day of April__, 2019.
_______________________________
James Popp, Village Mayor
ATTEST: _______________________________
Doneshia Codjoe, Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 43/348
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1912__
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1878 PERTAINING TO THE USE OF GOLF CARTS WITHIN THE VILLAGE
MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE VILLAGE OF MONEE
THIS _ 24TH _ DAY OF _April________, 2019
Published in Pamphlet Form by Authority of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Monee,
Will County, Illinois,
This __24th __ day of _April__________, 2019
ORDINANCE NUMBER _ 1912_
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1878 PERTAINING TO THE USE OF GOLF CARTS WITHIN THE VILLAGE
MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
WHEREAS, on or about September 26, 2018, the corporate authorities adopted Ordinance No. 1878 relative to the use of golf carts;
and
WHEREAS, a provision set forth in the Ordinance established a non-refundable registration fee; and
WHEREAS, upon a further review of Ordinance 1878, it has been determined that an amendment should be enacted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 44/348
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Monee, a Home Rule Unit of Government
that Ordinance No. 1878 be amended as follows:
Section One. Preambles. That the preambles above set forth are incorporated herein as if set forth in full.
Section Two. Operation of Vehicle 3-12(c). That the current provision of 3-12(c) are hereby repealed and replaced with the
following language:
(c) Commencing on June 1, 2019 and every year thereafter, a non-refundable registration fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall
be paid by the owner at the time of registration.
Section Three. Repealer. That all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are expressly repealed.
Section Four. Savings Clause. That in the event any portion of this Ordinance is declared to be void, that such other parts or
remainder of this Ordinance shall not be adversely effected and shall otherwise remain effective and valid.
Section Five. Adoption Clause. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its approval, adoption and
publication as required by law.
ORDINANCE NUMBER _ 1912_
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1878 PERTAINING TO THE USE OF GOLF CARTS WITHIN THE VILLAGE
MONEE, A HOME RULE UNIT OF GOVERNMENT, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
AYES: NAYS: ABSTAIN: ABSENT: PRESENT:
Blue
Gray
Horne
Holston
Raczek
Gonzalez
PASSED and APPROVED this _24th day of April ____________, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 45/348
_______________________________
James Popp, Village Mayor
ATTEST: _______________________________
Michelle Powell, Village Deputy Clerk
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Monee, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 1878, passed September 26, 2018.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Ordinance No. 1042
AN ORDINANCE
ADOPTING THE
CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE VILLAGE OF
MONEE, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS.
BE IT ORDAINED by the president and board of trustees of the village of Monee, Will County, Illinois, as follows:
Section 1. From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the village code of the village of Monee, Illinois prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing
body of the village, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of the village as enacted by the president and board of
trustees.
Section 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement
service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the official village code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one
copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said
office is regularly open.
Section 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this official village code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and
the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruptions in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official village code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision
of the village code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the official village code.
Section 4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the village to be
misrepresented thereby.
Section 5. Any other ordinances or portion thereof which may be inconsistent or in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. If any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid, it shall not be construed to invalidate the other provisions of this ordinance.
Section 6. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately after its passage, approval and publication as required by law. This ordinance shall
be published in pamphlet form as provided by state statute.
PASSED and APPROVED this 14th day of April, 1999.
/s/
Village President
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 46/348
ATTEST:
/s/
Village Clerk
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the board of trustees, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of Monee. This code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the MONEE VILLAGE CODE and is hereby published by authority of the board of trustees and shall be
supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the village as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any
section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general
penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal documents. (1999 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this state
as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (1999 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this
code. (1999 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so
authorized by the board of trustees. The village clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the
office of the clerk. Any person having custody of a copy of this code shall make every effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent
ordinances passed. Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered or made available to such
person through the office of the village clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain
the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the village clerk when directed so to do by order of the board of trustees. (1999 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
A. Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are
included in this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections),
and excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and
ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating
streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer
or acceptance of real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances. (1999 Code)
B. Effect Of Repeal Of Ordinances: When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not
be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 47/348
not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal,
for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. (Ord. 564, 7-11-1984)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such matters, in
which case, this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1999 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right
accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the
proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment
announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B. Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing
provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any
penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance
or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this code. (1999 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code or any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference
therein is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference therein. The village board of
trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of
the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1999 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
A. In the construction of any existing or future provisions of this code, the rules and definitions set out in this chapter shall be observed, unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of trustees. The rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not
be applied to any section of this code which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or context
of such section may be repugnant thereto. All general provisions, terms and phrases contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the board of trustees may be fully carried out. (Ord. 564, 7-11-1984)
B. Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party
or person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the
opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included.
C. The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the village's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1999 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
BOARD, BOARD OF TRUSTEES, VILLAGE BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the board of trustees of the village of Monee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 48/348
CODE: The village code of the village of Monee.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held
shall not be counted. "Time" shall mean Central Standard Time, except when the state of Illinois is on daylight saving time and then it shall mean Central
Daylight Saving Time.
CORPORATE OR VILLAGE LIMITS: The legal boundaries of the village of Monee.
COUNTY: The county of Will, state of Illinois.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other village officer to do some act or
perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to
perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of
the village of Monee".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied to the other gender and to firms, partnerships,
corporations, and persons.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare
of inhabitants of the village, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever any officer is referred to by title, such as "village clerk", "chief of police", "president", etc., such references shall be construed as
if followed by the words "of the village of Monee".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by
the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well
as to individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the
consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SHALL: The word "shall" is mandatory.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
TENSE: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
VILLAGE: The village of Monee, county of Will, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by
such person's proper mark. (Ord. 564, 7-11-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 49/348
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1999 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY1:
A. Whenever in this Code or any ordinance of the Village any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or whenever in
this Code or Village ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision shall be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day any violation of any provisions of this Code or Village ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to
the monetary penalty, the Village shall have the right to issue notices/orders directing an entity to restrain, correct, and remove any work done in
violation of the Village's Building and/or Zoning Code. Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from filing a lawsuit, at law or in equity, to ensure
compliance with all applicable Village Code provisions. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-2003)
B. A penalty imposed for violation of this Code or a Village ordinance may include, or consist of, a requirement that the defendant perform some
reasonable public service work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public places or along public highways or the maintenance of
public facilities. (1999 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section. (1999 Code)
B. Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this Code or within Village ordinances, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one (1) recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so
as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (Ord. 564, 7-11-1984)
C. Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (1999 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the Village Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer
or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1999 Code)
1-4-4: VIOLATION CITATIONS:
A. Police Officer Issuing Citation:
1. Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a person without a warrant because of a violation of this Code or a Village ordinance in respect of
any of the following subjects:
a. Regulating and licensing dogs;
b. Regulating and licensing businesses;
c. Regulating and licensing vending machines and mechanical amusement devices;
d. Regulating the storing and disposal of garbage and rubbish;
e. Littering;
f. Regulating the burning of garbage and rubbish;
g. Regulating weed control;
said police officer may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in court, in the first instance, issue to such alleged violator a citation.
2. The citation shall:
a. Advise said person that he has violated a specified Village Code section or Village ordinance;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 50/348
b. Request him to make payment in an amount applicable to said alleged violation; and
c. Inform him that upon failure to comply, a complaint may be filed in the Circuit Court of Will County, charging him with such violation. (Ord. 1760,
8-24-2016)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-5-1: ELECTION; TERM; QUALIFICATIONS:
A. Village President: The Village President shall be elected for a term of four (4) years, and shall serve until his or her successor is elected and qualified,
as provided by statute.
B. Board Of Trustees: The Board of Trustees of the Village shall consist of six (6) members and shall be elected to office as provided by statute. The
Trustees shall serve four (4) year terms, which shall be staggered as provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-25-5.
C. Qualifications: A person is not eligible for the Office of Village President or a member of the Board of Trustees unless that person is a qualified elector
of the Village and has resided in the Village at least one year next preceding the election, as provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-10-5.
(1999 Code)
1-5-2: VILLAGE BOARD MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings:
1. The President and Board of Trustees shall meet in regular session for the purpose of conducting the business of the Village on the second and
fourth Wednesdays of each and every month, at the hour of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M., at the Village Hall.
2. In every case where the regular meeting, as scheduled above, falls on a legal holiday, the regular meeting shall be held on the day following such
holiday.
3. The Village Clerk is directed to post a public notice of the change in regular meeting dates as designated in this section, at the Village Hall, and to
furnish a copy of same to the "Monee Monitor". (Ord. 876, 10-11-1995)
B. Special Meetings:
1. Special meetings may be called by the President or by any three (3) members of the Board by written request or notice being filed with the Village
Clerk at least seventy two (72) hours prior to the time specified for such meeting.
2. At least forty eight (48) hours' written notice of such special meeting shall be given by the Clerk, which notice shall specify the time and purpose of
such meeting and shall be delivered to each member of the Board personally, if such member can be found, and if such member cannot be found,
then by leaving a copy of such notice at the home of such Board member in the presence of an adult member of the family of the Trustee. (Ord.
1122, 2-14-2001)
C. Open Meetings: All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, except executive sessions thereof, pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
120/1 et seq. (1999 Code)
D. Recording Of Closed Sessions:
1. A verbatim record shall be kept of all meetings of the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Monee or any subsidiary "public body" (as defined by
the Illinois Open Meetings Act1) of the Village which are closed to the public. The verbatim record shall be in the form of an audio or video
recording. In addition, minutes shall be kept of all closed meetings in the manner required by the Illinois Open Meetings Act. Minutes of closed
meetings shall be placed before the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Monee or the subsidiary body, as the case may be, for approval as to
form and content as soon as practicable following the closed meeting. The clerk, or his/her designee, shall securely maintain the verbatim
recordings and minutes of all closed sessions of the corporate authorities of the village of Monee and all subsidiary public bodies of the village.
2. At the beginning of each closed session, those present shall identify themselves by voice for the audio recording. If the meeting is videotaped, at
the beginning of the meeting, those present shall individually appear on camera and identify themselves by voice. The president or chair of the
subsidiary public body of the village shall also announce the times the meeting commences and ends at the appropriate points on the recordings.
3. At the first regular board meeting of the corporate authorities of the village of Monee in February and August, the agenda shall include the
following item: "Review of the minutes of all closed sessions that have not yet been released for public review, and determination of which, if any,
may then be released". Minutes or recordings shall not be released unless the corporate authorities of the village of Monee find that it is no longer
necessary to protect the public interest or the privacy of an individual by keeping them confidential. As to any minutes or recordings not released,
the corporate authorities of the village of Monee shall find that the "need for confidentiality still exists" as to those minutes or recordings. The
village attorney shall prepare a recommendation for the corporate authorities of the village of Monee regarding the release and nonrelease of the
respective recordings and minutes. Minutes of closed sessions shall be kept indefinitely.
4. At the first regular board meeting of the corporate authorities of the village of Monee in February and August, the agenda shall include the
following item: "Authorization for destruction of verbatim recordings of closed sessions". The village clerk shall present a list to the corporate
authorities of the village of Monee of the dates of closed sessions where:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 51/348
a. A verbatim recording exists;
b. The corporate authorities of the village of Monee have approved the minutes of the closed meetings as to form, regardless of whether the
minutes have been released for public review; and
c. There have been more than eighteen (18) months since the date of the closed meeting.
The corporate authorities of the village of Monee shall consider whether to authorize destruction of the verbatim recordings of those meetings.
When ordered by the corporate authorities of the village of Monee, the village clerk shall destroy the recordings of that closed meeting in a
suitable manner. (Ord. 1264, 11-12-2003)
1-5-3: OATH:
The president and board of trustees shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute before assuming the duties of such office. (1999 Code)
1-5-4: BOND OF PRESIDENT:
Before entering upon the duties of such office, the president shall execute a bond in the amount of not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), with
such sureties as may be required and approved by the board of trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of such office. The president's bond
shall be on file in the office of the village clerk. (1999 Code)
1-5-5: DUTIES:
A. President: The president, who shall be referred to as the mayor, is the chief executive officer of the village and shall perform any and all duties as
may be required of such official by ordinance or statute. The word mayor shall be used herein when the word president is referenced. (Ord. 1497, 6-
10-2009)
B. Board Of Trustees: The board of trustees shall be the legislative branch of the village government and shall perform such duties and have such
powers as may be authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-45-15. (1999 Code)
1-5-6: COMPENSATION:
A. Village President: The salary of the village president shall be and is hereby fixed as follows:
1. Salary: The annual sum of thirteen thousand dollars ($13,000.00) payable on a biweekly basis. (Ord. 1473, 2-27-2008)
2. No Additional Salary Allowed: No other salary shall be allowed the village president. (Ord. 1178, 3-13-2002)
B. Village Trustees: The salary of the Village Trustees shall be and is hereby fixed as follows:
1. Salary: The sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each meeting of the Board of Trustees attended, whether said meeting be regular, special or
adjourned. (Ord. 1474, 2-27-2008)
2. Failure To Attend Meetings: The Trustees shall be allowed to miss two (2) Village Board meetings, either regular, special or adjourned in each
calendar year for personal reasons and shall be paid for said meeting as if he or she attended same.
3. No Additional Salary Allowed: No other salary shall be allowed to any Trustee. (Ord. 1178, 3-13-2002)
4. Salary Paid Monthly: The salary of the Village Trustees shall be paid on a monthly basis. (Ord. 1366, 8-10-2005)
C. Reimbursement For Travel Expenses: This section shall not prohibit the President and Board of Trustees from establishing procedures for
reimbursement of the President and Trustees for the use of their personal automobiles or transportation vehicles in conducting official Village
business, which reimbursement may be established by a separate ordinance.
D. Effective Date: This section shall be in full force and effect from and after the next regular election of the Village to be held in April 2003, and shall
only apply to the Trustees elected at said regular election. The President and all other Trustees whose terms do not expire in 2003, and who remain
in office, or the President or Trustees appointed to replace such President or Trustees shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section and
ordinance 926, passed and approved September 25, 1996, until their term of office expires pursuant to statute. (Ord. 1178, 3-13-2002)
1-5-7: VOTING BY AUDIO/VIDEO MEANS:
Every ordinance or resolution shall be reduced to writing and presented to the Mayor and Board of Trustees before a vote is to be taken. Any meeting of
the Board of Trustees at which a quorum of the Board is physically present may be attended by a Trustee by means of audio or video means under the
following conditions:
A. The Trustee cannot physically be present at a Village Board meeting due to personal illness, employment or Village related matters, or family
emergencies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 52/348
B. The Trustee desiring to attend the Village Board meeting by audio or video means must notify the Village Clerk at least forty eight (48) hours in
advance of said meeting.
C. The Trustee's voice, on an audio conference, after being duly identified, shall be broadcasted to the public at the meeting.
D. The Trustee shall state the reason for not being physically present at the meeting.
E. The Village Board minutes shall reflect compliance with these rules and regulations. (Ord. 1810, 8-9-2017)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-6-1: DATE OF INAUGURATION OF NEWLY ELECTED OFFICIALS:
All newly elected officers shall be inaugurated, and their terms of office shall commence at the first regular or special meeting of the corporate
authorities in the month of May following the proclamation of results of the regular municipal election at which such officers were elected. (Ord. 550, 5-
11-1983)
1-6-2: REIMBURSEMENT TO ELECTED OFFICIALS FOR TRAVEL EXPENSES:
A. Reimbursement For Official Business: The elected officials of the village, namely the president, trustees and village clerk, shall be reimbursed by the
village for the use of their personal automobiles when same are used in official business of the village.
B. Maintain Written Records; Submit Request: Each village official seeking reimbursement shall maintain a written record of the use of their private
automobiles in village business, which shall include the date of use, village business conducted, and total mileage driven. Each village official shall
submit to the village clerk a written request for reimbursement of said expenses setting forth the information above referred to, on forms to be
supplied by the village clerk, on or before the first day of each month, and said request shall be submitted with and approved at the time of approval
of bills at the next regular meeting of the board of trustees.
C. Basis For Amount Of Reimbursement: The amount of reimbursement to such officials shall be based on the mileage driven with reimbursement to be
made at the rate per mile allowed for purposes of computation for automobile expenses under the internal revenue code of the United States Of
America for the tax year in which the request for reimbursement is made. (Ord. 488, 6-13-1979)
1-6-3: LAWSUITS AGAINST VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words shall be defined as follows:
CLAIM: Any and all losses, judgments, awards, costs, legal defense fees and monetary damages.
EMPLOYEE: Any person employed by the village, expressed or implied, over which supervision is maintained.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL: Any and all appointed and elected officials including, but not limited to, trustees, zoning board members, persons operating in or
with the business office of the village.
B. Defense Of Public Officials And Employees: The village agrees to completely defend any public official or employee against any and all claims which
may arise during the scope of their respective duty as delineated in this code.
C. Payment Of Claims: The village agrees to pay claims which arise against any public official or employee with respect to actions taken during the
scope of their respective duties.
D. Nonpayment: The village shall not be obligated or liable to defend a public official or employee or pay a claim if the cause of action was based upon
any of the following:
1. A finding of fact of deliberate fraud, deceit, dishonesty by a public official or employee has been committed in relation to the underlying cause of
action.
2. That a violation of this code, village policy or a criminal provision of state or federal law pertaining to the underlying cause of action has been
proven.
3. That insurance coverage is available via another valid insurance policy. (Ord. 1481, 6-11-2008)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE CLERK
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 53/348
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1891 - VILLAGE CLERK. Go to new ordinance.
1-6A-1: APPOINTMENT:
The village clerk shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The village clerk must be a qualified
elector of the village of Monee. (Ord. 1316, 10-13-2004)
1-6A-2: BOND REQUIRED:
The village clerk shall, before entering office, file with the village treasurer a surety bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned
upon the faithful discharge of the duties of the office of clerk and the prompt payment of all monies that may come into the clerk's hands by virtue of the
office. Said bond shall be approved by the president and board of trustees and the premiums shall be paid for by the village. (Ord. 523, 11-12-1980)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1891 - VILLAGE CLERK. Go to new ordinance.
1-6A-3: COMPENSATION:
The salary of the village clerk shall be the sum of two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00), plus such other additional compensation, per fiscal
year of the village, said sum to be paid in installments as authorized by the president and the village board. (Ord. 523, 11-12-1980; amd. 1999 Code)
1-6A-4: DUTIES AND POWERS:
A. Generally: The village clerk shall have all of the powers, authority, duties and obligations imposed and conferred upon that office by the statutes of
the state and the ordinances of the village. In addition thereto or by way of enumeration thereof, the clerk shall have the following duties and
authorities:
1. Keeper Of Seal, Documents: To be the keeper of the corporate seal and all ordinances, resolutions and other official documents of the village, with
the exception of such documents over which the control of same has been given to other village officers. Copies of all documents duly filed in the
clerk's office, including official minutes of village board meetings and other records, certified by the clerk under the corporate seal, shall be
evidence in all court proceedings in like manner as if the originals were produced.
2. Attend Meetings: To attend all regular and special village board meetings.
3. Report And Respond To Correspondence: To report all correspondence directed to the village or to the clerk's office to the president and board of
trustees and to answer any such correspondence or initiate correspondence as directed by the president and board of trustees.
4. Publication And Posting Of Notices: To arrange for the publication or posting of all public notices required of the village.
5. Issue Liquor Licenses: To issue liquor licenses as directed by the village president as liquor commissioner.
6. Issue Vending Licenses: To be in charge of issuance of vending licenses pursuant to village ordinance.
7. Issue Commission Cards: To prepare and issue commission cards for appointed village officials as directed by the president and board of trustees.
8. Conduct Regular Village Elections: To take all action required by statute or as directed by the president and board of trustees in conducting the
regular village elections or any special elections.
9. Publication Of Ordinances: The clerk shall arrange for the publication, posting or publication in pamphlet form of any ordinances, resolutions or
reports of the village which require publication by state statute.
B. Duties Which May Be Delegated: In addition to the above duties and powers, the village clerk shall have the following additional duties and
authorities; provided, however, that same may be delegated to and performed by clerical assistants or other authorized individuals with the approval
of the village board and under the supervision and direction of the village clerk:
1. Record Board Meeting Minutes: To record all minutes of regular and special board meetings and distribute copies thereof to the president and
board of trustees prior to the next regular or special meeting.
2. List Bills For Board Approval: To receive all bills and invoices directed to the village and prepare an itemized listing of all bills prior to each regular
meeting, for approval by the president and board of trustees.
3. Payroll Computation: To compute all payroll for village employees and officials, including computation of all federal, state and IMRF deductions
and shall furnish such information to the village treasurer for issuance of drafts for payment of same.
4. Prepare And File Federal And State Reports: To prepare and file all necessary reports for federal and state employee deductions and IMRF
reports.
5. Obtain Licenses, Certificates Or Stickers: To obtain necessary vehicle stickers, motorcycle plates, dog tags and other licenses, certificates or
stickers as needed.
6. Sale Of Stickers, Plates And Tags: To be in charge of the sale of vehicle stickers, motorcycle plates and dog tags as required by ordinance.
7. Send Liquor License Renewal Notices: To send out liquor license renewal notices to present liquor license holders of the village, as directed by
the village president as liquor commissioner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 54/348
8. Send Vending License Renewal Notices: To send out notices of vending license renewals to existing license holders of the village.
9. Prepare Court Rental Statements: To prepare and be responsible for the preparation and mailing of statements for court rental for the circuit court
branch utilizing the village hall.
10. Answer Inquiries: To be available to answer inquiries directed to the village or the village clerk's office at reasonable times during the week and
direct any inquiries to the proper officials of the village.
C. Listing Of Duties And Authorities Not Limiting: The above itemized listing of duties and authorities shall not limit the duties and authorities granted to
the village clerk by the statutes of the state or present or future ordinances of the village. (Ord. 523, 11-12-1980)
1-6A-5: REPORTS:
The village clerk shall make such reports regarding the operation of the clerk's office as required by state statute or village ordinance. (Ord. 523, 11-12-
1980)
1-6A-6: DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK:
A. Position Of Deputy Village Clerk: The position of deputy village clerk is hereby established. The village president, with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees, shall appoint an individual to this position on an annual basis.
B. Duties Of Deputy Village Clerk: The deputy village clerk shall perform all the duties and responsibilities of the village clerk at such time or times when
the village clerk is absent from his/her office. The deputy village clerk may execute all documents required by law to be executed by the village clerk
and may affix the seal of the village clerk wherever required. In signing any document, a deputy village clerk shall sign the name of the village clerk
followed with the word "By" and the village deputy clerk's own name and the words "Deputy Clerk".
C. Compensation: The compensation of the deputy village clerk shall be determined by the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 1216, 12-11-2002)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE COLLECTOR
1-6B-1: CREATION OF OFFICE AND APPOINTMENT:
The office of village collector is hereby created, with the village collector to be appointed by the village president, along with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees. The village collector shall be a qualified elector of the village of Monee. (Ord. 1317, 10-13-2004)
1-6B-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the village collector to collect and receive all monies due to the village on or for special assessments, special taxes, licenses and
other fees and charges established by statute or ordinance, that are not to be paid by statute or ordinance directly to the village treasurer, and to keep
such records pertaining to such collections as may be required by statute or ordinance. The village collector shall be responsible for collection of fees or
charges for water service for the village and for garbage collection for the village as provided by ordinance. (Ord. 522, 11-12-1980)
1-6B-3: REPORTS:
The village collector shall make such reports regarding delinquent special assessments, special taxes, licenses, fees and water and garbage collection
fees as required by statute or ordinance and shall make a monthly report to the village board of trustees, showing what money has been received and
the source thereof. The village collector shall also make an annual report, during the last month of the fiscal year, showing all the activities of his or her
office. (Ord. 522, 11-12-1980)
1-6B-4: COMPENSATION:
The annual salary of the village collector shall be as set by the annual appropriation ordinance, unless specifically set by other ordinance. (Ord. 522, 11-
12-1980)
ARTICLE C. BUILDING INSPECTOR
1-6C-1: APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the position of building inspector who shall be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
(Ord. 419, 6-14-1972; amd. 1999 Code)
1-6C-2: DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 55/348
It shall be the duty of the building inspector, hereafter called "inspector", to see to the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to building or
zoning and to inspect all buildings or structures being erected or altered as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the village
ordinances. (Ord. 419, 6-14-1972)
1-6C-3: EX OFFICIO POSITIONS:
A. Ex Officio Plumbing Inspector: The inspector shall act as ex officio plumbing inspector, unless separate appointment is made to that position, and
shall have all the powers and perform all the duties connected with that office.
B. Ex Officio Electrical Inspector: The inspector shall act as ex officio electrical inspector, unless a separate appointment is made to that position, and
shall have all the powers and perform all the duties connected with that office. (Ord. 419, 6-14-1972)
1-6C-4: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Authority To Issue Order: The inspector shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction, alteration or repair of buildings in the village
when such work is being done in violation of any provision of any ordinance relating thereto, or in violation of the zoning ordinance, title 11 of this
code. (Ord. 419, 6-14-1972)
B. Written Permission To Resume Work: Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such an order except on the written permission of the
inspector; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within one hour. Such written stop order may be
served by any village officer or employee. (Ord. 419, 6-14-1972; amd. 1999 Code)
1-6C-5: ENTRY POWERS:
The inspector shall have the power to make or cause to be made an entry into any building or premises where the work of altering, repairing or
constructing any building or structure is going on, for the purpose of making inspections, at any reasonable hour of the day. (Ord. 419, 6-14-1972)
1-6C-6: MONTHLY REPORT:
The inspector shall make a monthly report of his inspections to the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 419, 6-14-1972; amd. 1999 Code)
1-6C-7: VIOLATION OF STOP ORDER; PENALTY:
Any person who shall continue work in violation of a stop order of the inspector shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title for
each day on which any work in violation of such stop order is done. (Ord. 419, 6-14-1972; amd. 1999 Code)
ARTICLE D. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
1-6D-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of village administrator is hereby created subject to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1082, 3-8-2000)
1-6D-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The village administrator shall be chosen by the village president and board of trustees solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications
with special reference to specific professional education for, actual experience in, and knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the administration of
local government and to the duties of the office as specified below. The appointment shall be made without consideration to the candidates' race, sex,
politics, or religious beliefs. The person appointed to this office need not be a resident of the village or of the state at the time of appointment. Neither
the village president nor any member of the village board shall receive such appointment during their term of office or within two (2) years after the
expiration of the term. (Ord. 1082, 3-8-2000)
1-6D-3: APPOINTMENT AND RELATIONSHIP TO ELECTED OFFICIALS:
The village administrator shall be appointed on an annual basis by the village president, with the consent of the board of trustees. The village
administrator shall, in all cases, be subject to the authority and direction of the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. 1359, 7-13-2005)
1-6D-4: COMPENSATION AND TERMS OF APPOINTMENT:
The rate of compensation of the village administrator shall be set by the village board and may be adjusted from time to time as the board deems
appropriate. Subject to the terms and conditions of state law and this article, the village board and the administrator may enter into an employment
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 56/348
contract which specifies in writing the level of compensation of the administrator, fringe benefits including levels of support for the administrator's
continuing professional education, agreements for separation pay upon termination of the administrator's employment, other appropriate agreements
describing the working relationship between the administrator and elected officials, and board's performance expectations for the administrator. This
agreement may be reviewed and revised by mutual agreement of the parties at periodic intervals of not more than one year's duration. (Ord. 1082, 3-8-
2000)
1-6D-5: SUPERVISION OR REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The village administrator shall be subject at all times to the suspension or removal from office at any regular or special meeting of the village board, by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the president and board of trustees, then holding office. (Ord. 1082, 3-8-2000)
1-6D-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village administrator shall be responsible to the mayor and board of trustees for the proper administration of all affairs as the village administrator. In
discharging this responsibility, the village administrator shall: (Ord. 1588, 2-8-2012)
A. Direct, supervise, and coordinate the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the village, except as otherwise provided by law;
(Ord. 1082, 3-8-2000)
B. (Rep. by Ord. 1359, 7-13-2005)
C. Attend all village board meetings. The village administrator shall have the right to take part in all discussions, but shall not vote;
D. Provide for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the village;
E. Serve as village budget officer and prepare and submit to the village board, by the date set by the board, a recommended annual budget for village
operations and a recommended capital program. When the annual budget or capital program has been approved by the village board, the village
administrator shall be responsible for the administration of said budget or capital program;
F. Submit to the village board and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the village as of the end
of each fiscal year;
G. Make such other reports as the village board may require concerning the operations of village departments, offices, and agencies;
H. Keep the village board fully advised as to the present financial condition and future needs of the village;
I. Advise the village board on pending decisions of public policy and recommend to the board the adoption of such measures as the administrator may
deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety, or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services; (Ord. 1082, 3-8-
2000)
J. Be responsible for procurement of commodities and services for all village departments, offices, and agencies, and promulgate purchasing rules
which shall be followed by employees in the procurement of goods and services, and for that purpose, he or she is authorized to make expenditures
to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or less, without preliminary authorization by the board of trustees; however, all expenditures and payments,
regardless of amount, shall be subject to the confirmation or approval of the board of trustees and to the limitations imposed by the adoption of a
budget or special appropriation; (Ord. 1359, 7-13-2005)
K. Propose to the village board such personnel rules and regulations as the administrator deems necessary to manage the personnel policies of the
village; (Ord. 1082, 3-8-2000)
L. Be responsible for the conduct and shall fully inform the village president and board of trustees of all collective bargaining processes. Upon the
president and board of trustees approving a collective bargaining agreement, the village administrator shall be responsible for the implementation of
said agreement; (Ord. 1359, 7-13-2005)
M. Provide staff support services for the village president and members of the board of trustees;
N. Perform such other duties as may be specified by law or village ordinance or as may from time to time be requested by the village board. (Ord. 1082,
3-8-2000)
O. Upon receipt of a zoning petition request, the village administrator shall have the authority to either establish a public hearing date or forward the
same directly to the zoning board of appeals for processing. In the event the village administrator establishes a public hearing date, he or she shall
notify the zoning board of appeals chairman and its respective members. (Ord. 1588, 2-8-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 57/348
1-6D-7: BOND:
The village administrator shall furnish a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to be approved by the village board. The bond
shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of the office. The premium for the bond shall be paid by the village. (Ord. 1082, 3-8-2000)
1-6D-8: ACTING ADMINISTRATOR:
If, because of a temporary absence, disability, or illness, the village administrator is unable to carry out the functions of this office, the village president
and committees will carry out the duties of the administrator during the administrator's absence. (Ord. 1201, 8-14-2002)
1-6D-9: MATTERS DIRECTED TO ADMINISTRATOR'S ATTENTION:
Except as provided for by law and the provisions of this code, no citizen or elected officer shall dictate to the village administrator or the administrator's
subordinates the appointment or removal of any person to any office within the village of Monee. (Ord. 1359, 7-13-2005)
1-6D-10: AUTHORITY OF OTHER OFFICERS:
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to diminish or detract from the statutory powers and authority of the village's elected officials. (Ord. 1082, 3-8-
2000)
ARTICLE E. VILLAGE TREASURER
1-6E-1: APPOINTMENT:
The village treasurer shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The village treasurer must be a
qualified elector of the village of Monee. (Ord. 1318, 10-13-2004)
1-6E-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of such office, the treasurer shall execute a bond in the amount of not less than seventy five thousand dollars
($75,000.00), with such sureties as may be required and approved by the board of trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of such office.
The treasurer's bond shall be on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 1560, 5-25-2011)
1-6E-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the village treasurer from time to time to take under his charge and keep a true and correct account of all money belonging to the
village, stating from whom and on what account received, and he shall give receipts therefor to the persons from whom he may receive the same, one of
which receipts the person to whom the treasurer may give them shall be delivered to the village clerk in order that the treasurer may be charged by the
village clerk with the amount thereof, and in no case shall any officer of the village or any other person be released from the responsibility to the village
for any money he may at any time have in his possession belonging to the village until he shall deliver to the village clerk the treasurer's receipt therefor.
(Ord. 251, 3-20-1953)
1-6E-4: REPORTING:
The treasurer shall semiannually from time of taking office, or more often if required, make a report to the village board of the amount of money received
by him, paid out and on hand, and shall, at the regular meeting in April of each year, make a full and complete report of his doings during the preceding
year to the village board under oath, stating the amount of money received and from whom and for what purpose received, and showing in detail all
monies paid out, which annual report the clerk shall cause to be published at once in some newspaper published or in general circulation in the village.
(Ord. 251, 3-20-1953)
ARTICLE F. BUILDING DEPARTMENT COMMISSIONER
1-6F-1: APPOINTMENT:
The position of Building Department Commissioner is hereby created. Said Commissioner shall be appointed each year by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees for a period of one year commencing on May 1 and expiring on April 30. (Ord. 1799, 6-14-2017)
1-6F-2: DUTIES:
The Building Department Commissioner shall be responsible to perform any and all duties as so outlined in the job description and any amendments
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 58/348
made thereto which include but are not limited to the supervision of the Building Department and enforcing all applicable Building Code rules and
regulations. The Building Department Commissioner shall work under the direction of the Village Administrator. (Ord. 1799, 6-14-2017)
1-6F-3: TERM OF APPOINTMENT:
The term of the Building Department Commissioner shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1649, 7-24-2013)
1-6F-4: COMPENSATION:
The salary of the Building Department Commissioner shall be established annually by the Village in its annual budget ordinance. (Ord. 1649, 7-24-2013)
Chapter 7
VILLAGE FINANCES
1-7-1: INTEREST ON BONDS:
Pursuant to the Local Government Debt Reform Act1, the Village hereby makes statute section 350/17 of said Act, applicable to all "bonds" as defined in
section 350/3(d) of said Act, authorized or issued by or on behalf of the Village prior to the effective date of the Local Government Debt Reform Act.
(Ord. 677, 11-8-1989)
1-7-2: RETURNED CHECK FEE:
A. Fee Assessed: The person issuing a check to the Village for payment of Village services, fines, penalties or other payment of monies due to the
Village which, upon being submitted to the institution upon which such check is drawn, is returned by the institution due to insufficient funds, closed
account, or is dishonored for any other reason, shall be assessed a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each check so returned, which fee shall be
added to the amount of any monies due to the Village.
B. Collection Of Fee Amount: The Village Clerk is authorized to assess and collect said fee, and to deduct said fee first from any monies received by the
maker of such check, prior to application of payments to the prior existing obligation to the Village. (Ord. 762, 6-10-1992)
1-7-3: LATE FEES:
A late fee of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month is hereby assessed to any outstanding statement of account which is not paid in any manner.
(Ord. 1838, 4-11-2018)
Chapter 8
ETHICS
1-8-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
A. The regulations of sections 5-151 and article 102 of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq.
(hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the village
of Monee to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
B. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the village of Monee, is
hereby prohibited.
C. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the village of Monee under the act, is hereby prohibited.
D. The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by any officer or employee of the village of Monee, is hereby prohibited.
E. For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
F. The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar violations
of the act.
G. This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village of Monee officers
and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this
section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 59/348
H. Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and shall
be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the corporate
authorities of the village of Monee.
I. If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois supreme
court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village of Monee if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court.
J. If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not address
the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village
of Monee. (Ord. 1298, 5-12-2004)
Chapter 9
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
1-9-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes. (Ord.
1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's administrator or his or her designee, is charged with the administration and collection of the locally
imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local
tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The
exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village, not an
agency or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village
other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of
such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered
tax to the village.
VILLAGE: The village of Monee, Will County, Illinois. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator
as follows:
A. First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
B. Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 60/348
1-9-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second to
the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to
have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer
paid the taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made.
The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as
applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the
taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from
the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than
thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days,
approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 61/348
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of
entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the
English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax collector
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount
of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental
entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-9: APPEAL:
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill,
a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
B. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition
for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice
to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless
the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a
final bill due and owing without further notice.
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due
date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45)
day period. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-10: HEARING:
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 1-9-9 of this chapter, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing.
The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
A. Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
twelve percent (12%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 62/348
B. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty
of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing
a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax
administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village, the
tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet
shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village clerk's office.
(Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-17: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the
local tax administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 63/348
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
1-9-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 1119, 1-10-2001)
Chapter 10
FUEL SALES TAX
1-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section.
DEALER: Every person engaged in the business of selling motor fuel, and who has an established place of business for such purposes within the
corporate limits of the Village of Monee.
MOTOR FUEL: All volatile and inflammable liquids produced, blended or compounded for the purpose of, or which are suitable or practicable for,
operating motor vehicles.
PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether
mutual, cooperative fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as
applied to associations shall mean the owners or part owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
RETAIL: The sale for any good and valuable consideration to a person for use as a consumer. (Ord. 1855, 5-23-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
1-10-2: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is hereby imposed and shall immediately accrue and be collected a tax upon the privilege of purchasing motor fuel at retail in the Village of
Monee at the rate of three cents ($0.03) per gallon. In the event motor fuel is dispensed by a unit of measure other than the U.S. gallon, then the tax
shall be imposed at the same ratio of three cents ($0.03) as the unit of measure is to the U.S. gallon. (Ord. 1855, 5-23-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
1-10-3: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the retail purchaser. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and
all other taxes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose the tax upon the occupation of selling motor fuel. It shall be the duty of every dealer
or motor fuel retailer to secure said tax from each retail purchaser and remit to the Village of Monee said tax under rules and regulations prescribed by
the Village and as otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1855, 5-23-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
1-10-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
Every dealer or motor fuel retailer in the Village of Monee shall have the duty to collect the Motor Fuel Tax from each retail purchaser at the time the
dealer collects payment for the motor fuel. (Ord. 1855, 5-23-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
1-10-5: REMITTAL OF TAX; FILING OF RETURN:
By the 20th day of the month, every dealer or motor fuel retailer in the Village of Monee shall file a report of sale of motor fuel in the previous month to
the Village's Finance Director on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the Village together with the appropriate tax payment. Every taxpayer
shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents. All such books and records shall at all times during business hours be
subject to and available for inspection by the Village of Monee. The Village of Monee shall have the right to audit the bookkeeping journal of any dealer
or motor fuel retailer and shall have the right to review the records for the last three (3) years prior to the audit. If upon the audit, good cause is
established, the Village shall have the right to extend the audit for an additional three (3) year timeframe. (Ord. 1855, 5-23-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
1-10-6: PENALTIES:
A. If for any reason any tax return is not filed when due, a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the tax which would be due shall be assessed.
B. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the tax which is due shall be assessed.
C. Interest of 1.5 percent per month or fraction thereof will also be assessed on the unpaid tax.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 64/348
D. The Village may bring an action to enforce this chapter and collect any unpaid tax or penalty and interest in any court of competent jurisdiction. Each
failure to collect the tax imposed hereby and each failure to pay such tax over to the Village shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 1855, 5-23-
2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
1-10-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to school districts or units of local government within the corporate limits of the Village of Monee. (Ord.
1855, 5-23-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
Chapter 11
PURCHASING
1-11-1: COMPETITIVE BIDDING; PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS:
Public works projects exceeding twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) which are not to be funded in whole or in part by special assessment shall be
constructed either: a) by a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertisement except that any such contract may be entered into by the
proper Village officers without advertising if so authorized by two-thirds (2/3) of the Village Trustees holding office; or b) in the following manner, if
authorized by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the Aldermen or Trustees then holding office: the Commissioner of Public Works or other proper officers to
be designated by ordinance, shall superintend and cause to be carried out the construction of the work or other public improvement and shall employ
exclusively for the performance of all manual labor thereon, laborers and artisans whom the Municipality shall pay by the day or hour; and all material of
the value of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and upward used in the construction of the work or other public improvement, shall be purchased
by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder. The competitive bidding requirements set forth herein shall not be applicable to any contracts entered
into with the Federal government or any agency thereof. (Ord. 1830, 2-14-2018)
1-11-2: COMPETITIVE BIDDING; MACHINERY AND VEHICLES:
Any and all purchases of equipment, vehicles, supplies or machinery exceeding a value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be let to the lowest
responsible bidder after advertisement except that any such contract may be entered into by the proper Village officials without advertising if so
authorized by two-thirds (2/3) of the Village Trustees then holding office. These bid requirements shall not apply to purchases made through the State of
Illinois or other governmental program purchase plan. (Ord. 1381, 1-25-2006)
1-11-3: ADVERTISEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
All proposals to award purchase orders or public work contracts exceeding the amount as described herein shall be published once at least ten (10)
days in advance of the date announced for receiving of bids in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the Village. Advertisements for bids shall
describe the character of the proposed contract in sufficient detail and shall state the date, time and place assigned for the opening of bids. (Ord. 1381,
1-25-2006)
1-11-4: REJECTION OF BIDS:
Any and all bids received in response to an advertisement may be rejected by the Village Board if the bidder is not deemed responsible or the character
or quality of the services, supplies, material or equipment does not conform to the bid requirements. (Ord. 1381, 1-25-2006)
1-11-5: ASSIGNMENT OF CONTRACTS:
No contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder shall be assignable or sublet by the successful bidder without the written consent of the Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 1381, 1-25-2006)
Chapter 12
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER INSPECTION
1-12-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, "real estate" shall mean single family residences, apartment buildings, multi-family dwellings, condominiums,
townhouses, commercial and industrial structures. (Ord. 1774, 12-14-2016)
1-12-2: INSPECTION OF REAL ESTATE:
The following rules and regulations shall apply to the transfer of real estate within the Village of Monee:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 65/348
A. Notice Of Transfer: Whenever an owner of real estate within the Village proposes to engage in the transfer of real estate, such owner shall provide
the Village with a notice of transfer form. Said form shall authorize the Village Building Department official to conduct an inspection of the real estate
to insure compliance with any and all pertinent Building and Zoning Code regulations of the Village.
B. Inspection Timetable: Upon the filing of a notice of transfer, the Village will schedule a compliance inspection within fourteen (14) days.
C. Refusal To Allow Inspection: If the owner or occupant does not consent to the inspection, the Village Building Department officials may appear before
any judge in the Circuit Court of Will County and seek an administrative search warrant to allow an inspection. The application for said search
warrant shall be made ten (10) days after the owner's refusal to allow the inspection. The application for the warrant shall specify the basis upon
which the warrant is being sought and will be limited to a determination that there are violations of the Code provisions set forth herein and whether
there is compliance with the current Zoning Code. The court may consider any of the following factors:
1. Eyewitness account of violation;
2. Citizen complaints;
3. Tenant complaints;
4. Plain view violations;
5. Violations apparent from Village records;
6. Property deterioration;
7. Age of property;
8. Nature of alleged violation;
9. Condition of similar properties in the area; and
10. Documented violations on similar properties in the area.
D. Uninspected Property: In the event the owner refuses to consent to the inspection and a warrant was not obtained, the Building Department official
shall notify the Village Clerk that the real property is uninspected and the purchaser shall be so notified.
E. Inspection Findings: Within three (3) business days after the inspection being completed by the Building Department official, a written notice of
violations or repairs, if any, shall be issued. Said notice shall include what actions are necessary to bring the real estate into compliance with this
Code. In the event a zoning violation has been determined, a notice shall be issued as to what steps are necessary to bring the real estate into
compliance with the appropriate zoning rules. In the event the real estate owner disputes the findings of the inspection report, said owner may file a
request for administrative review to be conducted by the Independent Administrative Hearing Office. Said hearing shall take place within five (5)
business days from the date of the request. The Hearing Officer shall issue a final determination on the matter.
F. Follow-Up Repair: Upon completion of the repairs as noted in the violation, the Building Department official shall reinspect the real estate. If it is
determined that the follow-up repairs addressed the violations, a certificate of completion shall be issued.
G. Conditional Certificate Of Compliance: A real estate owner who has not completed all the required repairs may still transfer ownership subject to the
following conditions:
1. The buyer assignee or successor in title or transferee ("buyer") has entered into an agreement with the Village whereby the buyer agrees to bring
the real property into full compliance with all applicable Building Code requirements and address all cited violations within a period not to exceed
one hundred twenty (120) days after the closing of the transaction.
2. If the buyer enters into such an agreement, a Conditional Certificate of Compliance will issue and shall terminate on the one hundred twenty first
day after closing. The buyer shall execute an affidavit acknowledging that the repair must be completed in a timely fashion and that other violations
could be discovered after work has commenced. A Certificate of Completion shall be issued upon the repairs being completed in accordance with
the terms of this Code.
3. In the event the buyer fails to complete the necessary repairs in a timely fashion, the Building Department official is authorized to issue appropriate
citations which will be heard through the Village administrative hearing process.
4. If the repairs are not completed in a timely fashion, citations may be issued under this chapter with fines being not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) per day nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day for each day the violation continues to exist.
H. No Warranty/Guaranty: That in issuing a Certificate of Compliance or a Conditional Certificate of Compliance, the Village is not making any
warranties, guarantees or representation of any kind in any manner as to the condition of the real estate.
I. Payment Of Water Bill, Sewer Charges And Garbage Fee: The owner of the real estate must pay any and all water bills, sewer charges and garbage
fees prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Completion. In the event the owner disputes such obligations, the Village Clerk shall provide the owner a
due process hearing notification and a hearing shall be so scheduled if requested by the owner. The owner may pay the bill "under protest" and may
pursue any remedies available at law for an overcharge. (Ord. 1774, 12-14-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 66/348
Chapter 13
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
1-13-1: SUMMARY AND PURPOSE:
This policy governing access to public records ("policy") is established to implement the provisions of the freedom of information act, 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 140/1 et seq., as amended (the "FOIA"). Recent amendments to the FOIA will go into effect as of January 1, 2010. The village of Monee (the
"village") supports the FOIA and the policy of providing public access to public records in its possession while also protecting information exempt from
disclosure under the FOIA. (Ord. 1527, 3-10-2010)
1-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this policy shall have the same meaning as set forth in the FOIA. (Ord. 1527, 3-10-2010)
1-13-3: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICERS:
The village clerk, or any individual acting in such official capacity as designated by the village clerk, shall be the chief FOIA officer for the village. As
chief FOIA officer for the village, the village clerk shall be responsible for the performance of those duties required of an FOIA officer pursuant to the
FOIA, including, but not limited to, maintaining the village's compliance with all statutory obligations of the FOIA. The village clerk shall also be
empowered to designate additional FOIA officers for other divisions or departments within the village, including, but not limited to, the village's police
department, village's building department, village's fire department and village's water department. All FOIA officers for the village shall be empowered
to consult with the village's legal counsel for the purpose of compliance with issues related to the FOIA. All FOIA officers shall successfully complete an
annual training program, and any other training required pursuant to the FOIA.
In compliance with the FOIA, the village clerk, in his/her capacity as chief FOIA officer for the village, shall make and maintain: a) a directory of the
village's FOIA officer(s); b) a list of the address(es) where requests for public records should be directed; and c) a list of the fees, if any, charged by the
village for inspection and photocopying of public documents requested pursuant to the FOIA.
All requests received by the village for inspection and photocopying of public records shall be immediately forwarded to the chief FOIA officer. In
compliance with the FOIA, the village clerk, in his/her capacity as chief FOIA officer, or any other FOIA officer so designated by the chief FOIA officer,
shall upon receipt of an FOIA request: a) note the date the village received the written request; b) compute the day on which the period for response to
the request will expire and make a notation of that date on the written request; c) maintain an electronic or paper copy of the request including all
documents submitted with the request until the request has been complied with or denied; and d) create a file for the retention of the original request, a
copy of the response, a record of written communications with the requester and a copy of other communications. (Ord. 1527, 3-10-2010)
1-13-4: PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING PUBLIC RECORDS:
Any request for public records in accordance with the FOIA and this policy, shall be submitted to the chief FOIA officer, or any other FOIA officer so
designated. All requests for police department information shall be submitted to the following address:
Office Of The Chief Of Police
Monee Police Department
5357 W. Main Street
Monee, IL 60449
Requests for public records other than police department information shall be submitted to the following address:
Office Of The Village Clerk
Village Of Monee
5130 W. Court Street
Monee, IL 60449
(Ord. 1527, 3-10-2010)
1-13-5: FORM AND CONTENT OF REQUESTS:
Requests for public records made in accordance with the FOIA and this policy shall be made in writing. Such requests may be submitted, but are not
required to be submitted, on an FOIA request form maintained by the village. The village's FOIA request forms shall be available at the village hall
located at 5130 W. Court Street, Monee, IL 60449.
Requests for public records made in accordance with the FOIA and this policy shall include the following information:
A. The requester's full name, address and phone number;
B. A description of the public records sought; and
C. Whether the request is for the inspection of public records, copies of public records, or both. (Ord. 1527, 3-10-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 67/348
1-13-6: RESPONSE TO REQUEST FOR PUBLIC RECORDS:
A. Timeliness Of Response: Except for requests made for a commercial purpose which shall be responded to within twenty one (21) working days after
receipt of the request, the village shall respond to other written requests for public records within five (5) business days after receipt of the request,
unless the time for response to the request is properly extended pursuant to the FOIA. The time for response to such a request for public records
may be extended for not more than five (5) business days from the original due date for any of the reasons set forth in section 3(e) of the FOIA.
When additional time is required, the village shall, within five (5) business days of receipt of the request, notify the requester of the reasons for the
extension and date by which the response will be forthcoming. The time for response to any request for public records may also be extended by
written agreement of the requester and the village. Failure to timely respond to a request for public records or properly extend the time for such
response shall be considered a denial of the request.
B. Form Of Response: The village shall respond to requests for public records by: 1) approving the request; 2) approving the request in part and
denying the request in part; or 3) denying the request. Upon approval of a request for public records, the village shall immediately provide the
requested materials, give notice that the materials shall be made available upon payment of applicable reproduction costs if any, or give notice of the
time and place for inspection of the records. Denial in whole or part of a request for public records shall be made to the requester in writing and shall
set forth the reasons for the denial, including a detailed factual basis for the application of any exemption claimed by the village, a citation to
supporting legal authority, and the name, title or position of each person responsible for the denial. Each notice of denial shall also inform the
requester of his/her right to review by the office of the attorney general public access counselor, shall provide the address and phone number of the
public access counselor, and shall inform the requester of his/her right to judicial review.
If the reason set forth for the denial of the request is that the records are exempt under subsection (1)(c) or (1)(f) of section 7 of the FOIA, the village
shall, within the time periods provided for responding to a request, provide written notice to the requester and the attorney general's public access
counselor of its intent to deny the request in whole or in part. The notice shall include: 1) a copy of the request for access to records; 2) the proposed
response from the village; and 3) a detailed summary of the village's basis for asserting the exemption.
C. Availability Of Records: The production of records or their inspection, pursuant to a proper request for public records, shall occur Monday through
Friday, between nine thirty o'clock (9:30) A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M., at the village hall, 5130 W. Court Street, Monee, Illinois, or for police
records at the Monee police department, 5357 W. Main Street, Monee, Illinois. An employee of the village shall be present during the inspection of all
public records.
D. Request For Records In Electronic Format: Public records requested in an electronic format shall be produced in the electronic format specified by
the requester, if feasible. If not feasible, the village shall produce the public records in the format in which the records are maintained by the village,
or in a paper format at the option of the requester. (Ord. 1527, 3-10-2010)
1-13-7: FEES FOR RECORDS:
No fees shall be charged for the first fifty (50) pages of black and white, letter or legal sized copies of timely produced requested records. No fees shall
be charged if the village fails to timely respond to a public record request, but thereafter provides the requester with copies of the requested documents.
Fees for black and white copies in excess of fifty (50) pages, color copies, certification and other documents shall be as follows:
Copies (black and white) per side:
81/2 x 11 $0.10
81/2 x 14 0.15
11 x 17 0.25
Copies (color) per side:
81/2 x 11 0.25
81/2 x 14 0.30
11 x 17 0.35
Certification per document 1.00
Plats and maps larger than 11 x 17 Actual cost of outsourced duplication
Accident report $5.00 (Request shall be submitted to the police department)
All copying shall be performed by an employee of the village. Copies of public records shall be provided to the requester upon payment of any charges
due for reproduction of the documents. (Ord. 1527, 3-10-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 68/348
1-13-8: PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF A DENIAL:
A requester whose request for public records has been denied by the village may file a request for review with the attorney general's public access
counselor in the manner and time permitted pursuant to the FOIA. The review process and all additional legal action, including, but not limited to, an
administrative review, shall be pursuant to the requirements of the FOIA. (Ord. 1527, 3-10-2010)
1-13-9: GENERAL INFORMATION/MATERIALS AVAILABLE:
The village shall prominently display at each administrative office for inspection and photocopying without charge, and on its website if one is
maintained, or send through the mail if requested, the following:
A. A brief description of itself which shall include:
1. A short summary of the village's purpose;
2. A block diagram providing the village's functional subdivisions;
3. The total amount of the village's operating budget;
4. The number and location of all of its separate offices;
5. The approximate number of full and part time employees;
6. The identification and membership of any board, commission, committee, or council which operates in an advisory capacity relative to the
operation of the public body, or which exercises control over its policies or procedures, or to which the public body is required to report and be
answerable for its operations;
B. A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request information and public records;
C. A directory identifying the village's FOIA officers;
D. The address(es) where requests for public records should be directed; and
E. The fees permitted under the FOIA and this policy. (Ord. 1527, 3-10-2010)
Chapter 14
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VIOLATIONS
1-14-1: PURPOSE:
The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement of village ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by
ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of such village ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and
authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. (Ord. 1531, 4-12-2010)
1-14-2: CREATION:
There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal government to be known as the Monee ordinance enforcement department and to
have the power to enforce compliance with all municipal ordinances as from time to time authorized by the village council, except for any offense under
the Illinois vehicle code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under
section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code. The establishment of the Monee ordinances enforcement department does not preclude the mayor and village
council from using any other method to enforce ordinances of the village. (Ord. 1531, 4-12-2010)
1-14-3: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The Monee ordinance enforcement department shall be composed of a hearing officer, an ordinance enforcement administrator and hearing room
security personnel, with the power and authority as hereinafter set forth:
A. Violation notice of any ordinance violation shall be issued by the persons authorized under this code and shall contain information and shall be
certified and constitute prima facie evidence of the violation cited as hereinafter set forth. For purposes of this chapter, the "village traffic code" or
"traffic code" shall mean all of the provisions of this code other than any reportable offense governing the movement of vehicles or any offense under
section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code.
B. The ordinance enforcement administrator is authorized and directed to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 69/348
1. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by
ordinance.
2. Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this
chapter.
3. Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability.
4. Certify copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the final
determination of any violation liability which was issued in accordance with this chapter, the laws of the state of Illinois including 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 as from time to time amended.
5. Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning initiating of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as
hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5.
6. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
7. Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies and pursuit of all postjudgment remedies available by current law.
C. System coordinator/computer operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer programs for the administrative
adjudication system of the Monee ordinance enforcement department hereby created, on a day to day basis, including, but not limited to:
1. Input of violation notice information.
2. Establishing court dates and notice dates.
3. Record fine and penalty assessment and payments.
4. Issue payment receipts.
5. Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination of liability; issue notice of immobilization; issue notice of impending
impoundment; issue notice of impending driver's license suspension, as directed by the ordinance enforcement administrator in accordance with
the provisions hereinafter set forth.
6. Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed, if
any, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
D. Hearing room security personnel shall be qualified off duty, full time, part time or auxiliary police officers who are hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Maintain hearing room decorum.
2. Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the circuit court.
3. Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the hearing officer or ordinance enforcement administrator.
The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the positions above set forth. Other than the hearing officer, one person may hold and
fulfill the requirements of one or more of the above stated positions and compensation for each of the above stated positions shall be as approved
by the village council. (Ord. 1531, 4-12-2010)
1-14-4: PROCEDURE:
The system of administrative adjudication of any village ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated hereunder shall be in accordance with the
following procedures:
A. Violation notice of any ordinance violation shall be issued by the persons authorized under this code and shall contain information and shall be
certified and constitute prima facie evidence of the violation cited as hereinafter set forth.
B. All full time, part time and auxiliary police officers as well as other specifically authorized individuals of any village department shall have the authority
to issue violation notices.
C. Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who detects an ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated under this chapter or
a violation of any section of any village ordinance, is authorized to issue notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter
set forth.
D. The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
1. The name of the party violating the ordinance, if known.
2. The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
3. The particular ordinance violated.
4. Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable).
5. The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 70/348
6. The signature and identification number of the person issuing the notice.
7. The date and location of the adjudicating hearing of ordinance violations, the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held
and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing. (Ord. 1531, 4-12-2010)
1-14-5: SERVICE:
A. Service of any violation regarding traffic by:
1. Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, unstickered vehicle; or vehicle violating any compliance
regulation;
2. Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of the vehicle, if present; or
3. Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the notice with any person twelve (12) years of age or older at the residence of the
responsible owner.
B. In the case of any ordinance violation other than those concerning traffic by:
1. Handing the notice to the person responsible for the ordinance violation;
2. Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the notice with any person twelve (12) years of age or older at the residence of the
responsible person;
3. Mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested to the person responsible for the ordinance violation; or
4. Posting the notice upon the property where the violation is found when the person is the owner or manager of the property.
C. The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be verified by the person issuing said notice by:
1. Signing his/her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
2. In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the ordinance enforcement administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under his/her control.
3. Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima
facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. (Ord. 1531, 4-12-2010)
1-14-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
An administrative hearing to adjudicate any alleged ordinance violation on its merits, or to contest the validity of a notice of impending immobilization or
impending impoundment, or the validity of a notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be granted to the registered owner or operator of the
"cited vehicle", pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 or the lessee of the "cited vehicle", 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306,
incorporated herein by reference and at the date, time and place as is set forth by the ordinance enforcement administrator and served upon the
registered owner, operator or lessee for hearings contesting the validity of notices of impending immobilization or impending impoundment or driver's
license suspension. All administrative hearings shall be recorded and shall culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability, made by the hearing
officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. Evidence including hearsay, may be
admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. The hearing officer shall, upon a
determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in accordance with section 1-14-11, "Schedule Of Fines/Penalties", of this chapter. Persons
appearing to contest the alleged violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at their own expense. The burden of proof shall be on the alleged
offender to refute the prima facie case set forth in the verified notice of violation. (Ord. 1531, 4-12-2010)
1-14-7: NOTICES:
A. Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation of a village ordinance, other than that regarding traffic, to appear at the time and date
designated for a hearing or, in the case of a violation regarding traffic, the registered owner, operator or lessee of the cited vehicle to pay the fine, in
full as stated on said notice, the ordinance enforcement administrator shall send or cause to be sent notices by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the person who received the notice of an ordinance violation; or, in the case of the violation regarding traffic, the registered owner or operator of the
"cited vehicle" at the address as is recorded with the secretary of state, and shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last
known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease. Service of notices sent in accordance herewith shall be complete as of the date of
deposit in the United States mail.
B. The notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the following sequences and contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
1. Upon a failure of the person receiving notice of an ordinance violation or, in the case of a notice of a violation regarding traffic, the registered
owner, operator or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to pay the fine in full as stated on said notice, a notice shall be sent, as above set forth, and shall
contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
a. Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice;
b. Particular ordinance violated;
c. Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 71/348
d. Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
e. A section entitled "Notice Of Hearing" which shall clearly set forth that the person receiving a notice of ordinance violation, in the case of a
violation regarding traffic, or the registered owner, operator or lessee may appear at an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the
violation notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the notice of hearing;
f. Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits;
g. Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the time
and place specified will result in a final determination of liability for the "cited" violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated; and
h. Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available
administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the village.
C. A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent following the conclusion of administrative hearing, as is hereinafter set forth, and shall contain,
but not be limited to, the following information and warnings:
1. A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the village.
2. A statement of any sanction ordered or costs imposed which costs are debts due and owing the village.
3. A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the village within the time specified may result in proceeding with collection
procedures in the same manner as a judgment entered by any court of competent jurisdiction.
4. A warning that the person's driver's license may be suspended for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or
parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, incorporated herein by reference.
5. A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within the village may be immobilized and impounded for failure to pay fines or
penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations.
6. Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or ordinance.
D. A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine or
penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations.
1. The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty five (45) days of the date of the notice will result in the village's
notifying the secretary of state that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5,
incorporated herein by reference.
2. The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary
of state. (Ord. 1531, 4-12-2010)
1-14-8: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A final determination of liability shall occur following the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of liability and the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth. Where a person fails to appear at the administrative
hearing to contest the alleged violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice, the hearing officer's
determination of liability shall become final either upon a denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination or upon the expiration of the period for
filing a petition without a filing having been made. (Ord. 1531, 4-12-2010)
1-14-9: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a Code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review
under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. (Ord. 1531, 4-12-2010)
1-14-10: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
A. Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the Municipality and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a Code
violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced in the same
manner as a judgment by a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. In any case in which a Hearing Officer finds that a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment ordering a defendant to correct a Code violation or
imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of Code violation, any expenses incurred by a Municipality to enforce the judgment including, but not
limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure after they are fixed by the Hearing Officer, shall be a debt
due and owing the Municipality and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 72/348
D. A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the amount of any debts due and owing the Municipality
under this section. The lien may be recorded and enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction. No lien may be enforced under this section until it has been recorded in the manner provided by article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure
or by the Uniform Commercial Code.
E. A Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new hearing date upon a petition filed within twenty one (21) days after
the issuance of the order of default if the Hearing Officer determines that the petition's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any
time if the petition establishes that the Municipality did not provide proper service of process. (Ord. 1531, 4-12-2010)
1-14-11: SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES:
The fines and penalties which shall be imposed shall be as follows:
A. Violations Regarding Vehicles:
1. Penalty For General Parking Violations: For violation of any provision regarding traffic or any compliance violation; or, violation of any other Village
ordinance regulating, restricting or prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles along the streets, byways, alleyways, regulated parking
lots or such other location as may be controlled by off street parking agreements, located within the geographical boundaries of this Village, other
than for handicapped parking and unless stated otherwise in a specific section of this Code, the fine shall be:
a. Seventy five dollars ($75.00) if paid on or before the date set for hearing as assigned on the notice of violation.
b. Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) if paid after hearing date after failing to appear or if paid after the thirtieth day following the final judgment.
2. Penalty For Handicapped Parking Violations: For violation of any Village ordinance regulating, restricting or prohibiting the standing or parking of
motor vehicles along the street, byways, alleyways, regulated parking lots or such other location as may be controlled by off street parking
agreements, located within the geographical boundaries of this Village for areas specifically designated for disabled or handicapped parking the
fine shall be:
a. Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) if paid on or before the date set for hearing as assigned in the notice of violation.
b. Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) if paid after hearing date after failing to appear or if paid after the thirtieth day following the final judgment.
3. Penalty For Use Of Cellular Phones While Driving: Any person found to have driven a motor vehicle while using a mobile, cellular, analog wireless
or digital telephone in violation of section 5-3-26 of this Code or Illinois Vehicle Code section 12-610 the fine shall be:
a. Seventy five dollars ($75.00) if paid on or before the date set for hearing as assigned on the notice of violation.
b. Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) if paid after hearing date after failing to appear or if paid after the thirtieth day following the final judgment.
4. Penalty; Certain Portions Of State Vehicle Code Adopted: Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of section 6-1-1 of this Code
which adopts certain portions of the State Vehicle Code the fine shall be:
a. Seventy five dollars ($75.00) if paid on or before the date set for hearing as assigned on the notice of violation, unless specified otherwise.
b. Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) if paid after hearing date after failing to appear or if paid after the thirtieth day following the final judgment.
c. If what is being transported by the driver requires a commercial driver's license, or any similar license by another state, the fine shall be two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) if paid on or before the date set for hearing as assigned on the notice of violation and seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) if paid after hearing date after failing to appear or if paid after the thirtieth day following the final judgment.
d. If what is being transported by the driver requires a commercial driver's license, or any similar license by another state, with the following
endorsements the fine shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) if paid on or before the date set for hearing as assigned on the notice of
violation and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) if paid after hearing date after failing to appear or if paid after the thirtieth day following the
final judgment:
(1) Passenger endorsement (P) - required to drive a vehicle designed to carry sixteen (16) or more passengers (including the driver), or any
similar by another state.
(2) Charter bus endorsement (C) - required to drive a bus transporting students involved in school sponsored activities, or any similar by another
state.
(3) School bus endorsement (S) - required to drive a yellow school bus transporting students to and from school and/or school-related functions,
or any similar by another state.
(4) Combination vehicle (X) - required to drive combination vehicles, or any similar by another state.
e. If what is being transported by the driver requires a commercial driver's license, or any similar license by another state, with the following
endorsements the fine shall be four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) if paid on or before the date set for hearing as assigned on the notice of
violation and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) if paid after hearing date after failing to appear or if paid after the thirtieth day following the
final judgment:
(1) Hazardous materials endorsement (H) - required to drive a vehicle transporting hazardous material that requires placarding, or any similar by
another state.
(2) Tank endorsement (N) - required to drive a vehicle designed to carry any liquid or gaseous material within a tank that is permanently or
temporarily attached to the vehicle or the chassis, or any similar by another state.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 73/348
5. Penalty; Violation Of Posted Regulations: Failure to comply with any posted regulations including but not limited to excessive engine braking or
truck and weight route restrictions. Penalty shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1761, 8-24-2016)
B. Violations Regarding Police Regulations: Any person found to have violated any section of title 5, "Police Regulations", of this Code, unless
specifically noted differently in a section of title 9 of this Code, shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), as determined by
the Administrative Adjudicator, per day as the violation exists:
5-3-2
Animals at large on public highways
5-3-3
Offenses affecting or involving children
5-3-
3D1
Curfew - under 17
5-3-
3D2
Curfew - parental responsibility
5-3-4
Indecency, obscenity and harmful materials
5-3-
4A
Public indecency - 17 and older
5-3-
4B
Prostitution
5-3-
4B2
Soliciting for a prostitute
5-3-
5A
Assault
5-3-
5B
Battery
5-3-6
Loitering
5-3-7
Disorderly conduct
5-3-8
Reckless conduct
5-3-9
Firearms discharge prohibited
5-3-
11
Theft related offenses
5-3-
11A1
Theft of property under $300.00
5-3-
11C
Theft of labor or services under $500.00
5-3-
11G
Retail theft
5-3-
12
Deceptive practices
5-3-
13
Odometer fraud
5-3-
14
Property related offenses
5-3-
14A
Littering
5-3-
14D1
Vandalism
5-3-
14D2
Vandalism - parental responsibility
5-3- Criminal damage to property
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 74/348
14E
5-3-
15
Trespass
5-3-
15B
Criminal trespass to residence
5-3-
15C
Criminal trespass to vehicles
5-3-
15D
Criminal trespass to real property
5-3-
16
Mob action
5-3-
17
Offenses involving Village officials
5-3-
18
Compounding a crime
5-3-
19
Liquor related offenses by underage person
5-3-
20
Drug related offenses
5-3-
20A
Possession of cannabis less than 2.5 grams
5-3-
21
Eavesdropping
5-3-
22
Harassment by telephone
5-3-
27
Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on Municipal property
5-3-
28
Prohibited activities on detention ponds
5-3-
29
Nuisances
5-4-1
Tobacco products; sale and possession
5-4-
1B
Minimum age to sell tobacco products - under 18
5-4-
1C
Purchase by minors prohibited - under 18
5-4-
1D
Possession by minors prohibited - under 18
5-4-2
Parental responsibility for minors - damage to property, enter into or obtain control over any motor vehicle, trailer, bicycle, aircraft or
watercraft, or any part thereof, any violation of a State Statute or Village ordinance concerning vandalism, battery, curfew, disorderly
conduct, obscene conduct, trespass, or possession or use of an alcoholic liquor, cannabis, or controlled substance, retail theft, fireworks,
or any other offense or willful or malicious acts to persons or property
(Ord. 1761, 8-24-2016; amd. Ord. 1773, 12-14-2016)
C. Violations Regarding Property Maintenance: Any person found to have violated any section of title 9, "Building Regulations", of this Code shall be
fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), as determined by the Administrative Adjudicator, per day as the violation exists.
D. Compliance: Upon a finding of compliance with any Village ordinance after the conclusion of an administrative hearing, the Hearing Officer is
empowered to waive any fines previously imposed and require the payment of court costs in an amount not to exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00).
E. Fines And Penalties Established: For violation of any Village ordinance other than a violation regarding traffic, fines and penalties shall be as
established from time to time by the Mayor and Village Council. (Ord. 1761, 8-24-2016)
Chapter 15
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 75/348
1-15-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby continued, created and established a department of the municipal government of the village which shall be known as the public works
department. The public works department shall consist of one superintendent of public works, one director of mechanical maintenance, who shall also
serve as assistant superintendent of public works, one water technician, two (2) full time laborers, various part time employees, and any other additional
employees as may be authorized by the village board by ordinance as provided from time to time. The village mayor shall have the power to appoint the
superintendent and assistant superintendent with the advice and consent of the village board, in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois municipal
code. (Ord. 1589, 2-8-2012, eff. 3-1-2012)
Chapter 16
PUBLIC SAFETY TRANSACTION FEE
1-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the following meanings for the purpose of this chapter:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic
ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Alcohol, spirits, wine, and beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of
being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BEER: A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes, among
other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
CANNABIS: As defined in the compassionate use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act effective January 1, 2014.
FIREARMS: Any device by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion of gas
or escape of gas; including, however:
A. Any pneumatic gun, spring or B-B gun which expels a single globular projectile not exceeding eighteen one-hundredths of an inch (0.1811) in
diameter.
B. Any device used exclusively for the signaling or safety and required or recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate
Commerce Commission.
C. Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition in the building and/or construction
process.
D. Model rockets designed to propel a model vehicle in a vertical direction.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, corporation, joint venture, company, receiver, legal representative, or other similar entity.
RETAIL DEALER: Any person who is engaged in the business of selling alcohol, tobacco, firearms, titled personal property, cannabis in the Village to a
purchaser for the purchaser's use and consumption and not for resale in any form.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substances in solution, and includes brandy, rum,
whisky, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
TITLED PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include but is not limited to automobiles, motorcycles, farm equipment, or other similar property which is
conveyed, sold, assigned, or transferred via a Certificate of Title or bill of sale.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipes, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping
tobacco.
TRANSACTION PROCESSING FEE: A process fee shall be due the Village for each transaction including the products described herein.
VILLAGE: Village of Monee, Will County, Illinois.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages when
fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above defined. (Ord. 1699, 11-12-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
1-16-2: TRANSACTION PROCESSING FEE:
A. The transaction processing fee schedule is hereby imposed upon the sale of the following:
1. Packaged alcohol: Two percent (2%) of the retail price.
2. Consumption of alcohol: One percent (1%) of the price charged to the patron.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 76/348
3. Firearm: Two percent (2%) of the retail price.
4. Cannabis: Five percent (5%) of the retail price.
5. Titled personal property: One percent (1%) of the retail price.
6. Tobacco: Two percent (2%) of the retail price.
B. If the sale of the aforesaid products account for more than fifty percent (50%) of a retail dealer's gross inside store revenue, then all products of any
kind sold in the premises will be subject to the applicable transaction processing fee rates.
C. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the fee shall be upon the purchase and nothing in this section shall be construed on a tax upon
an occupation. This fee shall be in addition to any and all other taxes, charges, or fees which may be due and owing. (Ord. 1699, 11-12-2014, eff. 1-
1-2015)
1-16-3: COLLECTION OF TRANSACTION PROCESSING FEES:
A. The transaction processing fee shall be collected by each retail dealer selling the products described herein during business in the Village.
B. The retail dealer shall submit all transaction processing fees directly to the Village Treasurer or Finance Director by the twentieth day of the month
following the month in which he or she collected the fee from the purchaser.
C. Any remittance of fees required to be made to the Village shall be accompanied by a form prescribed by the Village Treasurer. (Ord. 1699, 11-12-
2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
1-16-4: REGISTRATION:
Every retail dealer doing business in the Village shall register with the Village Treasurer on or before January 1, 2015. Every person becoming a retail
dealer after that date shall register within thirty (30) days after commencing business. (Ord. 1699, 11-12-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
1-16-5: FILING RETURNS:
Every retail dealer shall file by the twentieth day of each month with the Village Treasurer a remittance return containing a report of the sales of the
products described herein with the Village occurring in the prior month. Each return shall be accompanied by a remittance of the appropriate amount
due the Village. Payment shall be made to the Village Treasurer. In the event full payment is received by the Village within fifteen (15) days of the due
date, a one-half percent (0.005) discount will be applied. (Ord. 1699, 11-12-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
1-16-6: RECORD KEEPER:
Every retail dealer required to remit a transaction processing fee as set forth in this chapter shall keep accurate and complete books and records of
business. All books and records shall be subject to inspection by the Village Treasurer. (Ord. 1699, 11-12-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
1-16-7: FAILURE TO PAY TAXES:
A. In the event of failure by any retail dealer to pay the Village the transaction processing fee by the date the same is due, interest shall accumulate at a
rate as imposed by the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act. A retail dealer is also subject to a penalty as made by the Local Government
Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act.
B. Whenever any retail dealer shall fail to pay any tax herein provided, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village President and Board of
Trustees, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. If the Village President or his/her designee, after hearing held, shall find that such retail dealer has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by
this chapter, the Village President may suspend or revoke all Village licenses held by such tax evader. Such person may have an opportunity to be
heard at such hearing to be held not less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the hearing, said notice addressed to him at his last
known place of business. Any suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge such neither from his civil liability for the
payment of the tax nor from prosecution for such offense.
D. The retail dealer shall be entitled to all rights under this chapter provided in the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act. (Ord. 1699, 11-12-
2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
1-16-8: FACILITY IMPROVEMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1828, 1-24-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 77/348
1-16-9: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
Any retail dealer violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), for each offense. (Ord. 1699, 11-12-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
2-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
A. Establishment: There is hereby created the village emergency services and disaster agency, hereinafter called the "ESDA", to prevent, minimize,
repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade
disaster, in accordance with the Illinois emergency management agency act. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Composition: This ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the coordinator. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984)
2-1-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the village ESDA shall be appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and shall serve
until removed by same. The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject
to the direction and control of the village president as provided by statute. In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
coordinator, the village president, or any person designated by him, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
2-1-3: FUNCTIONS:
The village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the village as shall be prescribed in and by the state EMA plan and program prepared by
the governor and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the
corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered
into as provided in the Illinois emergency management agency act. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
2-1-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
A. Designation Of Members, Coordinator: All or any members of the village ESDA organization may be designated as members of a mobile support
team created by the director of the state EMA as provided by law. The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the coordinator of
the village ESDA organization.
B. Compensation: Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state
director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such
member who is not a paid officer or employee of the village, while so serving, shall receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by
law. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
2-1-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the village president and by the state director of EMA. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
2-1-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the village ESDA
to cooperate fully with the state EMA and with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984; amd. 1999
Code)
2-1-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the village, if called for training by the state director of EMA, shall receive for the time spent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 78/348
in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not such village employees or officers shall receive for such
training time such compensation as may be established by the village president. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
2-1-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The village treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the state director of EMA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while
serving outside the village in response to a call by the governor or state director of EMA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the
state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
2-1-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The village president may, on recommendation of the village coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchases or contracts necessary to place the village
in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and
safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster. In the event of
enemy caused or other disaster, the village coordinator of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or
material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by
law pertaining to village contracts or obligations, as authorized by the state EMA act; provided, that if the village president meets with the village board
of trustees at such time, the village president shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984; amd. 1999
Code)
2-1-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the village ESDA organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath,
which shall be filed with the coordinator:
I, , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I
am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the
Village ESDA Organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 560, 5-9-1984)
2-1-11: OFFICE SPACE:
The village president is authorized to designate space in a village building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the village president for the village
ESDA as its office. (Ord. 560, 5-9-1984)
2-1-12: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The village president may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a
tax not to exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as
provided by the state EMA act; however, that amount collectible under such levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. (Ord. 560,
5-9-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
2-1-13: COMPREHENSIVE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN:
The comprehensive emergency operations plan for the village, attached to ordinance 607 on file in the office of the village clerk, and made a part hereof
as exhibit A, is hereby adopted as the comprehensive emergency operations plan for the village, to provide emergency services in the event of a local
disaster emergency involving the village. (Ord. 607, 9-10-1986)
Chapter 2
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
2-2-1: BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
There is hereby created and established a police pension board of trustees consisting of five (5) individuals as delineated in 40 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-128 whether elected or appointed to the position. (Ord. 1574, 10-26-2011)
2-2-2: RIGHTS AND DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 79/348
The rights, powers, duties and functions of said board and the rights and powers of the beneficiaries of the pension fund shall be and are hereby
declared to be in accordance with article III of the Illinois pension code and all amendments thereof. Each board member shall perform all such duties
as required by law. Board members shall serve without compensation. All monies and securities belonging to the police pension fund shall be held by
the municipal treasurer subject to the order and control of the board. An annual list of the beneficiaries and a report of the funds shall be furnished as
required by law. (Ord. 1574, 10-26-2011)
Chapter 3
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-3-1: CREATION OF A BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS:
There is hereby created and established a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners for the Village of Monee. (Ord. 1575, 11-9-2011)
2-3-2: APPOINTMENT:
Said board shall consist of three (3) members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. That one such
appointment may be a non-resident who resides within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the Village corporate boundaries. All appointments shall be
made in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. (Ord. 1665, 11-13-2013)
2-3-3: APPOINTMENT OF POLICE CHIEF:
At all times, the appointment of the Police Chief shall be the responsibility of the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees.
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall not have any authority to appoint or dismiss the Police Chief. (Ord. 1575, 11-9-2011)
2-3-4: DUTIES:
All members shall comply with the duties of the position as delineated in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1 et seq. These duties include, but are not
limited to, the appointment, hiring, and imposing disciplinary action with respect to the officers in the department. (Ord. 1575, 11-9-2011)
2-3-5: BUDGET REQUESTS:
The board members shall submit annual reports and budget requests to the Corporate Authorities. (Ord. 1575, 11-9-2011)
2-3-6: EMPLOYMENT OF COUNSEL:
In accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-25, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is hereby authorized to employ its own
attorney to represent its interests. (Ord. 1675, 1-22-2014)
2-3-7: COMPENSATION:
Each appointed Police Commission Officer shall be entitled, as for compensation, the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per meeting, but shall not
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) per quarter. Said compensation shall be contingent upon the Commissioner attending such meeting as
scheduled by the Police Commission. (Ord. 1666, 11-13-2013)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSING AND PERMIT PROVISIONS
3-1-1: ENFORCEMENT OF LICENSING PROVISIONS:
A. Authority To Enforce:
1. It shall be the duty of the village president, or his duly authorized agent, to examine or cause to be examined all persons and places of business
subject to license for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not such licenses have been procured.
2. In case of the neglect or refusal of any person to procure a license as required by any section of this title or any ordinance, the village president
shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty, to take such action as he deems necessary to enforce said license requirement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 80/348
B. Police Powers: The village president or his duly authorized agent, shall have full police powers to enforce the provisions of this title or applicable
ordinance, shall have the right to cause to be arrested any person who violates any of the license provisions of this title or any ordinance and shall
have the right of entry, at any time, to any place of business for which a license is required by this title or any ordinance, for the purpose of
ascertaining whether or not the said license provisions have been complied with.
C. Action To Compel Compliance: It shall be the duty of the official or board charged with the enforcement of any license provisions of this title or any
ordinance to take such action as shall be necessary to compel compliance with the said provision. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on, or manage a business, occupation, activity, or offer for use by the
public, equipment, devices or machines, for which a license is required, without a license first having been procured for such business or occupation.
(Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-3: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS:
A. Make Application To Clerk: Applications for all licenses and permits required by this title or any ordinance shall be made in writing, under oath, to the
village clerk.
B. Contents Of Application: Each application shall contain:
1. The name of the applicant.
2. The type of permit or license desired.
3. The location to be used, if any.
4. The time covered.
5. The fee to be paid.
6. The address to which any notice provided herein is to be mailed. Each application shall contain the number of the certificate of registration
required under the retailers' occupation tax act1, service occupation tax act2, and/or use tax act3, if applicable.
7. Such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the village officials in the issuing of the license or permit applied for.
(Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-4: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Whenever in this title or in any village ordinance, a license or permit is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or
establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject to the requirement if by himself, or through an
agent, employee or partner, he is held forth as being engaged in the business, activity, or occupation; or if he solicits patronage therefor, actively or
passively, or if he performs or attempts to perform any part of such business, activity, or occupation in the village. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-5: FORMS AND CONTENTS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the village clerk. Each license or permit issued shall
bear the signature of the village president, village clerk and one trustee, shall bear the seal of the village, name of the licensee, address, nature of
business or occupation licensed, amount of fee paid, and such other material information as the village president shall prescribe. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986;
amd. 1999 Code)
3-1-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION:
A. Refer Application To Appropriate Official: Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where an investigation or inspection is required by
ordinance before the issuance of such permit or license, or where an inspection or investigation shall be deemed reasonably necessary or
appropriate, the village clerk shall refer the application to the appropriate officials for the making of such investigation or inspection.
B. Health And Safety Related Inspections:
1. The building inspector acting as the health officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection regarding such permits and licenses as relate to
the care and handling of food, the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease, and the protection of health, or may accept, after review,
inspections made by the Will County health department for such licenses.
2. The building inspector shall make or cause to be made any inspections which relate to compliance with the building code4, zoning ordinance5, and
other related regulations.
3. All other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the police administrator or by some other officer designated by the
village president.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 81/348
4. The village president may require inspection by the Monee fire protection district inspector in appropriate cases.
C. Report By Investigating Official: The official to whom the application has been referred shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten
(10) days after receiving such application or a copy thereof, unless delayed by action of the applicant.
D. Committee Evaluation Of Reports: Upon receipt of all related investigative reports, the village clerk shall forward such reports, together with the
application, to the finance, ordinances and license committee for evaluation, which committee shall make recommendations to the village president
and board of trustees on approval of the license.
E. Request For Additional Information: If it shall appear to the corporate authorities that the matters and circumstances relating to an application require
further information before a proper determination can be made, such application shall be returned to the applicant by the village clerk for the
inclusion of such additional information as may be specified necessary and appropriate.
F. Considerations: In considering an application for a license, the village president and finance, ordinances and license committee may consider the
general welfare of the citizens, and particularly such matters as congestion and traffic on public streets and rights of way, adequacy of personnel to
control and police the activity involved in the license, the public convenience and necessity of the activity sought to be licensed, nuisances, morals,
health and safety.
G. Denial Of License; Right Of Appeal: If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application, the related investigative reports,
and the recommendation of the finance, ordinances and license committee, the village president shall determine that the matters concerning the
application are unsatisfactory, he may disapprove such application, indicating the reasons therefor. Thereupon, the village clerk shall be directed to
promptly notify the applicant that his application is disapproved, and that no license or permit will be issued. Any applicant denied a license shall
have the right to appeal said decision pursuant to section 3-1-21 of this chapter.
H. Approval And Issuance Of License: If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application, the related investigative reports,
and the recommendation of the finance, ordinances and license committee, the village president shall determine that the application is satisfactory,
he shall approve the application. Thereupon, the village clerk shall be directed to promptly notify the applicant that his application is approved, and
the license or permit may be issued. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986; amd. 1999 Code)
3-1-7: FEES, DELINQUENT PAYMENTS AND PENALTY:
A. Payment Of Fee:
1. Advance Payment: In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time
application therefor is made to the village clerk in the amounts prescribed in the schedule set forth in chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
2. Prorate Fee: When an applicant has not engaged in the business or activity until after the expiration of part of the current license year, the license
fee shall be prorated by one-half (1/2) year and the fee paid for six (6) months thereof during which the business or activity has been or will be
conducted. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986; amd. 1999 Code)
3. Corporate Fund: Except as otherwise provided, all license and permit fees shall become a part of the corporate fund.
4. Rebate Or Refund Prohibited: In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license or permit fee, or part thereof, by reason of death or
departure of the licensee or permittee; nor shall any rebate or refund be made by reason of nonuse of the license or discontinuance of the
operation or conduct of the licensed establishment, business, or activity. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
B. Annual Fees: Except where otherwise expressly provided, the fee specified for each annual license, when required for a full calendar year, shall
apply only when such fee is paid to the village clerk on or before January 31 of such calendar year. Payment of an annual license fee on or after
February 1 of such calendar year, when required for a full calendar year, is a delinquent payment, except for a new business, and the applicable
annual license fee shall be two hundred percent (200%) of the specified annual fee. (Ord. 1530, 4-12-2010)
3-1-8: TERM OF LICENSES:
A. License Year; Proration Prohibited: All annual licenses shall be operative and the license year for the village shall commence on January 1 of each
year and shall terminate on December 31 of the same year, where no provision to the contrary is made. There shall be no proration of license fees
for partial years.
B. Notification Of License Expiration: The village clerk shall notify all licensees of the village of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee
(if an annual) three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Provided, however, that a failure to make such notification, or the failure of the
licensee to receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an
action based upon operation without a license. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-9: REINSPECTION PRIOR TO RENEWAL:
At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of any license or class of license, the village president shall notify each proper official that is required to
make an investigation or inspection as to the character or fitness of any applicant for a license, or as to the proper location or condition of the premises
in which the business or occupation is to be conducted or engaged in, to submit to him, a list of licenses which said official desires not to have renewed
without a new investigation as to any matter which he is charged with the duty of investigating. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 82/348
3-1-10: LICENSE RENEWAL:
The village clerk, upon the order of the village president, shall have the authority to authorize the renewal of any license at the beginning of a new
license period upon the payment of the required fee unless he has been notified prior to the beginning of the license period not to renew any such
license by the official who is required to make such investigation or inspection, in which event no renewal shall be had until such notice is withdrawn or a
new investigation or inspection has been made and renewal of license approved. A list of all licenses renewed shall be furnished the police
administrator. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-11: TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSE:
A. Procedure:
1. Authority To Transfer: Where the transfer is not otherwise prohibited, any person to whom any license shall have been issued may, with the
permission of the village president, assign and transfer the same to any other person of approved character and qualifications.
2. Form: Such assignment shall be executed in the form prescribed by the village president.
3. Surrender Of License: The person to whom such license is issued or the assignee of such license, shall surrender such assigned license to the
village clerk, and if required to do so by the village president, shall also surrender any license certificate, tags, plates, badges, emblems or other
insignia which have been issued to the licensee.
4. Issuance Of New License: A new license shall then be issued for the unexpired term of the old license, authorizing the assignee or transferee of
such license to engage in the same business or occupation at such place as may be named in such new license; provided, however, no business
or occupation shall be engaged in at any new location until such assignee or transferee shall have complied with the provisions of any section of
this title or ordinance relating to the engaging in of such business or occupation at such new location.
5. Bond Requirement: In all cases where a bond is required, the person obtaining such new license shall give a bond with sureties which shall
conform as near as may be to the bond upon which such surrendered license was issued.
B. Transfer Limitation: No more than one transfer of ownership shall be allowed on any license. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-12: POSTING OF LICENSE:
A. Posting Required: It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in the village to keep his license posted in a prominent place on
the premises used for such business at all times.
B. Removal Upon Expiration: No license certificate, plate, badge, tag, emblem, or other insignia shall be permitted to remain posted or displayed after
the period for which the license was issued has expired. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-13: DUPLICATE, REPLACEMENT OF LICENSE OR INSIGNIA; FEE:
In the event any licensee who has been furnished a plate, badge, tag, emblem, or other insignia in accordance with the provisions of any section of this
title or any ordinance, shall lose the same, it shall be within the discretion of the village president to authorize the issuance of a duplicate insignia, upon
the making of an affidavit of loss by such person and the payment of a fee of two dollars ($2.00) to the village clerk, unless otherwise specifically
provided. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-14: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any purpose or activity, if the premises and building to be
used for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the village and the state. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-15: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Change Of Location; Notify Clerk: The location of any licensed business or occupation, or the location of any permitted act, may be changed;
provided, that ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the village clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, however, that all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the village shall be complied with.
B. Multiple Locations: No license for the operation of a business or establishment in the village shall be construed to permit the operation of a licensed
business or establishment in more than one location in the village; a separate license shall be required for each location of a licensed establishment.
For the purposes of this title, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or accessory
uses shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel, shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner, and shall be an
establishment with the same classification. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-16: INSPECTIONS; LITTERING; SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 83/348
A. Right Of Entry: Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided
for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the village, or to
detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to admit thereto for the purpose of making the
inspection any officer or employee of the village who is duly authorized to make such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry
is requested.
B. Furnish Samples To Officer: Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of
any ordinance or regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to furnish to
any duly authorized officer or employee of the village requesting the same, sufficient samples of such commodity or material.
C. Refusal To Comply; License Revocation: In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the village president may revoke the license of any
owner or operator of a licensed business in the village who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or employee to make such inspection or to
take an adequate sample of said commodity or material, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duties;
provided, however, that no license shall be subject to revocation for such cause unless such officer or employee has been refused permission to
enter upon the premises in the name of the village after first having presented a written authorization from the village president for such entry.
D. Littering Public Ways; Snow And Ice Removal: It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to engage in any business or occupation on premises
abutting a public way or for any person using any part of a public way for or in connection with his business or occupation to litter or to permit the
accumulation of any paper, rubbish or refuse upon that portion of the public way abutting said premises or on and about that portion of the public
way so used. It shall also be the duty of the licensee to remove the snow and ice from the sidewalk in front of his premises. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-17: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
A. Generally: No business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof, shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
B. Unsafe Or Unhealthful Business:
1. No building or structure, utilized, constructed, or maintained in connection with any business or occupation, shall evidence an unsanitary, unsafe,
or dangerous condition.
2. No substance, matter, or thing of any kind whatever, which shall be dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection with
any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in the village.
C. Garbage Disposal: All licensees shall comply with the provisions of this code and ordinances of the village with respect to refuse and garbage
disposal6. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-18: DEFACING, DAMAGING OR REMOVING LICENSE OR INSIGNIA:
A. Defacing License: No person shall add to, alter, deface, forge, or counterfeit any license certificate or license plate, tag, badge, emblem, or other
insignia which has been or is being issued by the Village.
B. Removal Prohibited; Exception:
1. No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry away without the consent of the owner, any license certificate or license plate, tag,
badge, emblem, or other insignia which has been issued by the Village; except that said certificate, plate, tag, badge, emblem, or other insignia
may be removed after the licensed business has been discontinued or the licensed premises has been abandoned.
2. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village President or his duly authorized representative from removing any license certificate, emblem or
insignia from the possession of a former licensee, his premises, or any vehicle when said license has been revoked under the provisions of any
section of this title or any ordinance. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-19: UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE OR INSIGNIA:
A. Loaning Or Giving Away: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to loan or give away any license certificate or any license plate, tag, badge, emblem or
other insignia issued to such licensee.
B. Unlawful Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or display any license certificate or license plate, tag, badge, emblem, or other insignia which
has been unlawfully acquired. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-20: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A. Order Closure Of Nuisance Business: When the conduct or operation of any business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall constitute a
nuisance in fact or a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the Village President shall be authorized to summarily
order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any license or permit for a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 84/348
B. Hearing; Time Limit: Within eight (8) days after he has so acted, the Village President shall hold a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or
not the license or permit should be revoked. Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall be given as provided in subsection D of this section.
C. Causes For Revocation: Licenses and permits issued under the ordinances of the Village, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Village
President after notice and hearing as provided in subsections D and E of this section for any of the following causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for the license or permit;
2. Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or
the premises occupied;
3. Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
4. Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the Village;
5. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections, as provided in section 3-1-16 of this chapter; (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
6. Failure to comply with any and all applicable State or Federal rules, regulation, or requirements. (Ord. 1697, 11-12-2014)
Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other applicable
ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
D. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at
the address set forth for service of notice in the license application at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the hearing. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986;
amd. 1999 Code)
E. Conduct At Hearing: At the hearing, the Village Prosecutor shall present the complaint and shall represent the Village. The licensee or permittee shall
be permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The Village President shall preside and shall render
the decision. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-21: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. Right To Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village President in regard to the denial of an application for a business license, as
provided in section 3-1-6 of this chapter, or in connection with the revocation of a license or permit, as provided in section 3-1-20 of this chapter shall
have the right to appeal to the Board of Trustees.
B. File Statement With Clerk: Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Clerk, within ten (10) days after notice of a denial of an application or a
revocation of a license or permit, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal.
C. Time And Place Of Hearing: The Board of Trustees shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the applicant, licensee or permittee in the same manner as provided in section 3-1-20 of this chapter. The decision of the Board of
Trustees on such appeal shall be final. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-1-22: PENALTY:
Any person who shall be convicted of violating any provision of this title shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 2
LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE
3-2-1: LICENSE FEES ENUMERATED:
License fees under the terms of this title, for the businesses, occupations, activities and uses set forth, shall be as provided herein. License fees shall be
paid annually unless otherwise provided.
License
Fee
Ambulance service $ 50.00
Amusements:
Automatic amusement machines, including jukeboxes (per machine) 25.00
Public place of amusement such as auditorium, theater, tent or stadium provided with a screen, stage, arena or other space for a 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 85/348
theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular performance, motion picture show, circus, rodeo, animal act, athletic contest, sport or
similar exhibition; amusement park hall, billiard and pool room, bowling alley, skating rink, swimming pool, or other public resort
and cabaret
Animal care and sale 50.00
Auctioneers - annual - per person (chapter 5 of this title) 50.00
Barbershop and beauty shop (chapter 9 of this title) 50.00
Brokers, other than insurance and real estate 50.00
Building and construction contractors as follows (chapter 8 of this title):
General building contractors:
Annual rate 150.00
Single job rate 150.00
Building contractors or subcontractors of general building contractors:
Annual rate 100.00
Single job rate 100.00
(Includes the following types of contractors: masonry; carpentry; roofing; heating, air conditioning and ventilation; grading and
paving; landscaping; drywall, ceiling, flooring and any other separate trade not specifically referred to above, which is not
exempted by this title or State Statute, but not including electrical or plumbing contractors)
Any person who applies simultaneously for a business and contractor's license operating within the Village shall be entitled to a
$50.00 reduction with respect to its application fee
Carters or trucking firms 50.00
Cigarettes:
Cigarette and tobacco dealers 50.00
Cigarette vending machine, per machine 25.00
Cleaning and dyeing business 50.00
Cold storage business 50.00
Drugstores 50.00
Flammable and hazardous chemicals - manufacture 50.00
Flammable liquids - manufacture 50.00
Florists, plant shops, nurseries 50.00
Food establishments:
Bakeries - wholesale or retail 50.00
Candy, confectionery dealer 50.00
Catering service 50.00
Dairy - processor or retail dealer 50.00
Food delivery vehicle and mobile food dispensary 50.00
Food or beverage vending machine business 50.00
Fruit and vegetable market or stand 50.00
Grocery store 50.00
Ice cream - processing or parlor 50.00
Meat market 50.00
Meatpacking plant 50.00
Nonalcoholic beverage - bottler 50.00
Restaurants 50.00
Fuel oil or solid fuel dealer 50.00
Gasoline, filling stations (chapter 12 of this title) 50.00
General merchandise store (nonfood) 50.00
General service business - any other business operated in the Village which a municipality may license, but specifically excluding
such professions as physicians, dentists, attorneys, insurance or real estate agents or brokers, certified public accountants and the
50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 86/348
like, otherwise licensed by the State
Hardware and paint stores 50.00
Hotel or motel 50.00
Itinerant, transient merchants, peddlers (chapter 17, "Transient Merchants", of this title) 1,000.00
Junk dealer 50.00
Laundry and/or laundromats 50.00
Lumberyard (chapter 7 of this title) 50.00
Machine shop 50.00
Manufacturing - general not otherwise covered 50.00
Mortuary and funeral parlor 50.00
New and used car 50.00
Parking lot or public garage (chapter 13 of this title) 50.00
Pawnbroker (section 3-6-1 of this title) 50.00
Repair services 50.00
Scavenger 50.00
Solicitors (chapter 10, "Solicitors", of this title) 50.00
Taxicab 50.00
Vending machine (except cigarette, amusement, laundromat), per machine 50.00
Waste disposal 50.00
(Ord. 608, 10-8-1986; amd. Ord. 712, 12-12-1990; Ord. 908, 6-26-1996; 1999 Code; Ord. 1422, 12-13-2006; Ord. 1685, 6-11-2014; Ord. 1698, 11-12-
2014)
Chapter 3
LIQUOR CONTROL1
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic
ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of
being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BEER: A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes, among
other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this State, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale
or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used, and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and
accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and
maintaining a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests;
provided, that such club files with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at the time of its application for a license under this chapter two (2) copies of a
list of names and residences of its members, and similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional member his name and address; and,
provided further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at
their annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or
other compensation any profits from the distributions or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by
members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other
governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used or maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals
are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent,
servant or employee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 87/348
SELL AT RETAIL AND SALE AT RETAIL: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substances in solution, and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages when
fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above defined. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978; amd. Ord. 1702, 11-12-2014)
3-3-2: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The Village President shall be the Village Liquor Control Commissioner and shall have all of the power, duties and authority as granted by the Liquor
Control Act, as amended2. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
3-3-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the Village any and all alcoholic beverage or alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's
license as provided herein, or in violation of the terms of such license. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
3-3-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS:
Applications for licenses required by this chapter shall be made to the Village President acting as Village Liquor Control Commissioner in writing on
forms supplied by the Village, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall contain the following information and statements:
A. The name, age and address of applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the names, ages and addresses of all the
persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, or a club, the date of the incorporation, the objects for which it was
organized, the names, ages and addresses of the officers and directors and the names, ages and addresses of all stockholders.
B. The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
C. A description of the business conducted by applicant and his employment in the two (2) years immediately prior to the date of his application
hereunder and the address.
D. The length of time that such applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
E. The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made.
F. A statement that applicant is the owner of the premises at which he proposes to sell alcoholic liquor under a license issued pursuant to this chapter or
that he has a lease on said premises for the full period for which the license is to be issued. In his discretion, the Village President shall, as a
condition to the issuance of a license, require the production of evidence of applicant's ownership or leasing of such premises including title policies,
torrens certificates and executed leases and deeds.
G. A statement whether the applicant has made application for a similar license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition
of such application.
H. A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained
in this chapter, laws of this State or the ordinances of the Village.
I. Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the Federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
J. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State or of the United States, or any ordinances of the Village in the conduct of his
place of business.
K. Each "club" as defined in section 3-3-1 of this chapter shall furnish a list of members and other information as provided in said definition of "club" at
the time of filing of application and shall thereafter provide the additional information as provided in said definition and as required by State Statute.
(Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
3-3-5: PERSONS NOT ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No license required by this chapter shall be issued to: (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 88/348
A. (Rep. by Ord. 1526, 3-10-2010)
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State law, unless the Commissioner determines that such person has been
sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust, after considering the matter set forth in such person's application and the Commissioner's
investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant. (Ord. 711, 12-12-1990)
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame.
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
G. A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
H. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
(Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
I. A copartnership3, any general partner thereof, or any limited partner thereof, owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate limited partner
interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the Village. (Ord. 711,
12-12-1990)
J. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owned in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of
the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
Village. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
K. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act4 to
transact business in Illinois. (Ord. 711, 12-12-1990)
L. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by
the licensee.
M. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the effective date hereof or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
N. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
O. Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor control commissions, any mayor, alderman, or member of the city council or
commission, any president of a village board of trustees, any member of a village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board;
and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a
license may be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the
issuance of such license is approved by the State Liquor Control Commission.
P. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
Q. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of section 5/28-1 of, or as
proscribed by section 5/28-3 of the Criminal Code of the State of Illinois5, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as
proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
R. Federal gaming device or wagering stamps:
1. A person to whom a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax
period;
2. A copartnership to which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current
tax period, or if any of the partners have been issued a Federal gaming device stamp or Federal wagering stamp by the Federal government for
the current tax period;
3. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock
of such corporation has been issued a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp for the current tax period;
4. Any premises for which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current
tax period. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 89/348
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1892 - NUMBER OF LIQUOR LICENSES. Go to new ordinance.
3-3-6: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS; HOURS:
Retail licenses for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall consist of the following classes, with the following hourly restrictions, and shall be issued only after
payment in full of the fees enumerated in section 3-3-7 of this chapter: (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
A. Class A: Class A licenses shall include the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises categorized as follows: (Ord. 1702, 11-12-2014)
A-1 License (Bars/Taverns): A Class A-1 license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of alcoholic liquor from the premises which is primarily used
to serve alcoholic liquor and not food sales. No more than five (5) licenses of this class shall be issued and in force at any time. (Ord. 1852, 5-23-
2018)
A-2 License (Restaurants): A Class A-2 license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of alcoholic liquor from the premises which is primarily used
to serve food. No more than six (6) licenses of this class shall be issued and in force at any time.
A-3 License (Banquet Hall): A Class A-3 license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of alcoholic liquor from the premises which is used to serve
food for more than one hundred (100) individuals at a time. No more than one license shall be issued and in force at any time.
A-4 License (Gaming Facility): A Class A-4 license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of alcoholic liquor from the premises where video gaming
machines are the primary attractions of the facility. No more than one license shall be issued and in force at any time.
A-5 License (Club): A Class A-5 license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of alcoholic liquor from the premises used as a club as defined
herein. No more than one license shall be issued and in force at any time.
A-6 License (Special Event): A Class A-6 license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of alcoholic liquor at a special event which is held no more
than two (2) times per year and not exceeding six (6) days in duration. No more than two (2) licenses shall be issued and in effect at any time.
B. Class B: Class B licenses shall be limited to the sale of only beer and wine for consumption on the premises categorized as follows:
B-1 License (Bars And Taverns): A Class B-1 license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of beer and wine from the premises which is primarily
used to serve beer and wine and not food sales. No more than zero (0) licenses of this class shall be issued and in force at any time.
B-2 License (Restaurants): A Class B-2 license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of beer and wine from the premises which is primarily used to
serve food. No more than six (6) licenses shall be issued and in force at any time.
B-3 License (Banquet Hall): A Class B-3 license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of beer and wine from the premises which is primarily used
to serve food for more than one hundred (100) individuals at a time. No more than one license shall be issued and in force at any time.
B-4 License (Gaming Facility): A Class B-4 license shall entitle the licensee to make sale of beer and wine from the premises where video gaming
machines are the primary attractions of the facility. No more than one license shall be issued and in force at any time.
B-5 License (Club): A Class B-5 license shall entitle the licensee to make sale of beer and wine from the premises used as a club as defined herein.
No more than one license shall be issued and in force at any time.
B-6 License (Special Event): A Class B-6 license shall entitle the licensee to make sales of beer and wine at a special event which is held no more
than two (2) times per year and not exceeding four (4) days in duration. No more than two (2) licenses shall be issued and in effect at any time.
C. Class C: Class C licenses shall authorize the retail package sale of all alcoholic liquor on the premises. There shall be no consumption of any
alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises. No more than five (5) licenses shall be issued and in effect at any time.
D. Class D: Class D licenses shall authorize the retail package sale of only beer and wine on the premises. There shall be no consumption of beer or
wine on the licensed premises. No more than five (5) licenses shall be issued and in effect at any time. (Ord. 1702, 11-12-2014)
E. Class E: Class E license shall authorize the retail package sale of all alcoholic liquor and the sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises
only, in conjunction with the use of video gaming machines. Except for the use of the video gaming terminals, no other entertainment on the property
shall be permitted. No more than one license shall be issued and in effect at one time. (Ord. 1827, 1-24-2018)
F. Hours Of Operation:
1. Holders of Class A and Class B liquor licenses are hereby authorized to be open for business and sell at retail alcohol, liquor and/or beer and wine
during the following hours:
a. Sunday through and including Thursday from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until one o'clock (1:00) A.M. the following day.
b. Friday and Saturday from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. the following day. (Ord. 1835, 3-28-2018)
2. Holders of Class C and D licenses are authorized to open for business and sell at retail package alcoholic liquor and/or beer and wine during the
following hours:
a. Mondays through Saturdays from six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. until one o'clock (1:00) A.M. the following day.
b. Sundays from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. until one o'clock (1:00) A.M. the following day. (Ord. 1702, 11-12-2014; amd. Ord. 1827, 1-24-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 90/348
3-3-7: LICENSE FEES:
The following annual fees for the following classes of licenses shall be in effect commencing on January 1, 2015, and for any licenses to be renewed
and continuing thereafter:
License Classification Annual Fee
A-1 $ 700.00
A-2 700.00
A-3 2,500.00
A-4 5,000.00
A-5 300.00
A-6 200.00 per day
B-1 600.00
B-2 500.00
B-3 2,000.00
B-4 4,000.00
B-5 250.00
B-6 150.00 per day
C 600.00
D 500.00
E 5,000.00
(Ord. 1702, 11-12-2014; amd. Ord. 1827, 1-24-2018)
In addition to the annual fee, every applicant shall pay an initial application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) which is non-refundable. (Ord. 1702,
11-12-2014)
3-3-8: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every license issued hereunder shall be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises at all times. (Ord. 474, 2-8-
1978)
3-3-9: TERM OF LICENSE:
A. Term: All liquor licenses shall run for a period of one year commencing on January 1 and shall terminate on December 31 of the same year. (Ord.
1819, 11-20-2017)
B. Prorating Fee: (Rep. by Ord. 1819, 11-20-2017)
C. Surrender Of License; Refund: Any holder of a liquor license under this chapter may surrender said license by delivering same to the Village Clerk,
together with a written statement indicating the license holder desires to surrender the license effective as of a certain date. The holder of said
license shall, after said date specified, no longer engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages of any type. The holder of a license so surrendered shall
be entitled to a refund of the license fee paid for the current year, prorated on a monthly basis, for the period from the first day of the month
immediately following the date of termination through the end of the license term. (Ord. 719, 2-13-1991)
3-3-10: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
A. Number Specified6: (Rep. by Ord. 1702, 11-12-2014)
B. Effect Of Limitation: No new license shall be issued, unless approved by the Village Board, to increase the total number of such licenses for each
class within the Village. Such limitation shall not affect the right of any present licensee to a renewal of a present license which would exceed the
above maximum number, but as licenses in each class are revoked, expired, or for any other cause shall cease to exist, then the total number of
licenses shall be reduced until the total number in each class does not exceed the maximum number authorized by this section. (Ord. 1244, 8-27-
2003)
3-3-11: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 91/348
All such fees shall be paid to the Village President at the time application is made, and shall be forthwith turned over to the Village Treasurer. In the
event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the General
Corporate Fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the Board of Trustees, by proper action. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
3-3-12: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The Village President shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses issued by him; and shall furnish the Village Clerk, Village
Treasurer, and Chief of Police with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any new license, or the revocation of any old license, the Village President shall
give written notice of such action to each of these officers within forty eight (48) hours of such action. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
3-3-13: PERSONAL NATURE OF LICENSE; TRANSFERABILITY:
A. Personal Privilege: A license to sell alcoholic liquor shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one (1) year after issuance unless
sooner revoked or terminated as provided herein and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution nor
shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by
the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of
any deceased licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the
business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of an appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt
licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but no longer than six (6) months
after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the
representatives of the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 474, 2-
8-1978)
B. Corporation Or Partnership:
1. A license issued to a corporation or a copartnership shall not automatically terminate in the event of a sale, transfer or issuance of new shares of
the corporate stock of such corporation or a sale or transfer or addition of new partners in the case of a copartnership, but shall remain in effect
and in force thereafter subject to the following conditions:
a. In the event of a sale, transfer or issuance of new shares of corporate stock of a corporation, the president and secretary shall file an affidavit
with the Village Clerk, on forms to be supplied by the Village, setting forth the names, ages, addresses and any additional information required
of all new shareholders and shall also state therein such information for any new directors or officers of the corporation. Said affidavit shall also
contain a statement that the individuals listed thereon are new shareholders and are shown to be such shareholders on the official corporate
records and that shares of stock in said corporation have been issued to them in their respective names.
b. That in the case of the sale or transfer of an interest in a partnership holding a liquor license, or in the event of the addition of a new partner or
partners, the partnership shall file an affidavit with the Village Clerk, on forms to be supplied by the Village, setting forth the names, ages,
addresses and other information required of all new partners.
c. The affidavits required to be filed as provided in subsections B1a and B1b of this section may be filed with the Village Clerk prior to the transfer
of ownership or issuance of new shares, as the case may be, with the further statement that the corporation or partnership anticipates such a
sale, transfer or issuance of new shares and/or change of officers and directors and requesting prior approval therefor.
2. No alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquor shall be sold by such corporation or partnership under an existing license from the date of such a sale,
transfer or issuance of new shares of corporate stock or change in partnership interests as above described, until written approval to continue
operating under the existing corporate or partnership license is issued by the Village President.
3. The requirements of subsections B1 and B2 of this section shall not apply to the transfer of less than five percent (5%) of the total stock of any
corporation holding a liquor license in the corporate name. (Ord. 485, 3-8-1979)
3-3-14: RENEWAL NOT A VESTED RIGHT:
A. Requirement To Meet Qualifications: Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter may renew his license at the expiration thereof,
provided he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought is suitable for such purpose. The
renewal privilege provided for in this section shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Village Board of Trustees
from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the Village.
B. Businesses Not In Operation; Damaged Premises Excepted: Any provision in this chapter notwithstanding, the Village President, as Liquor Control
Commissioner, may refuse to renew a license held by any person under the provisions of this chapter, if the business for which said license was
issued has not been in operation for six (6) months prior to the renewal date. This subsection shall not apply to licenses issued for premises which
have been destroyed or damaged by fire or other natural cause or to premises which are being remodeled and for which a building permit has been
issued by the Village; provided, however, that such rebuilding of any damaged premises or remodeling shall be completed within nine (9) months
from the date of the occurrence of the damage or issuance of the building permit, as the case may be. (Ord. 497, 10-10-1979)
3-3-15: LIQUOR SALES PROHIBITED DURING CLOSING HOURS:
A. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale at retail, or give away on any licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in the Village, except during the hours
specifically designated in section 3-3-6 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 92/348
B. It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the public to any premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours
within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited; provided, however, restaurants, grocery stores, and clubs may be kept open during such hours, but
no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the public during such prohibited hours. (Ord. 894, 2-14-1996)
3-3-16: EMPLOYEES:
A. Diseased Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who
is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such
disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
B. Minor Serving Liquor: Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years is prohibited from at any time tending any bar and from drawing, pouring or
mixing any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises. (Ord. 548, 2-9-1983)
3-3-17: CHANGE OF LOCATION OF LICENSED PREMISES:
A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be
changed only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the Village President. No change of location shall be permitted unless the
proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the State, the provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
3-3-18: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Sanitation: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for
the storage or sale of food for human consumption.
B. View From Street:
1. In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises is licensed, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or
thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises, which shall prevent a clear view
into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times.
2. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial
white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible.
3. In case the view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by him wilfully
suffered to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided.
4. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the Village President shall have the right to require the filing with him of plans, drawings and
photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
3-3-19: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The Village President may revoke any retail liquor dealer's license for any violation of any provision of this chapter, or for any violation of any State law
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor as provided by State law. (Ord. 474, 2-8-1978)
3-3-20: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in the Liquor Control Act of 19347; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1731, 10-14-2015)
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
3-4-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: The village, being a home rule municipality, hereby imposes a tax upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of the state, at retail, in the village, at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross receipts from those sales made in the course of business, while this section is in effect, all in accordance with the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.
B. Exception: The tax imposed by this section shall specifically not be imposed on the sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off
the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and
prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 93/348
C. Collection By State: The taxes provided in this section shall be collected and administered by the Illinois department of revenue, as provided in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1, as amended. (Ord. 935, 10-23-1996)
3-4-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: The village, being a home rule municipality, hereby imposes a tax upon all persons engaged in the business of making sales of service
in the village, at the rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen, either in the form of
tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, while this section is in effect, all in accordance with the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5.
B. Exceptions: The tax imposed by this section shall specifically not be imposed on the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed
off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption) and
prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
C. Collection By State: The taxes provided in this section shall be collected and administered by the Illinois department of revenue, as provided in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5, as amended. (Ord. 936, 10-23-1996)
3-4-3: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which
is titled or registered with an agency of the state government in the village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while
this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-8 of the Illinois municipal code.
B. Collection: The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as
being in the village.
C. Payment To State: The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois department of revenue. (Ord. 539, 3-11-1982)
3-4-4: HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX:
A. Title: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-14, as amended, this section shall be known and cited as the hotel accommodations tax
ordinance and the tax herein imposed shall be known and cited as the hotel accommodations tax. (Ord. 992, 12-10-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
B. Definitions And Construction:
1. For the purpose of this section, whenever any of the following words or definitions are used herein, they shall have the following meanings:
EXTENDED STAY FACILITY: A hotel that has rooms specifically designed for extended stays for patrons improved with customary sleeping and
bathroom areas, dedicated kitchen areas with cooking appliances, refrigerators and sinks. All such rooms shall comply with the provisions of the
BOCA code and international fire code.
HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS: A room or rooms in any building or structure kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out to the public to
be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, dormitory or place, where sleeping, rooming, conference or exhibition accommodations
are furnished for lease or rent, whether with or without meals, in which ten (10) or more such accommodations are used or maintained for guests,
lodgers, or roomers. The term "hotel accommodations" does not include an accommodation which a person occupies, or has the right to occupy,
as his domicile and permanent residence.
PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership, joint
venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, for profit, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty, the term as applied to corporations shall include the officers thereof, and as applied to any other entity, the owners or part
owners thereof.
TREASURER: The treasurer of the village of Monee, Will County, Illinois.
VILLAGE: The village of Monee, Will County, Illinois. (Ord. 992, 12-10-1997, eff. 1-1-1998; amd. Ord. 1558, 4-27-2011)
2. In this section, unless the text otherwise requires, words in the singular number include the plural and in the plural include the singular; words of
the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter; and when the sense so indicates, words in the neuter gender may refer to any gender.
(Ord. 992, 12-10-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
C. Tax Imposed: A hotel/motel room tax is enacted in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the one night room charge for the use and privilege of a room
at any hotel, motel or other similar lodging facility operating within the village. Provided, however, any patron who uses and occupies any extended
stay hotel facility, as defined herein, shall be exempt for payment of this room tax after the thirty first consecutive day of use and occupancy. This
exemption shall not apply to the initial thirty (30) day use and occupancy wherein this hotel tax shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1558, 4-27-
2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 94/348
D. Tax Borne By Lessee: The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the lessee or the tenant of any such hotel
accommodations. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. It shall be the duty of every owner, manager or operator of
hotel accommodations to secure said tax from the lessee or tenant of said hotel accommodations and pay over to the village treasurer said tax under
rules and regulations prescribed by said treasurer and as otherwise provided by this section. (Ord. 992, 12-10-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
E. Collection: The tax herein levied shall be secured by the hotel owner, manager or operator from the lessee or tenant when collecting the price, charge
or rent to which it applies. Every lessee or tenant shall be given a bill, invoice, receipt or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge or rent
payable upon which the hotel accommodations tax shall be stated, charged and shown separately. The hotel accommodations tax shall be paid to
the village treasurer or the authorized representative of his office on a monthly basis. The tax shall be due on or before the last day of the
succeeding month. (Ord. 1020, 8-12-1998)
F. Payment And Penalty For Nonpayment:
1. Filing Return: Every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations within the village shall file a sworn tax return on a monthly basis with
the village treasurer showing tax receipts received with respect to hotel accommodation space rented or leased during the preceding monthly
period, upon forms prescribed by the treasurer. At the time of filing said tax return, the owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations shall
pay to the treasurer all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
2. Failure To Pay Tax; Penalty: If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of two percent (2%) per month on the amount of
tax which remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, upon the request of the
treasurer, the corporation counsel shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax in behalf of the village in any
court of competent jurisdiction with cost of such enforcement to be borne by the owner.
G. Records: Every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations in the village shall keep books and records showing the prices, rents or
charges made or charged, and occupancies taxable under this section. The treasurer or his designee shall at all reasonable times have full access
to said books and records.
H. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: If the village president, after hearing held by or for him, shall find that any person has wilfully avoided
payment of the tax imposed by this section, he may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by said tax evader. The owner, manager, or operator
of the hotel accommodations shall have an opportunity to be heard and such hearing shall not be held less than five (5) days after notice of the time
and place of the hearing, addressed to the owner, manager or operator at his last known place of business. The suspension or revocation of any
license shall not release or discharge the owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations from his civil liability for the payment of the taxes nor
for prosecution of such offense.
I. Proceeds: All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this section shall be distributed and expended as directed by the village, to
promote tourism and conventions, within the village, or otherwise to attract nonresident overnight visitors to the village, as well as any other legally
authorized general corporate purposes. However, no funds received pursuant to this section shall be used to advertise for or otherwise promote new
competition in the hotel business.
J. Penalties: Any person found guilty for violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this section, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first offense and not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one hundred eighty (180) day period; provided,
however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which each person shall continue any such violations. (Ord.
992, 12-10-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
3-4-5: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES:
A. Tax Imposed: All corporations, companies and associations not incorporated under the laws of the state, and which are engaged in the village in
effecting or soliciting fire insurance, shall pay to the village treasurer a sum equal to two percent (2%) of the gross receipts received by such
corporation, company or association, or their agency or agents, for business effected or transacted for fire insurance within the village during the
year ending on every July 1. The sum above mentioned shall be a tax or license fee upon all such corporations, companies and associations
transacting business within the village.
B. Report Receipts Of Agency: Every person who shall act in the village as agent or otherwise, for or on behalf of such corporation, company or
association, shall, on or before July 1 of each and every year, render to the village clerk a full, true and just account, verified by his oath, of all
premiums which, during the year ending on every July 1 preceding such report, shall have been received by him or any other person for him in
behalf of such corporation, company or association, and shall specifically set out in such report the amounts received as premiums for fire insurance.
C. Payment Of Tax: Such agent shall also at the time of rendering the aforesaid report pay to the village treasurer the said sum equal to two percent
(2%) upon the gross receipts of such corporation, company or association, obtained as premiums for effecting fire insurance in the village, as is
specified in subsection A of this section.
D. Failure To Report Or Pay Tax: If such account is not rendered on or before July 15 of each and every year, or if said sum shall remain unpaid after
July 15 of each and every year, it shall be unlawful for any corporation, company or association, so in default, to transact any business of insurance
in the village until this section shall have been fully complied with in the manner hereinbefore specified, but this section shall not relieve any
company, corporation or association from the payment of any risk that may be taken in violation hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 95/348
E. Fund To Benefit Fire Department: Any and all sums so received under the provisions hereof shall form and constitute a fund to be kept separate by
the village treasurer for the maintenance, use and benefit of the fire department of the village. (Ord. 107, 6-10-1918)
F. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof in any court of competent jurisdiction, be subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and said corporation, company or association, or its agent, shall be liable to the village for the full
amount of two percent (2%) on its gross premium receipts for the preceding year to be recovered by appropriate action. (Ord. 107, 6-10-1918; amd.
1999 Code)
Chapter 5
AUCTIONS1
3-5-1: AUCTIONS IN STREETS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sell or attempt to sell or offer for sale at public auction, any goods, chattels, or personal or real property of any kind upon the public
streets or sidewalks of the village. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-5-2: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any public auction or sale made or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order or process or by
virtue of any power or authority contained in a mortgage or trust deed. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
Chapter 6
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
3-6-1: PAWNBROKERS1:
A. Records Maintained And Kept Open For Inspection: Every pawnbroker doing business in the village shall keep a record of every article pledged with
him or sold to him, and this record shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any time during business hours.
B. Receiving Or Displaying Weapons Prohibited: No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol, blackjack or sawed off
shotgun. No pawnbroker shall display in his window or shop any such weapons for sale.
C. Transactions With And Employment Of Minors:
1. No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who is not twenty one (21) years of age or over, and no pawnbroker shall employ a person
of less than twenty one (21) years of age to assist him in his business.
2. No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as pawnbroker with any person less than twenty one (21) years of age except with the written
consent of the parent or guardian of the minor to each particular transaction.
D. Reporting Of Items Believed To Be Stolen Or Lost: It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him, or
which it is attempted to be pledged with him if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or that the article was lost and found by the
person attempting to pledge it. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-6-2: SECONDHAND DEALERS:
Every person operating a secondhand store shall keep a record of all articles purchased, which record, together with the articles themselves, shall be
open to inspection by any member of the police department at all reasonable hours. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
Chapter 7
LUMBER DEALERS1
3-7-1: DUTY TO MAINTAIN FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS:
It shall be the duty of every person owning or operating a lumberyard to have the same equipped with sufficient firefighting apparatus to handle any
small fires which may start and to prevent their spreading. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-7-2: MANNER OF PILING LUMBER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 96/348
It shall be unlawful to pile any lumber in a lumberyard in such a way that the lumber is hanging over, or in danger of falling onto any adjoining property,
street, alley or public way. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-7-3: INSPECTION REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of the fire chief to inspect or cause to be inspected, every lumberyard established in the village to ensure compliance with this
chapter. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 8
CONTRACTORS1
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BUILDING CONTRACTOR: Any person, firm, company or corporation which, for a consideration, undertakes or offers to undertake or purports to have
the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to, or does himself or by or through other personnel employed by such contractor, construct, alter, repair, add
to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish the whole or any part of a building or structure, or any of the appurtenances thereto, sidewalk,
street or pavement for which a permit is required by village ordinance.
GENERAL BUILDING CONTRACTOR: Any building contractor who subcontracts all or any portion of a building contract to one or more building
contractors or who shall himself perform more than one trade during the course of any construction, and subcontract any other trade during the course
of any construction. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; NONTRANSFERABLE:
A. Requirements; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business in the village as a building contractor or general building
contractor without first having obtained a license therefor, or to violate the terms of any such license, when so granted. This section shall not be
construed to require a license for the business of a plumbing contractor or electrical contractor, as these contractors are subject to state licensing
provisions.
B. Nontransferable: No contractor's license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-8-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Insurance Requirement:
1. Application for a contractor's license shall be made to the village clerk in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, and signed by all the
partners if a partnership, or by a duly authorized officer thereof if a corporation, verified by oath or affidavit and shall contain, in addition to the
information required in section 3-1-3 of this title, a listing of insurance coverage then in effect and which applicant agrees to keep in force
throughout the period to be covered by the license, including workers' compensation, public liability for personal injury or death, property damage
and vehicle coverage, listing the insuring company, policy number, amount of coverage and expiration date. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
2. Minimum limits of insurance shall be as required by law for workers' compensation, public liability for personal injury or death, property damage
and vehicle coverage, listing the insuring company policy, number, amount of coverage and expiration date. The village of Monee shall be named
as additional insured and certificate holder. (Ord. 1286, 3-10-2004)
3. Minimum limits of insurance shall be as required by law for workers' compensation, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for general liability and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) property damage for both public liability and vehicle
coverage. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
4. All contractors shall furnish a licensing and permit bond (L & P bond) in an amount acceptable to the village, however in no event shall the amount
be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to cover any and all work to be performed in connection with a project. (Ord. 1286, 3-10-2004)
B. Other Information: The application shall also contain any other information as may be required by the village president at his discretion. The
procedure contained in chapter 1 of this title shall prevail when applicable. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-8-4: ADDITIONAL LICENSE NOT REQUIRED:
Any person having a general building contractor's license shall not be required to secure an additional license for work performed as a building
contractor, nor shall a license be required of building contractors acting as subcontractors under written contract to a properly licensed general building
contractor. General building contractors shall be responsible to verify that their subcontractors are insured to the minimum limits as listed in subsection
3-8-3A3 of this chapter. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-8-5: VERIFY PERMITS IN EFFECT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 97/348
It shall be the absolute duty and irrevocable responsibility of the contractor to verify that all permits required by this chapter or village ordinances are
lawfully in effect before proceeding with any work to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish the whole or any
part of a building or structure or any of the appurtenances thereto, sidewalk, street or pavement. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-8-6: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Authority; Hearing: In addition to any other penalty imposed by chapter 1 of this title for violation of any provisions of this title or other village
ordinance or regulation, a contractor's license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the village president after
a hearing in accordance with the provisions contained in section 3-1-20 of this title.
B. Statement Of Grounds; Appeal: All orders of the village president suspending or revoking licenses shall state the grounds therefor, shall be signed
and shall be subject to appeal as provided in section 3-1-21 of this title and thereafter by judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the
administrative review act2, approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments and modifications thereto. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-8-7: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION:
The commission or omission of any of the following acts shall, in addition to the violation of any applicable section of this chapter, village ordinance or
state law, constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of a contractor's license:
A. Acceptance of final payment without issuance of waivers of lien and contractor's affidavit to the permit holder which shall be issued to run with the
property.
B. Bankruptcy.
C. Noncompletion of contract before the expiration of the permit.
D. Allowing insurance policies listed in license application to lapse or be canceled without replacement of equal coverage by other policies.
E. Failure of general contractor to verify that subcontractors are insured to the minimum requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-8-8: RENEWAL OF REVOKED LICENSE RESTRICTED:
No contractor's license shall be issued to a person whose previous license has been revoked within a period of one year from the date of such
revocation. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
Chapter 9
BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY PARLORS1
3-9-1: STATE CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No license shall be issued to conduct a barbershop or beauty shop or to practice the occupation of a barber or beautician in the village, to any person
who does not have a certificate of registration as a registered barber or beautician issued by the state. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-9-2: HEALTH CONDITIONS:
A. Premises And Employees:
1. Premises: Premises used for barbershop or beauty shop shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. Employees:
a. The employees of such shop must keep themselves clean, both as to person and clothing.
b. It shall be unlawful to keep as an employee in any such shop any person afflicted with a contagious disease of any kind.
B. Sterilization Of Equipment: Utensils and tools must be sterilized before being used on the patron. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-9-3: INSPECTIONS:
The Will County health department shall make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 98/348
this chapter. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 10
SOLICITORS1
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is in the
possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING: Any one (1) or more of the following activities:
A. Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever, for
any kind of consideration whatever; or
B. Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; or
C. Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
D. Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation, or project. (Ord. 401, 8-12-1970)
3-10-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every person desiring to engage in "soliciting" as herein defined from persons in residences within the Village is hereby required to make written
application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 401, 8-12-1970)
3-10-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
A. Information Required: Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the Chief of Police of the Village and filed with
such Chief. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application:
1. Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than residence address;
also social security number;
2. Address of place of residence during the past three (3) years if other than present address;
3. Age of applicant and marital status, and if married the name of spouse;
4. Physical description of the applicant;
5. Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length of time of
such employment or representation;
6. Name and address of employer during the past three (3) years if other than the present employer;
7. Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting which the applicant will engage in;
8. Period of time for which the certificate is applied;
9. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this chapter, if any;
10. Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this chapter ever been revoked;
11. Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this title, or the ordinance of any other Illinois municipality
regulating soliciting;
12. Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United
States;
13. Also such additional information as the chief of police may deem necessary to process the application.
B. Statements Under Oath: All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 99/348
C. Fingerprinting Required: The chief of police shall require every applicant to submit to fingerprinting by the police department of the village in
connection with the application for certificate.
D. Record Of Certificates Kept By Police Department: The chief of police shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application
received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration issued under the provisions
of this chapter, and of the denial of applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate
issued, and any renewal thereof shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued.
E. Denial Of Registration: No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the
laws of the state of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United States, within five (5) years of the date of the application; nor to any person
who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; nor to any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder
has previously been revoked as herein provided. (Ord. 401, 8-12-1970)
3-10-4: ISSUANCE OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
A. Issuance Or Denial: The chief of police, after consideration of the application and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if
the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein required, and that the issuance of a certificate of registration to the
applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Endorsement shall be made by the chief of police upon the application
of the denial of the application. When the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith.
B. Revocation For Violation; Notice: Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the chief of police if the holder of the certificate
is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes
disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this chapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof
shall be given by the chief of police to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified U.S. mail addressed to his or her residence address set
forth in the application.
C. Nullification Of Certificate: Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void.
D. Expiration Date Shown: The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. (Ord. 401, 8-12-1970)
3-10-5: VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the board of trustees of the village that the occupants of the residences in the village shall make the
determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences. If no determination is made as is provided in section 3-
10-6 of this chapter, then in that event, registration is not required. (Ord. 401, 8-12-1970; amd. 1999 Code)
3-10-6: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall comply
with the following directions:
A. Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitations to solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence, shall be given in
the manner following:
1. A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches (3" x 4") in size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows:
ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN MONEE INVITED
or
NO SOLICITORS INVITED
2. The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. For the purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the chief of police to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
B. Such cards so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the information
contained thereon. (Ord. 401, 8-12-1970)
3-10-7: DUTY OF SOLICITORS:
A. Compliance With Notice: It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the village upon which a "residence" as herein defined
is located to first examine the notice provided for in section 3-10-6 of this chapter, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on
the notice. If the notice states "Only Solicitors Registered In Monee Invited", then the solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration as
herein provided shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises; and if the notice states "No Solicitors Invited", then the solicitor, whether
registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 100/348
B. Departure Upon Request Of Resident: Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. (Ord. 401, 8-12-1970)
3-10-8: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any
premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other
manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and
engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. of any weekday, or at any time on a Sunday
or on a state or national holiday. (Ord. 401, 8-12-1970)
3-10-9: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door,
or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience
with the occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the
provisions of section 3-10-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 401, 8-12-1970)
3-10-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code
for each offense. (Ord. 401, 8-12-1970; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 11
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid.
"Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within this municipality, charges for the channel mileage
between each channel point within this municipality, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within Illinois. However,
"gross charge" shall not include:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to
customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to
customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax
liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such municipality;
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a timesharing agreement;
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
E. Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the department of commerce and community affairs;
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to
the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent
expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 101/348
G. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made);
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication devices; or
I. Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who,
to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without
charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this
state. The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within
this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any
agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business
or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging
systems, and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing
conformity act. For air to ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications
equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line"
means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel
or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider
for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end
communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale.
Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of
this section, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section 2-27 of the retailers' occupations tax act. (Ord. 1206, 9-25-
2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-11-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
A. The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of three
percent (3%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer.
B. The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of three
percent (3%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event,
shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and
paid in such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this state.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 102/348
C. The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the municipality. (Ord. 1206, 9-25-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-11-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
A. The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be remitted
by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is
recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided by the department.
B. Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for
telecommunications. (Ord. 1206, 9-25-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-11-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and
any accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement this act. (Ord. 1206, 9-25-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-11-5: RESELLERS:
A. If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax
authorized by this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require.
B. Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax
free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales.
C. Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax
free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 1206, 9-25-
2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-11-6: REPEALER:
If public act 92-0526, entitled the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act, is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, or if this chapter is
repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, then ordinance 991, passed December 10, 1997, shall be deemed in full force and effect as of the date
public act 92-0526 or this new chapter is repealed or becomes ineffective. (Ord. 1206, 9-25-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
Chapter 12
SERVICE STATIONS1
3-12-1: DEFINITION:
The term "filling station" or "service station" as used in this chapter, is hereby defined as meaning any building, structure, premises, enclosure or other
place within the Village where containers or tanks, either portable or stationary, and containing flammable liquids, are kept or located for the purpose of
selling, offering for sale, or distributing any such liquids from such container or tank; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any place where such flammable liquids are kept or sold for medicinal purposes only. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-12-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of operating a filling station within the Village without first having obtained a license therefor. (Ord. 608, 10-8-
1986)
3-12-3: CERTAIN PRIVATE TANKS EXEMPT FROM LICENSE FEE:
Any person maintaining or operating any storage tank in excess of twenty (20) gallons of gasoline or motor fuel for his own use shall comply with all of
the provisions of this chapter other than the requirements for the payment of a license fee. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 103/348
3-12-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
A. Application Requirements: An application for a filling station license shall be made in conformity with the provisions of chapter 1 of this title. The
applicant shall also specify the capacity in gallons of every container or tank installed or to be installed upon the premises.
B. Investigation: Every such application shall be investigated by the fire inspector to determine whether the applicable provisions of this title are being
complied with, and the approval of such officer shall be noted thereon before a license shall be issued. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-12-5: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Location Restriction For Tanks: No tank, container, pipe or other equipment for the storage and handling of flammable liquids shall be installed within
two hundred feet (200') of the nearest boundary of any lot or plot of ground used for a school, hospital, church or theater.
B. Smoking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or permit smoking in the immediate vicinity of gasoline pumps.
C. Flammable Liquids: Gasoline, benzol, naphtha and other flammable liquids shall not be used for washing or cleaning purposes within any filling
station nor in the open air within a distance of fifty feet (50') of any repair pit or any opening from any basement space.
D. Waste Disposal: Waste oil or other flammable liquids shall be stored in metal containers pending removal from the premises. No such waste shall be
permitted to drain into any sewers or stormwater drainage system. Rags and soiled waste shall be kept in metal containers.
E. Conformity To Fire Code2: The construction and equipment of filling stations, including tanks and the requirements for safety clearances around
same, shall be made and maintained in accordance with the provisions contained in the Village ordinances regulating buildings and flammable
liquids.
F. Inspections: Filling stations shall be inspected by the fire inspector or his duly authorized representative at least once every year.
G. Bulk Sales Prohibited: No motor fuels shall be dispensed at any filling station or service station except into fuel tanks connected with the carburetion
system of motor vehicles; however, individual sales of up to five (5) gallons per person may be made in metal receptacles when painted red and
labeled in full conformity with state law.
H. Cleanliness Of Premises: All filling stations or service stations shall be kept neat and clean and free of rubbish and trash. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
Chapter 13
PARKING LOTS1
3-13-1: DEFINITION:
The term "parking lot", as used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean and include any premises, enclosures or other places other than a licensed
public garage where four (4) or more vehicles may be stored or parked and where rent is paid or compensation is paid to the owner, manager or lessee
of such premises for the storing or parking of such vehicles. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-13-2: MANNER OF DRIVING INTO AND OUT OF LOTS:
A. Use Of Driveway: No person operating a parking lot shall invite or permit any person to drive into such lot over any sidewalk, curb or parkway at any
place other than a permanent driveway, or in any way in violation of any provision of the ordinances of the village.
B. Compliance With Police Regulations: Vehicles driving into or out of such parking lots shall be driven with due respect to traffic conditions and in
accordance with police regulations. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
3-13-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful:
A. Parking Junked Or Inoperable Vehicles: To park or store in any parking lot any vehicle which is not in condition or ready for use, or to permit the
parking of any abandoned, junked or partially dismantled vehicle in any such lot.
B. Parking For Purposes Of Sale Or Repair: To use any parking lot for the storage or parking of any vehicle for sale or to use any parking lot or portion
thereof as an automobile repair shop.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 104/348
C. Use Of Parked Vehicle As Mercantile Establishment: To allow any vehicle to be parked upon a parking lot for the purpose of selling commodities or
merchandise therefrom or to use such lot as a mercantile establishment. (Ord. 608, 10-8-1986)
Chapter 14
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
3-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate adult entertainment businesses to protect the community from the many types of criminal activity frequently
associated with such uses. The village recognized that such regulation cannot in effect prohibit such uses. This chapter has balanced the competing
interest of the community in reducing criminal activity and protecting property values versus the protected rights of the owners, operators, employees
and patrons of adult uses. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT BOOKSTORE AND/OR VIDEO STORE: An establishment having as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter, and/or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, tapes, records or other forms of visual or audio
representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CARD, GIFT, OR NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade items, such as cards,
games, articles of clothing and novelties which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: The operation of a business, or any use thereof, of which any portion involves an activity distinguished or
characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, including, but not
limited to, the operation of an adult card, gift or novelty store, an adult bookstore and/or video store, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motel, adult
motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, massage parlor, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual encounter
establishment.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building or any portion or portions thereof having a capacity from six (6) to fifty (50) persons,
where, for any form of consideration (including a coin or token inserted into a coin or token operated projector, video screen, or other image producing
device) patrons may view films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic electronic reproductions in which a significant or
substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of materials that are distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: a) offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration,
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other electronic or photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible
from the public right of way which advertises the availability of such transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions; or b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than eight (8) hours; or c) allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping
room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than eight (8) hours. "Rent" and "subrent" when used in reference to an adult motel, shall mean
the act of permitting a sleeping room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE: An establishment in which electronic, electrical, or mechanical still or slide projectors, motion picture projectors,
video screens, closed circuit television transmissions or other image-producing devices operable by insertion of a coin or token or for other
consideration are maintained for presentation of images to five (5) or fewer persons at a single time per such device and where the images presented
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons where, for any form of consideration, patrons
may view closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar electronic or photographic reproductions in
which a significant or substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of materials that are distinguished by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER: A public or private establishment which: a) features topless dancers, strippers, "go-go" dancers, male or female impersonators,
lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows; b) not infrequently features entertainers who display "specified anatomic areas"; or c) features entertainers who
by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron or features
entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in, explicit simulation of "specified sexual activities".
ESCORT: A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
MASSAGE PARLORS: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with "specified sexual activities" or
where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas" or massages the
"specified anatomical areas" of the customer unless prescribed by a physician or registered physical and massage therapist. The definition of "sexually
oriented business" shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital nor by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopathy,
nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for any
amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 105/348
NUDE, SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity is provided for money or any
form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT: A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form
of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of "specified sexual activities" when one
or more of the persons is nude or seminude. The definition of "sexually oriented businesses" shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual
therapy.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
A. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance
by a minor; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaged in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
B. For which: 1) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction
which is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 2) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement for conviction whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or 3) less than five (5) years have
elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement from the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurred within any twenty four (24) month
period;
C. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio or sodomy;
C. Fondling, kissing or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas;
D. Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship;
E. Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain;
F. Erotic touching, fondling or other such contact with an animal by a human being; or
G. Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A
through F of this definition. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-3: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
Prior to the issuance of any permit for the construction or occupancy of an adult use, the applicant for said permit(s) must first proceed through the site
development and plan review procedure set forth in the zoning ordinance. However, site plan review for an adult use shall be considered by the
planning and zoning commission within sixty (60) days of filing. After consideration by the planning and zoning commission, findings shall be forwarded
to the village board and considered within sixty (60) days of the planning and zoning commission's consideration. The planning and zoning commission
and the village board may place conditions on the development and operation of the adult use related to site plan, floor plan, construction materials,
lighting, parking and circulation, ingress and egress, landscaping and screening, and signage in order to assure that the design and operation of the
adult use is in conformance with all village ordinances and is compatible with surrounding uses. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-4: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No adult entertainment business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall
apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment business without a valid adult entertainment business license issued by the
village pursuant to this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 106/348
B. An application for a license shall be made on a form provided by the village.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information (including fingerprints) as are needed to enable the village to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
chapter.
D. If a person who wishes to operate an adult use is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who
wishes to operate an adult entertainment business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following section and each applicant
shall be considered a licensee if the license is granted.
E. The completed application for an adult entertainment business license shall contain the following information:
1. If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of
age;
2. If a partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
3. If a corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under
the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal shareholders, and the name and address of the
registered corporate agent.
F. If the applicant intends to operate the adult entertainment business under a name other than that of the applicant, he/she must state: 1) the business'
fictitious name, and 2) submit any required registration documents.
G. Whether the applicant has been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal activity
involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
H. Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this chapter or similar ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the business which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation. If the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or similar ordinance in another jurisdiction or an officer, director or principal
stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under this chapter and a license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, include the
name and location of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
I. Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar ordinance from another city or county and if so, the names and
locations of such other licensed businesses.
J. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises including statement of total floor area occupied by the business. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a completed adult use business license application, the village shall approve or deny the issuance of a license
to an applicant. The village shall approve the issuance of a license unless it determines by a preponderance of the evidence by one or more of the
following:
1. The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
2. The applicant is overdue in payment to the village of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to
business;
3. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form;
4. The applicant has been denied a license by the village to operate an adult entertainment business within the preceding twelve (12) months or
whose license to operate an adult use business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months;
5. The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" defined in this chapter;
6. The premises to be used for the adult use business has not been approved by the fire and building departments as being in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances;
7. The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid;
8. The applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The license, if granted, shall state on its face, the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the
adult use business. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read at any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 107/348
time.
C. No adult use business license shall be issued unless the premises at which the adult use will operate is in conformance with the restrictions set forth
in the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-7: FEES:
Every application for an adult use business license (whether a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a two hundred
fifty dollar ($250.00) nonrefundable application and investigation fee. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-8: INSPECTION:
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, fire and building departments or other village, or village designated,
departments or agencies to inspect the premises of the adult entertainment business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time
it is occupied or open for business.
B. A person who operates an adult entertainment business, or his agent or employee, violates this chapter if he/she refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-9: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
A. Each license shall expire on January 1 after it was issued and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 3-14-5 of this
chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date and when made less than thirty (30) days before
the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
B. If the village denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the
village finds that the basis for denial of the license has been corrected or abated, the applicant must be granted a license. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-10: SUSPENSION:
The village may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if, after a hearing, it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee: a) violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; b) refused to allow an inspection of the adult entertainment business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or c) knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult entertainment business premises.
If the licensee or an employee of the licensee has been found guilty in a court of law of a violation of this chapter, no hearing is necessary prior to
suspension of the license. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-11: REVOCATION:
A. The village shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 3-14-10 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months or if the licensee is convicted of any specified criminal activity.
B. The village shall revoke a license if it determines, after a hearing that:
1. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
2. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises;
3. A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
4. A licensee knowingly operated the adult entertainment business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
5. A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the
licensee's premises;
6. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the village, county or state for any taxes or fees past due;
7. A licensee has knowingly or intentionally facilitated another commission of the offense of public indecency.
C. If the village revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult entertainment business
license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If subsequent to revocation, the village finds that the factual basis for the
revocation did not occur, the applicant may be granted a license.
D. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or a revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may
seek prompt judicial review of such action in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 108/348
3-14-12: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another nor shall a licensee operate an adult entertainment business under the authority of a license at
any place other than the address on the license. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-13: BUSINESS RECORDS:
All adult uses shall file a verified report with the village showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to employees during the preceding
calendar year. In addition, all adult entertainment businesses shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses and alias of all
persons employed, including independent contractors, by the licensee. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-14: ADULT THEATER; RESTRICTIONS:
All dancing and other performances shall occur on a stage intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet (2') from the level of the floor. No
dancing or other performances shall occur closer than ten feet (10') to any patron. In addition, no performer shall fondle, caress, or otherwise touch any
patron and no patron shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any performer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer and no
performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. Gratuities may be indirectly given to performers by placing the gratuity on the stage. (Ord.
1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-15: ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE; RESTRICTIONS:
No booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment shall have
doors, curtains or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms so used shall have at least one side
open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room. All such described areas shall be lighted in
such a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms,
but such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the motion pictures or other offered entertainment. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-16: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No adult use shall be open prior to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. (Ord. 1045, 4-14-1999)
3-14-17: ALCOHOL SALES PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibition Of Alcohol: The sale, use or consumption of any and all alcoholic beverages is hereby prohibited in all adult entertainment businesses as
defined in this code.
B. Penalties: Any person or entity who is found to be in violation of this section is subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day the violation exists. In addition to the imposition of fines, the business license is
subject to revocation. (Ord. 1429, 3-14-2007)
Chapter 15
GARAGE SALES
3-15-1: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Prior to conducting a garage sale, an individual must complete and submit a permit application with the village clerk two (2) days prior to the anticipated
date of sale. (Ord. 1541, 8-25-2010)
3-15-2: GUIDELINES:
Garage sales are subject to the following guidelines:
A. All garage sale permit signs must be posted in plain view from the street of the premises and must remain until after completion of garage sale.
B. Sale signage affixed to utility/streetlight poles or trees is strictly prohibited. No signage is allowed in public rights of way. If found, sign will be removed
by village staff and can be picked up at village hall during normal business hours. The village of Monee will only keep said signs for a period of three
(3) days after removal and thereafter will be discarded.
C. If more than one household is joining in a single sale, each household needs its own permit even if the sale is at the address of only one participating
household.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 109/348
D. Sales are limited to two (2) consecutive days beginning no earlier than seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and must end before seven thirty o'clock (7:30)
P.M.
E. Permits are only issued to village of Monee residents and no sales are to be conducted by outside parties.
F. Only freestanding ground signs located on the property of the sale are allowed.
G. All signs should be removed within twenty four (24) hours after sale is closed in order for the twenty dollar ($20.00) deposit to be refunded.
H. Advertising signage can be displayed no earlier than two (2) days prior to sale.
I. Only two (2) garage sale permits will be issued per calendar year for the same premises.
J. Fines up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) may be imposed for violation of these regulations. (Ord. 1541, 8-25-2010)
3-15-3: PLACEMENT OF SIGNS:
There shall be a limit of five (5) signs which may be posted advertising the garage sale with these signs only being allowed on private property. It shall
be unlawful to place any such signs on public property including rights of way, telephone poles, stop signs and other similar places. (Ord. 1541, 8-25-
2010)
3-15-4: PERMIT FEES:
A permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be due with every application. In addition to said permit fee, a twenty dollar ($20.00) refundable sign deposit
shall be remitted to the village clerk. No such fees shall be imposed during the annual Fall Faire garage sale event, but all other regulations shall remain
in full force and effect. (Ord. 1541, 8-25-2010)
Chapter 16
VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
LICENSED VIDEO GAMING LOCATION: A licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, licensed veterans' establishment, or licensed truck
stop establishment.
TERMINAL OPERATOR: An individual, partnership, corporation or limited liability company licensed to own, service, and maintain video gaming
terminals for placement in licensed establishments, licensed truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, or licensed veterans'
establishments.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL (VGT): An electronic video gaming machine that plays or simulates the play of a video game authorized by the board upon
the insertion of cash. Authorized video games include, but are not limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack. The VGT must utilize a video display
and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. VGT does not include a terminal that directly
dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only. (Ord. 1623, 11-14-2012)
3-16-2: LICENSE FEE:
An annual license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be paid to the village by the terminal operator for each video gaming terminal located in a
licensed location. Said fees are nonrefundable. (Ord. 1623, 11-14-2012)
Chapter 17
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the following meanings:
ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person who transports tangible personal property for retail sale who does not maintain an established office, distribution
house, warehouse, service center or residence from which such business is conducted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 110/348
PEDDLER: A person who travels about selling, bartering or exchanging small wares which he carries with him on his person or on a wagon truck, push
cart or moveable receptacle of any kind.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale of goods, wares or merchandise, and in pursuance of such sales
occupies any building, room vehicle, structure or unoccupied or unimproved lot for the purpose of conducting such sale. (Ord. 1685, 6-11-2014)
3-17-2: LICENSE:
Peddlers, itinerant vendors, and transient merchants shall be required to obtain a business license from the Village of Monee prior to conducting any
type of business within the Village. (Ord. 1685, 6-11-2014)
3-17-3: LICENSE FEES:
A license fee as established in section 3-2-1 of this title shall be required for the issuance of such business license. (Ord. 1685, 6-11-2014)
3-17-4: REMITTANCE OF SALES TAX:
All peddlers, itinerant vendors, and transient merchants shall comply with any and all regulations and laws pertaining to the remittance of taxes due the
State of Illinois and the Village of Monee. (Ord. 1685, 6-11-2014)
3-17-5: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply in the following situations:
A. Any person selling vegetables, fruit or perishable farm products at an established Village market or other location on the private property of a
consenting owner;
B. Any person delivering tangible personal property who is fulfilling an order for such property which was selected or placed by mail or other means.
(Ord. 1685, 6-11-2014)
3-17-6: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation or organization violating this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 1685, 6-11-2014)
Chapter 18
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSING PROGRAM
3-18-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is as follows:
1. Minimum Residential Standards: The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the protection of the life, safety, health, welfare,
and property of rental residential owners, whether from a zoning or usage standpoint, and tenants, as well as that of the general public.
2. Licensing System: To establish a licensing system to track the upkeep and performance of rental properties in terms of Code violations and
nuisance complaints.
3. Maintain Property Values: To preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the Village of Monee in an effort to prevent blight.
These rules and regulations will apply to all residential real property, whether from a zoning or usage standpoint, located within the incorporated
limits of Monee, Illinois. (Ord. 1864, 6-27-2018)
3-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall be defined as follows:
HOUSING INSPECTOR: A designated employee of the Village charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
LANDLORD: A. Any person or entity who alone, jointly, or severally with others has legal title to any land or premises located in the Village which is
leased in whole or in part for residential purposes; or
B. Any person who is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of a legal title holder of land or premises located in the Village
which is leased in whole or in part for residential purposes; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 111/348
C. Any person who is a mortgagee in possession, or has been appointed to serve as the trustee of any land or premises located in the Village which
is leased in whole or in part for residential purposes.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE: The duly adopted Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Monee.
REGISTRATION: The process by which owners submit application for a license to operate one or more rental units in the Village. All rental units must
be licensed and registered to be occupied by tenants. A license and occupancy may be refused or revoked by the Village on units not in compliance.
RENTAL UNIT: One or more rooms containing individualized cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities which is designed to be occupied or intended for
use by one household.
TENANT: A person not the owner who occupies a rental unit with the consent of the owner for monetary or non-monetary consideration. A family
member of the owner shall not be considered a tenant. (Ord. 1864, 6-27-2018)
3-18-3: REGISTRATION AND LICENSING:
A. Registration Form Date: Prior to engaging in the business of renting any rental unit to the public, every owner of a rental property, whether occupied
or vacant, shall file with the Village a completed license application including the appropriate fee for each rental unit.
B. Initial Registration Time Frame: All residential rental property must be registered with the Village by August 1, 2018. All residential rental properties
must be duly licensed with the Village within ninety (90) days from the date of registration. The building inspector shall have the sole authority to
extend said time requirement for good cause.
C. License Time Frame: All residential rental housing licenses shall be issued for a period of one calendar year and shall expire after twelve (12) months
of issuance, unless previously revoked.
D. Application Form Renewal: Application for license renewal must be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the license expiration date.
E. New Owner Registration: Any person becoming an owner of an existing licensed rental unit shall file a complete license application form within thirty
(30) days of the property transfer; however, the new owner will not have to pay the license fee until applying for license renewal at least thirty (30)
days prior to the license expiration date.
F. Notification Of Sale: License is non-transferrable to another person or to another rental housing unit. Every person holding a license must give notice
in writing to the Village of Monee within five (5) business days after having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the ownership or legal control
of any licensed rental housing unit.
G. Refusal Or Revocation Of License: Rental units found to be non-compliant after an Administrative Adjudication hearing or by an appropriate court
order with this chapter or other applicable codes or ordinances shall lose rental status, shall have the license and registration refused or revoked,
shall not be occupied until brought back into compliance. Tenant removal shall be the responsibility of the landlord.
H. Material Non-Compliance: Should the tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest or any other person or persons associated with the
tenant, or his/her household, violate any provisions stated herein on the rental unit or affecting the adjacent property, such a violation shall constitute
a material non-compliance with the lease and shall further constitute grounds for termination of tenancy and eviction. (Ord. 1864, 6-27-2018)
3-18-4: LANDLORD OBLIGATIONS:
A. Landlord Responsibilities: Landlords must comply with all rules and regulations required in the Village of Monee Residential Rental Licensing
Program.
1. Landlord must advise and notify prospective tenants of the Village of Monee Residential Rental Licensing Program, as identified in this chapter.
2. Landlords shall require a signed lease, identifying all tenants eighteen (18) years of age and older.
3. Landlords shall incorporate into the body of all leases or rental agreements, renewal of leases or rental agreements, the first and last legal names
and date of birth of all individuals eighteen (18) years of age or older, who will reside at the rental property during the term of the lease.
4. Landlords shall complete a criminal background check on each tenant eighteen (18) years of age or older. The landlord shall provide proof, if
requested, by the Village, that a background check has been so completed.
5. Landlords must have all tenants eighteen (18) years of age or older sign the Rental Housing Lease Addendum.
B. Tenant Access To Landlord: The landlord of a residential rental housing unit shall provide each tenant with the name and telephone number of a
responsible person, or managing agent, who in emergency situations will be available on a twenty four (24) hour basis and who has the authority to
make repairs as needed for occupancy. (Ord. 1864, 6-27-2018)
3-18-5: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 112/348
No residential rental housing shall be occupied or continued to be occupied unless the structure in which said unit is located complies with the
provisions and standards of the Property Maintenance Code adopted by the Village of Monee, the Will County Public Health Department, or other
appropriate governmental agencies and is maintained in a structurally sound condition and kept free from health, fire and other hazards to life and
property which shall include, but not limited to, the following:
A. General Repair: The landlord shall be responsible for keeping the premises maintained in good repair and fit for human habitation, which shall
include the building's interior and exterior and all living areas. Premises shall have at least two (2) routes of egress unencumbered by any type of
obstacle. Repairs may require obtaining proper Village building permits.
B. Exterior And Site: The building exterior and sites on which residential rental housing is located shall be maintained and be in compliance with Village
ordinances, including, but not limited to:
1. Building exterior envelope: walls, roof, soffits, doors, windows, etc.;
2. Building address;
3. Landscaping;
4. Parking lot spaces, private roads, curbs and access aisle repair and maintenance;
5. Roof and site water drainage of an "approved" design;
6. Public and private sidewalks; and
7. The Property Maintenance Code adopted by the Village of Monee.
C. Exterior Balconies: Exterior balconies, porches, or patios may not be used as storage areas which are visible from the street or adjacent properties.
D. Equipment Safety And Maintenance: Every facility, piece of equipment, utility or service which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed
and/or installed to function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition and shall not be removed, shut off or
disconnected in any occupied residential rental housing, except for such temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs or
alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies or tenant's failure to pay agreed upon services. Utilities or services shared by more than
one unit shall be the owner's responsibility to maintain.
E. Rodents, Insects And Other Pests: All structures shall be kept free from insect, pest, or rodent infestation. Upon a complaint or evidence of insects,
pests, or rodents, a licensed pest control company shall then inspect and/or treat all attached residential rental housing. Receipts of reports must be
made available upon request to the Village inspector. All structures in which insects, pests, or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by
approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. If, upon inspection there is an insect or rodent infestation in more than one dwelling
unit, the owner shall be required to contract with a licensed extermination company to treat all common areas and infested units not less than on a
monthly basis for up to six (6) months or until remediated.
F. Garbage Containers: Providing for garbage and rubbish removal and supplying such facilities or containers as necessary for the sanitary disposal of
all garbage and rubbish is a condition of occupancy. Storage of all containers shall be at the rear of the building in such a manner as to be concealed
from view from the street or public way of such building and adjacent properties. All areas surrounding the containers must be clean and free of
garbage or refuse at all times. The containers must be emptied at a frequency so that garbage and rubbish does not overflow provided containers. It
is the owner's responsibility to provide the appropriate type and number of such facilities or containers.
G. Interior Storage: In a common area, patio, balcony, hallway, stairwell or in any living areas, it shall be unlawful to:
1. Accumulate and store building materials, lumber, boxes, cartons, scrap metal, machinery, junk, flammable or hazardous materials or devices in
such quantities or in such a manner as to create a fire, health or other hazard to the premises or persons residing therein.
2. Store gasoline and similar combustible liquids (if in a multi-unit dwelling such liquids must be locked in an approved fire resistant cabinet).
3. Store a motorcycle, moped, gasoline powered lawn mower, snow blower, or other similar equipment which may contain a hazardous material
including, without limitation, gasoline.
4. Store grills (gas and charcoal) within five feet (5') of structure or used without proper ventilation.
H. Public Utilities: Water, electric and natural gas utilities must be made available and operational in buildings and residential rental units for occupancy
approval, and contact information be made available in the event of an emergency or any of the utilities become unavailable. (Ord. 1864, 6-27-2018)
3-18-6: ACCESS FOR INSPECTION AND WATER SERVICE MAINTENANCE:
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, Village authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times, after giving notice to the landlord of any
building, structure, or land within the Village, to perform the duties imposed by this chapter.
B. Reasonable notice for required scheduled inspections shall be defined as a minimum of ten (10) calendar days' advance written notice.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 113/348
C. It shall be the responsibility of the landlord to notify the tenant(s) of inspection appointments, arrange access with the tenant(s) and provide access to
all units.
D. In the absence of the building landlord or landlord's agent, an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age must be present during the inspection. (Ord.
1864, 6-27-2018)
3-18-7: POWERS AND DUTIES OF HOUSING INSPECTOR:
A. Notice To Public: Before making inspections, the housing inspector shall advise the owner and/or tenant of the plan to inspect.
B. Inspection: The housing inspector shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections upon
request of the owner, or in response to a complaint that an alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter or of the applicable rules or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto may exist, or when the housing inspector has valid reason or probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter or of
any rules and regulations adopted has been or is being committed.
C. Time Of Inspections: The housing inspector is hereby authorized to enter and inspect between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M.,
or other hours as agreed upon between the housing inspector with the owner and/or tenant, all dwellings and buildings on the subject property.
D. Premises Inspection: The housing inspector is hereby authorized to inspect rental dwelling units subject to this chapter, for the purpose of enforcing
the specific minimum standards of the Building and Property Maintenance Codes of the Village of Monee.
E. Appointments: The housing inspector and the owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling subject to this chapter may agree to an
inspection by appointment at a time other than the hours provided herein.
F. Compliance With Ordinance Required: No property covered by this chapter shall be occupied in violation of any section of this chapter.
G. Petition To Court: If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, licensed as such, fails to or refuses
to permit free access and entry to the structure or premises under his control, or any part thereof, with respect to which an inspection authorized by
this chapter is sought to be made, the housing inspector may, upon a showing to the court or adjudicates that probable cause exists for the
inspection and for the issuance of an order directing compliance with the inspection requirements of this chapter with respect to such dwelling,
dwelling units, petition and obtain such order from a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1864, 6-27-2018)
3-18-8: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee per rental housing unit shall be as follows:
License Fees
1 or more rental housing units $50.00 (per unit, includes first inspection)
First re-inspection $ 75.00 (per unit)
Second re-inspection and each inspection thereafter 100.00 (per unit)
(Ord. 1874, 9-12-2018)
3-18-9: PENALTY:
A. Any person who is found to be in violation when a citation is issued shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
B. A violation shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation is present.
C. Any person who fails to register shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) each day not registered.
D. No show inspections for designated times fines are as follows:
$250.00 1st offense
350.00 2nd offense
750.00 3rd offense
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 114/348
(Ord. 1864, 6-27-2018)
3-18-10: CITATIONS:
Citations for violations shall be adjudicated through the Village of Monee administrative adjudication. (Ord. 1864, 6-27-2018)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following definitions:
BULK RUBBISH: Large items such as a chair, couch, stove, hot water heater, mattress, appliance, etc., which cannot be placed in a required suitable
container.
BUNDLED TREE LIMBS: Tree limbs cut in length to no longer than three feet (3') and tied in bundles with a diameter no larger than eighteen inches
(18"), which are not placed in a suitable container for landscape waste.
GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the wrapping, handling, storage, preparation, cooking and consumption of food of all kinds.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Grass, shrubbery, cuttings, leaves or other material resulting from the care of lawns, shrubbery, weeds, vines or trees.
RUBBISH: Such matter as ashes, metalware, broken glass, crockery, dirt, sweepings, dead animals, boxes, wood, tin cans, bottles, or litter of any kind,
that can be put in required suitable containers, but not "landscape waste" as defined herein. (Ord. 759, 5-13-1992)
4-1-2: VILLAGE SERVICES:
It is hereby required that all residents have garbage and refusal collection services. Subject to the provisions of this chapter and except as otherwise by
ordinance provided for, the Village shall provide for the collection and disposal of residential "garbage", "rubbish", "bulk rubbish", "bundled tree limbs"
and "landscape waste", as above defined, by contract with a scavenger or disposal service. The schedule shall be published in a local newspaper or by
individual notice with monthly billings. (Ord. 1837, 4-11-2018)
4-1-3: COLLECTION SCHEDULE:
A. Weekly Collection: Garbage and rubbish shall be collected each week on the collection day established by contract with the scavenger or disposal
service, except when the collection day falls on a holiday, or when there is any holiday in that week preceding the collection day, in either of which
events the garbage and rubbish shall be collected one day later in that week.
B. Notice Of Change: There shall be no change in the day of collection except upon ten (10) days' written notification by the scavenger to the Village
and to each owner, occupant or lessee receiving garbage disposal service under this chapter and any contract in implementation thereof. (Ord. 689,
6-13-1990)
4-1-4: CHARGES FOR SERVICES:
A. Liability For Payment; Charges Established:
1. The owners, occupants or lessees of the premises to which garbage and refuse disposal services are provided under the terms of this chapter
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for such services supplied to each premises and the garbage disposal service is furnished to the said
premises by the Village only upon the condition that the owners, occupants and lessees are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village. (Ord.
689, 6-13-1990)
2. The service charges to owners, occupants or lessees for collection and disposal of household "garbage" and "rubbish" as herein defined shall be
as in this section provided. Every such owner, occupant or lessee of a single detached dwelling shall pay to the Village a sum fixed by the Board of
Trustees heretofore or from time to time hereafter, as expenses require for garbage disposal service furnished said household unit.
3. The current charges for such garbage disposal service as heretofore fixed by the Board of Trustees are as set forth below:
a. The bimonthly service charge per single detached dwelling unit within the Village shall be as follows:
The sum of twenty dollars ninety cents ($20.90) beginning July 1, 2003 through June 30, 2009.
The sum of twenty three dollars forty cents ($23.40) beginning July 1, 2009 through June 30, 2013. (Ord. 1241, 8-13-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 115/348
4. Each two-family dwelling or multiple-family row house, townhouse or apartment house dwelling shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be deemed
a multiple single detached dwelling and each unit or apartment shall be charged the same sum as a single detached dwelling. (Ord. 689, 6-13-
1990)
5. See section 8-1-6-3 of this Code regarding unpaid charges when ownership of property changes. (Ord. 1658, 9-11-2013)
B. Billings: Billing for such services shall be as follows:
1. Mail To Owner Or Occupant: The bill for such services shall be mailed to the owner of the premises to which the services are supplied or to the
individual, whether owner, occupant or lessee, to whom bills are rendered for water services furnished by the Village, at the option of the Village.
The owner of the premises can direct the Village Treasurer to bill the occupants or lessees of the subject premises for such services, but shall
remain liable for the payment thereof. (Ord. 689, 6-13-1990)
2. Billing Periods; Late Charges:
a. Bimonthly Billings: The Village Treasurer shall mail billings to each such owner, occupant or lessee between the first and fifteenth days of
January, March, May, July, September and November, for the two (2) month period ending on the last day of the preceding month.
b. Late Charges: A late charge equal to twenty percent (20%) of the service charge shall be added to any bill paid after thirty (30) days after the
date of mailing. In the event charges for garbage services are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing, such charges shall be
deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent. The Village Treasurer shall indicate on the bill the date after which the late charge will be
assessed.
c. Combined Billings: Billings for such services may be combined with billing for water service charges or sewer service charges, if applicable, and
payment of combined billing shall be applied first to sewer service charges, then to garbage collection charges, and finally to water services
charges1. (Ord. 802, 3-9-1994)
C. Scavenger Service; Contract Directly: The owners or residents of a multiple-family residence may contract directly with the scavenger service with
which the Village has contracted to provide garbage disposal services for the multiple-family residence. The owner or residents contracting directly
with the scavenger service shall notify the Village, in writing, that they have done so, which notification shall be countersigned by the scavenger
service. If the garbage disposal service is contracted directly with the scavenger service by the residents of a multiple-family residence, all residents
must join in said contract in order to be relieved from payment of charges above set forth. Upon receiving said notification, the Village will thereafter
not be responsible for providing garbage disposal service or handling the billing therefor. Upon any such contract being terminated, the Village shall
be notified by the owners or residents who made the initial contract, that the contract is terminated and the Village garbage disposal services should
be renewed. (Ord. 689, 6-13-1990)
4-1-5: PROCEDURE FOR NONPAYMENT:
In the case of nonpayment with respect to a bill for services rendered, the Village shall have the following options:
A. Issue a citation for non-compliance;
B. File a complaint at law seeking any and all monies due the Village including late fees and attorney fees. (Ord. 1837, 4-11-2018)
4-1-6: COLLECTION OF LANDSCAPE WASTE:
After July 1, 1990, it shall be unlawful for any person within the Village limits to place, or in any manner intermingle, "landscape wastes" with garbage
and rubbish for disposal by the scavenger service provided by the Village. All landscape waste will be collected and disposed of as follows:
A. Collection: All landscape waste shall be collected by the same licensed scavenger service that collects garbage and refuse for the Village under
separate agreement between the residents of the Village and the scavenger service.
B. Placement In Bags:
1. All landscape waste will be collected and must be contained in special biodegradable thirty (30) gallon paper bags to be sold to the public at
various locations in the Village, or contained in a one hundred (100) gallon container cart to be sold or rented by the licensed Village scavenger
service and a monthly collection fee paid to the scavenger service as provided hereafter.
2. No collection of said materials will be made, however, unless they are contained in the special paper bags or special container, and unless the
owner, occupant or lessee has entered into a separate agreement with the scavenger service.
C. Voluntary Use Of Service: No resident of the Village will be obligated to use the collection services for landscape waste. (Ord. 689, 6-13-1990)
D. Service Charges:
1. The cost of the paper bags and the costs of rental of the container carts and monthly pick up services will be determined by and paid directly to
the licensed village scavenger service, and the village shall have no obligation to collect said fees. The initial cost of said items and services shall
be as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 116/348
Service Fee
30 gallon paper bag, including pick up charge $ 1.10 per bag
Purchase of 100 gallon container cart 80.00 per cart
Rental of 100 gallon container cart, a minimum 12 month rental 2.50 per month per cart
Monthly collection fee per 100 gallon container cart, whether purchased or rented for all 12 months 3.00 per month per cart
2. The container carts may be used for regular garbage and refuse from December through March. (Ord. 689, 6-13-1990; amd. 1999 Code)
E. Time Of Collection: The collection of landscape waste will be on the same day as the collection of other garbage and rubbish in the village. (Ord. 689,
6-13-1990)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1908 - PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION. Go to new ordinance.
4-1-7: CONTAINERS AND STORAGE OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
A. Garbage Handling; Container Requirements: All garbage of any person shall be drained, wrapped and stored in durable, rust resisting, nonabsorbent,
watertight, and easily washable metal or plastic containers, which shall have close fitting covers and adequate handles to facilitate collections, and
shall be not more than thirty five (35) gallons or less than twenty (20) gallons in capacity, with the exception that the one hundred (100) gallon
container carts described in subsection 4-1-6B1 of this chapter may be used when not used for landscape waste. (Ord. 689, 6-13-1990; amd. Ord.
759, 5-13-1992)
B. Rubbish: All rubbish shall be stored in durable, metal or plastic containers with close fitting covers. (Ord. 689, 6-13-1990)
C. Placement Of Containers For Collection; Time Period: It shall be the duty of any person having household garbage or rubbish to comply with all
provisions of this chapter, and on each day of garbage, rubbish or recycling collection to place the containers as aforesaid on the curb in front of the
residential premises receiving said disposal services no earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on the day before collection and should be removed by
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. the day of collection. All garbage, rubbish, or recycling containers shall not be stored in the front yards on nontrash days.
All garbage, rubbish, or recycling containers shall be stored behind a privacy fence or out of view from public areas. (Ord. 1504, 6-24-2009)
4-1-8: DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND LANDSCAPE WASTE:
A. Placement Of Garbage In Suitable Container: It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or place any garbage, rubbish, or landscape waste in
any street, alley or sidewalk or any other public place within the village, nor shall any person dispose of or place any garbage or rubbish on private
property, whether owned by such person or not, within the limits of the village, unless the same shall be enclosed in a suitable container so that it
cannot be blown about by ordinary winds.
B. Compost Pile Or Container: Landscape waste may be placed on private property in what is commonly known as a "compost pile" or a container used
for composting; provided, however, that such compost pile or container shall not create a public nuisance as a result of smell or otherwise. (Ord. 689,
6-13-1990)
4-1-9: INSTITUTIONAL, INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL UNITS:
A. Duty Of Institution: The foregoing provisions of this chapter with regard to collection of garbage, rubbish and landscape waste, shall not apply to any
institutional, industrial or commercial unit in the village. It shall be the duty of such institutional, industrial or commercial unit in the village at its own
cost to arrange with a properly licensed scavenger for the disposal of its "garbage", "rubbish" and "landscape waste" as herein defined, as well as its
market and industrial wastes. Such institutional, industrial or commercial unit, including any corporation, partnership or person engaged in running a
store, business or commercial or industrial enterprises of any kind shall keep its premises free and clear of any accumulation of "garbage", "rubbish",
or "landscape waste" as above defined or of market or industrial waste of any kind.
B. Time Of Collection: Such institutional, commercial, and industrial garbage, rubbish and landscape waste, including market and industrial waste, shall
be collected each week or as often as is necessary to prevent any accumulation of same which would cause any nuisance or health hazard or the
breeding of insects. In no event shall such collection be made less frequently than once in each week.
C. Storage In Closed Containers: Institutional, commercial, and industrial garbage, rubbish, and landscape waste and other waste shall be stored in
closed containers so as not to cause litter or a nuisance or health hazard. (Ord. 689, 6-13-1990)
4-1-10: BURNING OF REFUSE:
A. Burning Garbage Prohibited: No person shall set fire to or burn out of doors upon any premises located within the Village any material defined as
"garbage" by section 4-1-1 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 117/348
B. Creating Nuisance: No person shall set fire to or burn out of doors upon any premises located within the Village any material that upon combustion
creates smoke and/or odor which constitutes a nuisance to surrounding premises; and that if the burning of any combustible material constitutes a
nuisance to surrounding premises, such fire shall be extinguished by the person by whom it was set.
C. Fire Limits: No person shall set fire to or burn rubbish or other combustible material out of doors upon any premises located within the fire limits of the
Village, except upon specific permission of the Village President and the Fire Chief of the Monee Fire Protection District.
D. Setting Fire On Public Ways: No person shall set or maintain any rubbish fire on any public right-of-way, including curb and gutter, sidewalk, alley or
parkway. (Ord. 689, 6-13-1990)
4-1-11: PENALTY:
A. Penalty Imposed: Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1
of this Code, and each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 689, 6-13-1990; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Issuance Of Citation; Filing Of Complaint: The Village Police Department or Village Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the issuance of
citations pertaining to violations of the provisions herein. All such citations shall be filed with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Will County, Illinois.
(Ord. 1380, 1-25-2006)
4-1-12: RECYCLING PROGRAM:
A. Implementation Of Program: The Village hereby implements a recycling program for its residential customer base. The following products shall be
separated for recycling:
1. Newspapers;
2. Cardboard;
3. Fiber products;
4. Plastic containers;
5. Glass bottles and jars;
6. Tin cans; and
7. Aluminum cans.
These products shall be placed in a recycling cart as provided by the Village and/or its disposal service company.
B. Costs/Expenses: The recycling costs shall be added to the customer's monthly garbage bill.
C. Penalty: Noncompliance with any provision of this section may result in the issuance of a citation and subject to the penalties as set forth in title 1 of
this Code. (Ord. 1496, 12-10-2008)
Chapter 2
GRASS AND WEED CONTROL
4-2-1: NOXIOUS WEEDS DEFINED; DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
No person shall permit the growth upon any premises of any noxious weeds, except as hereinafter provided. Canada thistles and all of its varieties,
perennial sow thistles, European bindweed, leafy spurge, Russian knapweed, Johnson grass, giant foxtail, hoary cress, jimson, burdock, cockleburs,
ragweed and similar weeds and all weeds which, due to pollination, are a menace to health, are, for purposes of this chapter, defined as noxious weeds.
No person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any plot of real estate shall permit the growth of noxious weeds thereon except as hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 1155, 8-22-2001)
4-2-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL:
A. All grass used for landscaping purposes or grown wild on vacant property shall not exceed six inches (6") in height at any time.
B. All weeds shall be pulled or otherwise destroyed by the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in control of real estate in the Village whenever
weeds growing on such property exceed six inches (6") in height, but in no event less often than twice a year, once between June 15 and July 1, and
once between August 1 and August 15. Failure to destroy such weeds of the height specified or within the designated periods shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 118/348
C. If the tract of real estate on which such weeds or grasses are located exceeds one (1) acre in area, is unsubdivided and is vacant, the owner, lessee,
tenant, occupant or person in control of such real estate shall be required to cut grass, pull or otherwise destroy those weeds located within thirty feet
(30') of the perimeter of such real estate. (Ord. 1155, 8-22-2001)
D. In addition to the responsibilities imposed upon any person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any plot of real estate, the said responsibility
shall also apply to any real estate that is adjoining and abutting the property line of the said real estate to the improved area of the said dedicated
right-of-way. (Ord. 1162, 11-14-2001)
E. See section 8-1-6-3 of this Code regarding unpaid charges when ownership of property changes. (Ord. 1658, 9-11-2013)
4-2-3: NOTICE TO CUT OR REMOVE:
The Director of Code Enforcement or such other authorized Village official or representative thereof shall serve or cause to be served a notice upon any
person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any real estate in the Village upon which a nuisance is found to exist, requiring such person to remove
or cut down weeds or grass exceeding six inches (6") in height constituting such nuisance within five (5) days from the date of the notice. Such notice
may be given by any one (1) of the following described methods: (Ord. 1690, 7-23-2014)
A. By a written notice sent by United States certified mail, postage prepaid, to the last known person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling the real
estate, and as to the owner, the notice may be addressed to the address shown on the most recent tax bill for the real estate;
B. By a written notice personally delivered by the Director or such other authorized Village official or representative to the person owning, leasing,
occupying, or controlling the real estate;
C. By posting or tagging a written notice on the property of the person owning, leasing, occupying, or controlling the real estate upon which the violation
exists. Said notice shall state the contents of sections 4-2-1, 4-2-2, and 4-2-4 of this chapter, the date of the posting or tagging and shall provide that
said weeds shall be destroyed not later than five (5) days after the notice has been posted or tagged on said property; or
D. By a general notice addressed to all owners, lessees, occupants or persons controlling real estate, printed in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Village, which notice shall direct attention to this chapter and shall provide that weeds shall be destroyed not later than five (5) days after the
notice is so printed. The notice is authorized to be printed once in each month from April through September in each year, as the Director deems
necessary. (Ord. 1155, 8-22-2001)
4-2-4: NON-COMPLIANCE WITH NOTICE; REMEDIES OF VILLAGE:
If any person so notified as set forth in section 4-2-3 of this chapter fails or refuses to comply with said notice, the Village shall cause the weeds to be
removed and or cut the grass in excess of six inches (6") and shall charge the costs of such removal to the person owning, leasing, occupying or
controlling the real estate. The cost for such removal or cutting shall be calculated on the basis of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of real estate. The cost and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and administrative costs, incurred by the Village, or by
the firm employed by the Village, for weed removal or grass cutting following the refusal or failure to comply with the notice, shall constitute a lien upon
the real estate affected.
That until payment of any and all costs, expenses and fees incurred by the Village are paid by the owner of the real estate, the Village shall have the
authority to cut the grass in excess of six inches (6") or remove the weeds on a weekly basis from April to November without the need for re-inspection
by the Village staff.
The Village shall have the right to prepare and record the lien based upon the costs for the entire grass cutting season from April through and including
November of each year. Upon payment of the costs incurred by the Village for the weed removal, grass cutting, and lien preparation, a full release of
lien will be prepared by the Village and forwarded to the owner of record. The owner of record shall be responsible for filing the release with the Will
County Recorder of Deeds Office. (Ord. 1690, 7-23-2014)
4-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per offense. (Ord. 1690, 7-23-2014)
Chapter 3
SMOKING REGULATIONS
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
ENTRANCE: A. The doorway or other entrance to a public place or public area that is open to, and intended for use by, the general public for ingress
and egress to the public place or public area, and
B. The doorway or other entrance to a place of employment that is open to, and intended for use by, the general public or business invitees for
ingress and egress to a place of employment, or where employees are required or permitted to enter or exit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 119/348
OUTDOOR EATING AREA: A seating area open to the air that is accessory to a restaurant.
OUTDOOR EVENT: A scheduled outdoor musical, dance, theatrical, dramatic, entertainment or performance event, or a scheduled outdoor community
fair, parade, event or market, that is organized, licensed or permitted by the owner of an outdoor venue and to which members of the general public are
invited.
OUTDOOR VENUE: An outdoor theater, plaza, street or other improved area that is used as a public venue or forum to which members of the general
public are invited to listen, view or otherwise participate in an event that is organized, licensed or permitted by the owner of the venue, and including,
without limitation, parking lots located on the same property as the theater, plaza, street, or other improved area.
PARK GROUNDS: All unenclosed areas of a park or playground: a) that is owned or operated by the Village, the park district, or a public school district,
and b) to which members of the general public have been granted a right of access. "Park grounds" shall include, without limitation, parking lots located
on the same property as the park or playground.
PUBLIC MEETING: A meeting open to the public pursuant to the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.
SCHOOL GROUNDS: All unenclosed areas of property on which a public or private school, or school-related use, is located, which areas shall include,
without limitation, parking lots located on the same property as the public or private school or school-related use.
SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT: The Smoke Free Illinois Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 82/1 et seq., as may be amended. If a word or phrase is not
specifically defined in this chapter, it shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any
other lighted smoking equipment. "Smoke" or "smoking" does not include smoking that is associated with a native recognized religious ceremony, ritual,
or activity by American Indians that is in accordance with the Federal American Indian Religious Freedom Act, 42 USC 1996 and 1996a. (Ord. 1747, 3-
23-2016)
4-3-2: ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF APPLICABILITY OF THE SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT:
A. The Village hereby acknowledges that the Smoke Free Illinois Act is applicable, and is in full force and effect, within the Village of Monee. No person
shall smoke in any place in the Village within which smoking is prohibited pursuant to the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
B. In the event of a conflict between the Smoke Free Illinois Act and the provisions of this chapter, the most restrictive provision shall control. (Ord.
1747, 3-23-2016)
4-3-3: PROHIBITION IN UNENCLOSED PUBLIC AREAS:
A. No person shall smoke in the following unenclosed public areas:
1. Outdoor venues;
2. Park grounds;
3. School grounds;
4. Vehicle and railroad loading areas and platforms;
5. Loading docks and areas;
6. The Village Hall;
7. Village-owned parking lots;
8. Outdoor eating areas; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to any person who is temporarily in any portion of an outdoor eating
area that is located on a public sidewalk for the sole purpose of walking or traversing through such area;
9. Public sidewalks within fifteen feet (15') of an outdoor eating area; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to any person who is
temporarily in such area for the sole purpose of walking or traversing through such area;
10. Gasoline or fuel stations.
B. No person shall smoke in, or within fifteen feet (15') of, an outdoor venue during the time that an outdoor event is taking place in that outdoor venue;
provided, however, that the Village may designate, specified portions of an outdoor venue as areas within which smoking is not prohibited.
C. No person shall smoke, at any time, in any Municipal owned vehicle or during the operation or use of any Municipal owned equipment. (Ord. 1747, 3-
23-2016)
4-3-4: PROHIBITION AT ENTRANCES:
Smoking shall be prohibited within fifteen feet (15') of an entrance to any place (enclosed or unenclosed) within which smoking is prohibited; provided,
however, that this prohibition shall not apply to any person who is temporarily in such area for the sole purpose of walking or traversing through such
area. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 120/348
4-3-5: PROHIBITION AT PUBLIC MEETINGS:
Smoking shall be prohibited in all public meetings. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2016)
4-3-6: PROHIBITION IN COMMON RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
No person shall smoke in any common or public area (including, without limitation, lobbies, hallways, reception areas, public restrooms, and elevators)
of any apartment building, condominium, or other multiple-family residential structures. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2016)
4-3-7: HOTEL AND MOTEL REGULATIONS:
Not more than ten percent (10%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. (Ord. 1747,
3-23-2016)
4-3-8: RETAIL TOBACCO STORES:
Smoking shall be prohibited in all retail tobacco stores; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to an established smoking area incidental to
the sale of tobacco in retail tobacco stores, if such smoking area was in existence and operational as of April 25, 2005. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2016)
4-3-9: SIGNS AND ASHTRAYS:
Each owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of any place within which smoking is prohibited pursuant to this chapter shall:
A. Conspicuously post signs indicating that smoking is prohibited in the same manner as is described in sections 20(a) and 20(b) of the Smoke Free
Illinois Act; provided, however, that in the event that there is no clearly defined entrance to a place within which smoking is prohibited pursuant to this
chapter, such signs shall be posted on or adjacent to an existing identification sign located on the property; and
B. Remove all ashtrays from the place within which smoking is prohibited, in the same manner as is described in section 20(c) of the Smoke Free Illinois
Act. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2016)
4-3-10: OWNER AND OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit smoking in any place that is owned, occupied, or leased by the person and within which smoking
is prohibited pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2016)
4-3-11: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each and every offense.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, and who is the owner, occupant, or lessee of any place at which smoking is prohibited
pursuant to this chapter, shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
C. Violation notices for violations of this chapter shall be issued, served, and resolved in accordance with the administrative hearing system established
pursuant to this Code.
D. Each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs or exists shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2016)
4-3-12: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or part of this chapter or of the Smoke Free Illinois Act is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this
chapter shall remain in full force and effect, and shall be interpreted, applied, and enforced so as to achieve, as near as may be, the purpose and intent
of this chapter to the greatest extent permitted by applicable law. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2016)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 121/348
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
5-1-1: CREATION AND COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created in the village a police department, to be an executive department of the village. The police department shall consist of the chief
of police and such other members as may be provided from time to time by the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 457, 8-11-1976)
5-1-2: APPOINTMENTS:
The mayor, along with the advice and consent of the board of trustees shall appoint the chief of police. (Ord. 1586, 1-24-2012)
5-1-3: TERM OF APPOINTMENT:
A. Determination Of Mayor: The chief of police shall serve for such terms as determined by the mayor along with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees. (Ord. 1586, 1-24-2012)
B. Specific Term: In the absence of any designated term of appointment, such chief of police and police officers shall serve from May 1 to April 30 of the
following year. (Ord. 457, 8-11-1976)
5-1-4: SUPERVISION:
The mayor and board of trustees shall exercise general supervision and control over the police department and all members thereof. Whenever
practicable, the following procedures shall be followed in exercising such general supervision and control:
A. Establish Rules And Regulations: The standing committee on police and public safety shall establish rules, regulations, general orders, work
schedules, salaries, schedules and other administrative procedures for the police department, after consulting with the chief of police. The police and
public safety committee shall then report to the mayor and board of trustees regarding such matters for their final approval, prior to their becoming
effective.
B. Grievances: Any grievances, complaints or suggestions made by members of the police department shall be transmitted to the chief of police who
shall in turn bring them before the police and public safety committee for their consideration. Said committee shall then make recommendations
regarding the same to the mayor and board of trustees for ultimate final action thereon. (Ord. 457, 8-11-1976)
5-1-5: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. General Duties:
1. The chief of police shall be the keeper of the village jail and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein.
2. He shall also have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered in the village.
3. He shall keep such records and maintain such reports concerning the activities of the police department as may be required by state law or by the
mayor and village board of trustees.
4. The chief of police shall be responsible for the performance by the police department of its functions, and all persons who are members of the
police department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of police.
B. Promulgation Of Rules And Regulations:
1. The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations regarding the operation of the police department as he shall deem
advisable.
2. Such rules, when approved by the mayor and board of trustees, shall be binding on the members of the police department.
3. Such rules and regulations may cover the conduct of members, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried, hours of service, scheduling of
vacations, and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the efficiency of the police department. (Ord. 457, 8-11-1976)
5-1-6: GENERAL DUTIES OF POLICE:
The members of the police department shall have the following duties:
A. Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the enforcement of all of the provisions of this code, village
ordinances and applicable state law, and to preserve order and prevent infractions and arrest violators therefor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 122/348
B. Appear As Witnesses:
1. Every member of the police department shall appear as witness whenever it is necessary in the prosecution for a violation of this code, village
ordinances or of any state or federal law.
2. No member of the police department shall retain any witness fee for service as witness in any action or suit to which the village is a party. Any fees
paid for such services shall be turned over to the chief of police who shall deposit same with the village treasurer. (Ord. 457, 8-11-1976)
C. Conduct Of Members:
1. It shall be the duty of members of the police department to conduct themselves in a proper and law abiding manner at all times and to avoid the
use of unnecessary force.
2. Each member of the police department shall obey all lawful orders and directions of his superior.
D. Resignation Or Termination; Return Property To Village: In the event of resignation or termination of any police officer, he shall immediately return to
the police chief, or in the case of the police chief to the chairman of the committee on police and public safety, all badges, commission cards issued
to him and any village property in his possession. (Ord. 457, 8-11-1976; amd. 1999 Code)
5-1-7: COMPOSITION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
The Monee police department shall be staffed as deemed appropriate by the mayor and board of trustees. Currently the police department consists of
one police chief, two (2) sergeants and nine (9) patrol officers. (Ord. 1586, 1-24-2012)
5-1-8: SALARIES:
The mayor and board of trustees shall set the salaries of the chief of police and police officers by special ordinance or by the appropriation ordinance
passed annually by the village. (Ord. 457, 8-11-1976)
5-1-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The rules and regulations set forth as exhibit A attached to ordinance 636, on file in the office of the village clerk, and made a part hereof by reference,
are hereby adopted as official rules and regulations of the village police department. (Ord. 636, 3-9-1988)
5-1-10: PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AT AGE SIXTY FIVE:
A. Annual Examination: Upon any member of the police department reaching the age of sixty five (65), including supervisory personnel, he or she shall
be required to undergo an annual physical examination to determine his or her ability to adequately perform the duties of the position. Upon a review
of the results of said physical examination, the mayor and village board of trustees shall then determine the employment status of the member. The
mayor and village board of trustees shall have the authority to maintain the member in his or her current position, reassign said member and/or retire
the member from employment of the village. The medical information obtained from the physical examination shall be treated as confidential and
kept in a file separate from other personnel records.
B. Applicability: This section shall apply to any and all members currently employed or appointed by the village and to all such members who will be
employed or appointed in the future. (Ord. 1293, 4-14-2004)
5-1-11: ASSIST POLICE OFFICERS:
It shall be the duty of any person eighteen (18) years of age or older residing in the village when called upon by any member of the police department of
the village to promptly aid and assist him in the execution of his duty. (Ord. 457, 8-11-1976; amd. 1999 Code)
5-1-12: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
A. Authority To Employ: The village hereby authorizes the employment of part time police officers pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-30-21.
B. Definition; Conditions: A "part time police officer" is defined as a police officer hired for duties which require specific hours, but are not required to
work all regular days (shifts) of the year. The part time police officers are not entitled to sick leave, vacation, or other similar benefits. They are to
work twenty (20) hours or less per week, or occasionally for more hours, if needed, when requested by the department supervisor.
C. Requirements For Applicants: All applicants for employment as a part time officer shall satisfy all of the following minimum conditions:
1. Must have a high school (twelfth grade) diploma.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 123/348
2. Must be a United States citizen.
3. Must have a valid Illinois driver's license.
4. Must submit to criminal history investigation (background check), including submission of fingerprints to Illinois state police bureau of identification
and federal bureau of investigation.
5. Must have a legal residence within thirty five (35) miles of the village.
6. Must have a valid Illinois FOID card (firearms).
7. Must pass a medical physical examination including drug testing.
8. Must complete the Illinois law enforcement training and standards board requirements, presently completion of four hundred (400) hours of
certified training, or receive a waiver from the training board and power test. (Ord. 982, 8-13-1997)
D. Probationary Period: All original appointments to the position of a part time police officer shall serve a probationary period of one year after
completion of in service training. Prior to the completion of the probationary period, the chief of police shall recommend to the police and public
safety committee the retention or dismissal of the probationary appointee. If the recommendation is for dismissal before the end of the probationary
period, the chief of police shall state to the police and public safety committee the reasons for said dismissal. The police and public safety committee
shall make the final determination of whether to dismiss the probationary part time police officer, and the police and public safety committee shall not
be required to hold any hearings in arriving at a final decision of dismissal. (Ord. 982, 8-13-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
5-1-13: CREATION OF A POLICE PENSION FUND:
There is hereby created and established a police pension fund for the village of Monee in accordance with 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et al.
(Ord. 1574, 10-26-2011)
ARTICLE A. AUXILIARY POLICE
5-1A-1: APPOINTMENT; CONDITIONS:
A. Appointment; Recommendations: The village president is hereby authorized to appoint twenty (20) auxiliary policemen, as employees after
recommendation by the police and public safety committee subject to the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
B. Fingerprinting; Background Check: Prior to appointment, all proposed auxiliary policemen shall be fingerprinted and their fingerprints shall be
checked with the federal bureau of identification, Washington, D.C., for any possible criminal record.
C. Felony Conviction: No person shall be appointed as an auxiliary policeman if he has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral
turpitude.
D. Age: The minimum age to be an auxiliary policeman shall be set at twenty one (21) years of age.
E. Termination: The appointment of any or all auxiliary policemen may be terminated by the village president subject to the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. (Ord. 412, 12-8-1971; amd. 1999 Code)
5-1A-2: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Not Members Of Police Department: Such auxiliary policemen shall not be members of the regular police department.
B. Residency: Auxiliary policemen shall be residents of the village area.
C. Identification Symbols: Identification symbols worn by such auxiliary policemen shall be different and distinct from those used by the regular police
department and shall be selected and chosen by the chief of police.
D. Supervision By Chief Of Police: Auxiliary policemen shall at all times during the performance of their duties be subject to the direction and control of
the chief of police. (Ord. 412, 12-8-1971)
5-1A-3: COURSE OF TRAINING:
Auxiliary policemen, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures by
the chief of police. Such course of training shall be not less than forty (40) hours in duration. Upon completion of the course of training, the chief of
police shall file a certificate attesting to the auxiliary policeman's completion of said course with the police and public safety committee which will certify
the man's readiness for auxiliary duty. (Ord. 412, 12-8-1971; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 124/348
5-1A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Auxiliary policemen shall have the following powers and duties, when properly assigned and on duty:
A. To aid or direct traffic in the village;
B. To aid in control of natural or manmade disasters;
C. To aid in case of civil disorders;
D. To perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by the chief of police on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular
police department to perform normal and regular police duties;
E. To arrest or cause to be arrested with or without process all persons who break the peace, or are found violating any village ordinance or any criminal
law of the state;
F. To commit arrested persons for examination; (Ord. 412, 12-8-1971)
G. If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight or Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before the proper court in
authority; (Ord. 412, 12-8-1971; amd. 1999 Code)
H. To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that the corporate authorities may prescribe;
I. To serve and execute all warrants for violation of village ordinances, or the state criminal law, within the limits of the village, and for this purpose to
have all the common law and statutory powers of sheriffs. (Ord. 412, 12-8-1971)
5-1A-5: FIREARMS:
Auxiliary policemen shall not carry firearms, except with the permission of the chief of police and then only when in uniform and in the performance of
their duties. (Ord. 412, 12-8-1971)
5-1A-6: COMPENSATION:
Auxiliary policemen shall receive no compensation for services performed. (Ord. 412, 12-8-1971)
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the Village may thereby be protected and, to the
end to provide harmonious relationships in the interaction between man and animals by:
A. Protecting the citizens of the Village from rabies by specifying such preventive and control measures as may be deemed necessary;
B. Providing security to residents from annoyance, intimidation, and injury from dogs and other animals;
C. Encouraging responsible pet ownership;
D. Providing for the assessment of penalties for violators and for the enforcement and administration of this chapter. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The animal control officer hereafter defined.
ANIMAL: Any live vertebrate creature except man.
ANIMAL CAPABLE OF TRANSMITTING RABIES: All animals classified as mammals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 125/348
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The Chief of Police of the Village or other employee appointed by the Village President who is to exercise police powers
in the enforcement of this chapter.
BIRD: Any flying vertebrate that is covered with feathers.
BITE: Seizure of a person with the jaws or teeth of any cat, dog, or other animal capable of transmitting rabies so that the person so seized has been
wounded or pierced and further includes contact of the saliva of such cat, dog, or other animal with any break or abrasion of the skin.
BOARD: The County Board of Will County, Illinois.
CAT: All members of the classification, Felis catus.
CONFINED: The restriction of the cat, dog, or other animal at all times by the owner in a manner that will isolate the cat, dog, or other animal from the
public and other cats, dogs, or other animals.
CONTROL: Any owned animal that is either secured by a leash or lead, or within the premises of its owner, or confined within a crate or cage, or
confined within a vehicle, or on the premises of another person with the consent of that person.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner's family, in a
vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places.
DOG: All members of the classification Canis familiaris.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Any animal which has been domesticated by man so as to live and breed in a tame condition.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog.
Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal
from escaping from the enclosure.
GUARD DOG: A dog used in a commercial business or by a municipal or police department for the purposes of patrol and protection.
GUIDE DOG: A dog trained by a recognized organization to lead the legally blind or hearing impaired.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into custody and placed in a public pound or other suitable place in the county where the vicious dog is found.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection of a rabies vaccine approved by the Illinois department of agriculture and administered by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the company's recommendations for the vaccine used.
OWNER: Any person having the right of property of an animal, who keeps or harbors an animal who has it in his care, acts as its custodian or who
knowingly permits an animal to remain in or about any premises occupied by him unless possession is prohibited by federal or state laws. Native wildlife
remaining on or about any premises shall not be included in this definition.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association, or other legal entity, any public or private institution, municipal corporation,
unit of local government or any other business unit.
POUND: Any facility licensed by the Illinois department of agriculture and approved by the administrator for the purposes of enforcing this chapter and
used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals.
RUN LINE: A system of tying a dog in place with either rope or chain having a tensile strength of at least three hundred (300) pounds.
STRAY ANIMAL: Any animal that is not controlled by leash or other recognized control methods, or confined within the real property limits of its owner.
VICIOUS DOG: A. Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites or attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property;
B. Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings or domestic animals;
C. Any individual dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation;
D. Any individual dog which has been found to be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions;
E. No dog shall be deemed "vicious" if it bites, attacks, or menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner, or harms or menaces anyone who has
tormented or abused it, or is a professional trained dog for law enforcement or guard duties. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992; amd. 1999 Code)
5-2-3: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; RABIES CONTROL:
A. Rabies Vaccination Required: Every owner of a cat or dog four (4) months or more of age, except animal shelters, animal impounding facilities and
laboratory animal facilities, shall cause such cat or dog to be inoculated with rabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian at such intervals approved by
the Illinois Department of Agriculture. The rabies vaccine shall be licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture and approved by the
Illinois Department of Agriculture.
B. Certificate Of Vaccination: Evidence of such rabies inoculation shall be in the form of a certificate signed by a veterinarian who administered the
vaccine, and said certificate shall indicate the dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies and that said vaccination is valid for the licensing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 126/348
period, only one (1) cat or dog shall be included on each certificate. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992)
C. Annual License Required; Fee:
1. Requirement; Fee: Every owner of a cat or dog four (4) months or more of age, except animal shelters, animal impounding facilities and laboratory
animal facilities, shall obtain an annual license for said animal, and shall make application for a license on forms to be provided by the Village
Clerk. Upon the issuance of a license, the owner shall be furnished with a license certificate and a tag for the dog or cat for the licensing period.
The fee for such license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for two (2) years immunity for male or female dogs or cats, whether spayed or unspayed.
(Ord. 1396, 4-26-2006; amd. Ord. 1721, 5-13-2015)
2. Expiration Date: The license required to be obtained pursuant to this chapter shall expire on June 30 of each year. No license shall be issued for
less than the full annual fee. (Ord. 863, 6-14-1995)
D. Maintain Registry Of Licenses Issued: The Village Clerk shall keep a complete registry of all licensed dogs or cats describing the same by name,
breed, color and sex, and shall also enter the name and address of the owner or keeper as given, date of vaccination for rabies and the number of
the Village license tag. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992)
E. Reregistry Fee: Whenever the ownership of a dog or cat shall change, the new owner shall notify the Village and pay to the Village the sum of three
dollars ($3.00) for reregistry fee, whereupon the Village shall change the records accordingly for said dog or cat. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992; amd. 1999
Code)
F. Collar And Tag Required; Fee For Duplicate Tag:
1. Every dog or cat kept within the Village shall be provided by its owner or keeper with a collar or harness made of leather, metal or other substantial
material to which the license tag shall be securely fastened.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner, to remove a license tag from a dog or cat, and said tags shall be in place at all times.
3. In the event that a license tag is lost or taken from any duly licensed dog or cat, even though the dog or cat may not have been taken up or
impounded, the owner or keeper shall immediately notify the Village Clerk's Office, pay a fee of one dollar ($1.00), and obtain a new license tag.
G. New Residents:
1. A rabies tag and registration certificate issued by another city, village or county in the State will be honored until expiration if the owner has
recently established residence in the Village.
2. All other new residents owning or keeping a dog or cat, four (4) months of age or older, shall have the dog or cat inoculated against rabies and
shall register the dog or cat within twenty one (21) days after establishing residence in the Village.
H. Authority To Ascertain Inoculation And Licensing: The animal control officer is hereby authorized to ascertain by observation and by inquiry of the
animal owner if a dog or cat is inoculated against rabies and licensed. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992)
5-2-4: BITING ANIMALS CAPABLE OF TRANSMITTING RABIES:
A. Notify Village Of Animal Biting A Person: It shall be unlawful for any person knowing that an individual has been bitten by an animal to fail or refuse to
notify, within twenty four (24) hours, the animal control officer.
B. Impoundment Of Animal: When the animal control officer receives information that any person has been bitten by an animal, the animal control officer
shall have the owner impound the biting animal under observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days beginning within twenty four
(24) hours of the biting incident. The biting animal must be confined in the house of its owner in a manner which will prohibit it from biting any person
or animal if the animal control officer adjudges such confinement satisfactory.
1. When the biting animal is currently inoculated with rabies vaccine and the bite occurred below the shoulder and the animal has not reportedly
bitten within the last twelve (12) months, the animal's health shall be reported by the veterinarian to the animal control officer and Will County
department of animal and rabies control on the first and tenth days of the observation period for rabies.
2. When the biting animal has bitten a family member living within the same household, below the shoulder and is not currently inoculated with rabies
vaccine, the animal's health shall be reported to the animal control officer and the Will County department of animal and rabies control on the first,
fifth, and tenth days of the observation period for rabies.
C. Confirmation Of Health Of Animal: Confirmation of the health of the biting animal shall be sent by the veterinarian to the animal control officer and the
Will County department of animal and rabies control within twenty four (24) hours of the first and final examination. Official forms shall be provided by
the animal control officer.
D. Procedure On Signs Of Rabies: When an animal confined for biting shows signs of rabies or acts in a manner which would lead a person to believe
that an animal may have rabies, the owner or veterinarian shall notify the animal control officer immediately by telephone or in person of these signs.
The animal control officer shall immediately notify the physician attending the bitten person or responsible health agency as soon as he received
notice of such signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 127/348
E. Release Of Confined Animal; Owner Requirements: If the animal confined is determined not to be infected with rabies at the end of the period of
confinement, it shall be released from quarantine. The animal owner shall show proof of rabies inoculation for cats and dogs and shall pay any fee,
charge, or penalty including any fee for veterinary services attributed to the bite. A confined animal, when not redeemed by the owner, may be
disposed of in accordance with the state law.
F. Compliance With Written Instructions From Village: It shall be unlawful for the owner of a biting animal to euthanize, sell, give away, or otherwise
dispose of or have inoculated against rabies the animal known to have bitten a person until it has been released from confinement for observation for
rabies by the animal control officer. It shall be unlawful for the owner of such animal to refuse or fail to comply with the written or printed instructions
made by the animal control officer. If such instructions cannot be delivered in person, they shall be mailed to the owner of such animal by regular
mail, postage prepaid. The affidavit or testimony of the animal control officer delivering or mailing such instructions is prima facie evidence that the
owner of such animal was notified of his responsibilities.
G. Destruction Of Animal; Examination Of Head And Brain: In all cases where an animal which has bitten or caused an abrasion of the skin has been
destroyed before ten (10) days have elapsed since the day upon which the animal bit or caused the abrasion of the skin of any person, it shall be the
duty of the person destroying the animal to deliver the head and the brain of the animal to the animal control officer immediately after the destruction
for laboratory examination.
H. Deliver Animal To Veterinarian Or Seizure By Village:
1. The owner or keeper of a dog, cat, or other biting animal must deliver said animal to the licensed veterinarian of their choice within twenty four (24)
hours after receiving notice from the animal control officer. Animals that bite any person must be confined for observation by a licensed
veterinarian.
2. The animal control officer is authorized to seize and impound all biting animals if the pet owner or keeper refuses to deliver said animal to a
veterinary hospital within twenty four (24) hours after receiving official notice. Impounded animals shall be confined for a period of ten (10) days at
the owner's expense.
3. The biting animal shall not be released by the animal control officer until all costs of observation, notification, and inoculation have been paid by
the owner or keeper of the dog, cat, or other animal. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992)
5-2-5: RABIES CASE PROCEDURE:
A. Notification Required: It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal or any veterinarian examining an animal which shows signs of rabies, or which
acts in a manner which would lead a person to believe that such animal may have rabies to fail to notify the animal control officer immediately by
telephone or by person.
B. Investigation; Confinement Of Animal: The animal control officer shall investigate each report of an animal which shows signs of rabies or acts in a
manner which would lead a person to believe that the animal may have rabies. Upon determination by the animal control officer or a licensed
veterinarian that an animal may be affected with rabies, the owner of such animal shall be required by the animal control officer to surrender the
animal to the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian for confinement for a period of time as determined by the Illinois department of
agriculture.
C. Destruction Of Infected Animal: When the animal confined is determined to be infected with rabies by the examining veterinarian, the animal control
officer shall order the animal humanely destroyed and examined for rabies by a laboratory licensed to perform rabies virus analysis (FRA test). A
copy of this order shall be given to the owner of the animal or mailed to the last known address of the owner. Any animal capable of transmitting
rabies in direct contact with the rabid animal whether or not the exposed animal has been inoculated with rabies shall be confined as recommended
by the animal control officer. The animal control officer may order the exposed animal euthanized.
D. Release Or Disposal Of Healthy Animal:
1. If the animal confined is determined not to be infected with rabies at the end of the period of confinement, it shall be released to the owner of such
animal upon presenting proof of a current rabies inoculation certificate for cats and dogs and payment of any fee, charge or penalty including any
fee for veterinary services.
2. If the animal is not redeemed by the owner, the animal may be disposed of in accordance with state law.
E. Compliance With State Regulations: Whenever a case of rabies occurs in a locality, or whenever the proper officials of a government unit are
apprehensive of the spread of rabies, the animal control officer shall act as directed by the rules and regulations of the Illinois department of
agriculture. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992)
5-2-6: STRAY ANIMALS:
A. Running At Large Prohibited: No owner of a dog, cat, or other animal shall cause or permit the dog, cat, or other animal to run at large at any time
during the year in any area of the village. All dogs, cats, and other animals kept within any area of the village shall be confined by means of a secure
leash or chain, or confined within a fenced area in such a manner as to prevent the animal from running at large.
B. Nuisance Declared: Any dog, cat, or other animal found running at large in violation hereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be
apprehended and impounded in the manner provided in this chapter. However, if the animal cannot be safely apprehended and impounded, it may
be destroyed by the animal control officer, state or local police authority.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 128/348
C. Notice Of Impoundment To Owner: When owners of stray animals impounded are known, notice shall be given by mail to the last known address of
the owner. Stray animals shall not be held more than seven (7) days from date of actual notice to the owner, if known, or five (5) days if the owner is
unknown. All unclaimed, apprehended animals shall be placed for adoption, humanely euthanized, or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the
state law.
D. Owner Responsible For Costs: The stray animal owner is responsible for all costs relating to the apprehension and impoundment of the animal found
not under control. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992; amd. 1999 Code)
5-2-7: VICIOUS DOGS:
A. Confinement:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is at all times kept in an
enclosure. The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure is: a) if it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain
veterinary care for the vicious dog; or b) to comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction; provided, that said vicious dog is securely
muzzled and restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding three feet (3') in length, and shall
be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the vicious dog.
2. Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the law enforcement authority
having jurisdiction in such area and shall be turned over to a licensed veterinarian for destruction by lethal injection.
3. No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away any vicious dog. (Ord. 1525, 2-24-2010)
B. Nuisance Conditions; Exception; Complaints:
1. Maintaining Nuisance Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by permitting any dangerous dog or other
animal to leave the premises of its owner when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods.
2. Guide Dogs: Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped, and sentry, guard or police owned dogs
are exempt from this section, provided an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for
exemption under this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with section 5-2-3 of this chapter. It shall
be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog to notify the animal control officer of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the
owner shall keep the animal control officer advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992)
3. Filing Complaint: The animal control officer, a police officer, the village prosecutor, the state's attorney, or any citizen of the county in which a
dangerous dog or other animal exists may file a complaint in the name of the people of the state to enjoin all persons from maintaining or
permitting such, to abate the same, and to enjoin the owner of such dog or other animal from permitting same to leave his premises when not
under control by leash or other recognized control methods. Upon the filing of a complaint in the circuit court, the court, if satisfied that this
nuisance may exist, shall grant a preliminary injunction with bond in such amount as the court may determine enjoining the defendant from
maintaining such nuisance. If the existence of the animal shall be in violation of this chapter, and in addition, the court shall enter an order
restraining the owner from maintaining such nuisance and may order that such dog or other animal be humanely dispatched. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992;
amd. 1999 Code)
5-2-8: ANIMAL CARE:
A. Promoting Animal Fights: No person shall promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, or carry on any animal fight or any other type of contest, game, or
fight of a similar nature, nor any simulated version of same that involves baiting or inciting an animal toward intent to fight.
B. Abandoning Animals: No person shall knowingly abandon any animal whether healthy, old, maimed, infirm, sick, or disabled on their own property
without daily care or by abandonment off the premises where it may suffer injury, hunger, or exposure, or become a public charge.
C. Keeping Animal Under Control: No person shall permit at any time his animal to:
1. Run uncontrolled on any public place, public way, or upon the private premises of any other person than the owner of such animal;
2. Molest persons or vehicles by chasing, barking, or biting;
3. Attack other animals;
4. Damage property other than the owner's;
5. Bark, whine, howl, or make excess noises so as to cause a nuisance.
D. Offensive Condition Due To Animal Feces: No person shall allow cat or dog feces to accumulate in any yard, pen, or premises in or upon which a cat
or dog shall be confined or kept so that it becomes offensive to those residing in the vicinity or a health hazard to the residing dog or cat.
E. Leaving Animal In Motor Vehicle: No person shall leave any animal unattended in a motor vehicle or enclosed trailer when the outside temperature
shall exceed twenty one degrees Celsius (21°C) (70°F) in such manner that said animal does not have proper air circulation while so confined.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 129/348
F. Care Of Injured Or Diseased Animal: Any animal which is on any public way or public place and which appears to be injured or severely diseased and
for which care is not being provided on the scene by the owner, or any injured or severely diseased animal that has strayed onto private premises
shall be removed, if possible, to the nearest Municipal pound or to the nearest veterinarian or veterinary hospital willing to accept same without
guarantee of payment. If immediate removal shall not appear practical or possible, or if the animal is in critical condition, such animal may be
deprived of life by the most humane method available on the scene unless the owner shall come forward beforehand and assume responsibility for
immediate removal and care.
G. Vehicle Operator To Stop Upon Striking Animal: Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes an animal shall stop at once and render
such assistance as may be possible; or shall immediately report such injury to the animal owner, if known, or to the appropriate law enforcement
agent.
H. Chaining Animal On Premises: No person shall chain or leash a dog outside unless the chain is at least twelve feet (12') long so as to allow for
adequate exercise and freedom of movement. Said dog must also be contained on the owner's premises. The chain shall be attached to a swivel
base so as to avoid entanglement. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992)
5-2-9: UNLAWFUL ACTS REGARDING ANIMALS AND RESTRICTED AREAS:
A. Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person within the limits of the Village to:
1. Dead Animals:
a. Fail to remove or have removed the carcass of any dead animal or fowl from any place or property under the individual's ownership or control.
b. Place or deposit the carcass of any dead animal upon any place or property within the Village.
2. Keeping Bees: Keep or raise bees within the Village limits, except that any resident keeping or raising bees within the Village on November 12,
1975, may continue to keep and raise bees within the Village thereafter. This exception shall terminate in the event such resident shall cease to
keep or raise bees for a period of six (6) months or more. This exception shall be personal to the resident and shall be limited to the location at
which the bees were raised as of said date. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992)
3. Defecating: Permit any domestic animal or pet to defecate or urinate on any alley, street, sidewalk, park, playground, parking lot, church, school or
other property of public use, or on private property without the express consent of the owner of the property; provided, however, that the owner or
person in control of such animal will not be guilty of a violation of this section if any feces which is deposited on property used by the public or on
private property, is removed immediately and disposed of in an appropriate fashion. (Ord. 1725, 7-22-2015)
4. Keeping Farm Animals: Keep, raise, or allow to run at large within the corporate limits of the Village any farm animal, including, but not limited to,
cattle, hogs, sheep, horses, ducks, geese or other livestock or poultry, except chickens. Such farm animals may, however, be kept or raised on
property specifically zoned therefor by Village zoning ordinance1. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992; amd. Ord. 1870, 8-8-2018)
5. Protection Of Animals: Hunt animals, game, or wild fowl within Village limits; cruelly treat any animal or inhumanely beat, underfeed, overload or
abandon any animal.
6. Dogs And Cats On Leash: Dogs and cats, while on any public way or in any public place, or in the area surrounding any building occupied by two
(2) or more families within the Village, shall be led by a chain or leash not exceeding six feet (6') in length and the owner or party in control of said
animal shall take whatever means necessary so as to prevent such dog or cat from running at large or biting any person or other animal. (Ord.
747, 1-8-1992)
B. Restricted Areas: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person within the limits of the Village to take a dog or cat into any commercial business,
public building or public park; provided, however, that dogs or cats may be left in cars parked in parking lots adjacent to commercial business areas,
if proper ventilation is provided such animals. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs leading blind persons or the hearing impaired.
(Ord. 1515, 11-9-2009)
5-2-10: PET CEMETERY; SPECIAL PERMIT:
A. Special Permit Issued; Specific Property: A special permit is hereby granted authorizing the location on and use of the subject property, legally
described in exhibit A attached to ordinance 535, on file in the office of the village clerk, and made a part hereof by reference, as a cemetery for
animals owned as pets, including the authorization to erect thereon such buildings as are necessary for the utilization of said property as such a
cemetery.
B. Use Restricted To Pets Only: This special permit is restricted to the use of the property as a cemetery for animals owned by individuals as pets only,
and shall not extend to the use of the property as a cemetery or disposal ground for deceased animals not owned by individuals as pets, such as
lost, strayed or dangerous animals held by any individual or private or public agency or any animals owned or held by individuals or private or public
agency for profit or for commercial or research purposes.
C. Compliance With Regulations:
1. Property Use: The utilization of the subject property as a pet cemetery shall be in accordance with any and all municipal, county, state or federal
regulations pertaining thereto.
2. Improvements: Any and all improvements to the subject property shall conform to any and all municipal, county, state or federal regulations
pertaining thereto.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 130/348
D. Special Permit Noted On Zoning Map: The village clerk is hereby authorized and instructed to note the special permit made by this section upon the
official zoning map of the village. (Ord. 535, 7-23-1981)
5-2-11: IMPOUNDMENT FEES AND PENALTIES:
A. Impoundment Fees:
1. Fees Established: The following fees shall be charged and collected for any dog, cat or other animal impounded under the provisions of this
chapter. In addition, for each day or part thereof, that such animal is sheltered, reasonable and customarily accepted board fees shall be charged
by the veterinarian and paid by the owner prior to release of the animal.
For the first offense $ 5.00
For the second offense 10.00
For the third offense and each offense thereafter 15.00
2. Accumulation Of Offenses; Fees Added To Penalty Fine: The offenses shall be accumulated over the period of the last twelve (12) consecutive
preceding months in determining the number of offenses for the above purposes. Said fees shall be added to any penalty fine if a citation is issued
for violation of this chapter and the animal is not redeemed.
B. Redemption: The following provisions shall apply to redemption of impounded animals:
1. Payment Of Fees: Any person desiring to redeem any dog, cat, or other animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to
do so by paying all fees which have accrued due to the impounding of such dog, cat, or other animal as of the date of redemption, and, in the
event such dog or cat has not been licensed, obtaining a license for such dog or cat pursuant to the applicable provisions of this chapter. Any
animal impounded under this chapter and which this chapter declares it to be unlawful to keep within the village, shall upon redemption be
immediately removed from within the village limits, properly restrained so as not to damage property or person.
2. Disposal Of Unredeemed Animals: Any dog, cat or other animal not redeemed by his owner may be disposed of in accordance with state law. If no
state law applies to the disposition of a particular animal impounded, any such animal not redeemed by its owner within ten (10) days after
impoundment, where the owner or keeper is unknown, or within ten (10) days of notification of the owner or keeper where known, may be
redeemed by any person paying the required fees, or released to an animal welfare agency or destroyed in a humane manner.
C. Penalties: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fines as follows:
1. A fine in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each offense, provided said fine is paid within seven (7) days from the date of issuance of a
citation for violation of this chapter, and the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) if paid after said seven (7) days and prior to hearing. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992)
2. Upon a hearing on any such violation, the fine shall be as determined by the court, but not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than the
maximum fine provided for in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
3. The above fines shall be in addition to any fee charges for impoundment and shelter under the provisions of this chapter, should the animal be
impounded. (Ord. 747, 1-8-1992; amd. 1999 Code)
5-2-12: RAISING OF CHICKEN HENS:
A. Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context indicates a different meaning:
CHICKEN COOP: Means an accessory structure, wholly enclosed, used for the purposes of housing hens.
HEN: Means the female of the species Callus gallus f. domestica.
PERSONAL POULTRY LICENSE: Means a license to keep or maintain hens as provided by this section.
SLAUGHTER: Means the act of killing an animal for food consumption.
ZONING ORDINANCE: Means the Village of Monee zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1870, 8-8-2018)
B. License Required:
1. No person shall keep or raise hens without having first secured a Municipal poultry license.
2. There is no fee for a Municipal poultry license. (Ord. 1877, 9-26-2018)
C. License Application: Applications for personal poultry licenses shall be made upon such forms as prescribed by the Village. Tenants seeking a license
for rented property must submit a copy of their current lease and written evidence that the landlord consents to said application.
D. License Rules:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 131/348
1. Licenses shall indicate the name of the licensee and the location of the premises. Licenses issued under this section shall only apply to the
premises described in the application and only one location shall be described in each license.
2. Licenses shall provide for no more than eight (8) hens on each licensed premises, and shall be restricted to properties zoned and utilized as
single family dwellings in the R-1 and R-2, and C-1 Single Family Residential Zoning Districts as defined in the zoning ordinance. Roosters and
guinea hens are prohibited.
3. Licensees shall not slaughter hens on the licensed premises.
4. Hens must be kept within the chicken coop between dusk and dawn.
5. The licensed premises shall be constructed and maintained to be free of rodent infestation and to prevent the collection of standing water; refuse
from the hens shall be disposed of in a clean and sanitary fashion.
6. All feed and related items shall be protected in a container with a tightly fitted lid to prevent rodents from gaining access.
7. No person shall allow hens to produce noise loud enough to disturb persons occupying adjacent property.
8. Hens shall be kept as pets or for personal, non-commercial purposes only. Breeding or sale of eggs, excrement or any byproduct of the licensed
activity is prohibited.
E. Chicken Coop Requirements:
1. Each licensed premises shall contain a single chicken coop with dimensions no larger than twenty four (24) square feet in area and six feet (6') in
height as measured from grade, elevated at least one foot (1') off of the ground.
2. If electricity is installed to the chicken coop it must be installed underground; extension cords or above ground wire are not permitted. Any
electrical work requires an electrical permit; the fee shall be the same as for an accessary structure.
3. Chicken coops shall be located only in a rear yard a minimum of three feet (3') from any lot line and shall be at least thirty feet (30') from
residential structures not occupied by the licensee. Chicken coops shall be located at least ten feet (10') from the principal building and a minimum
of five feet (5') from all other buildings on the licensed premises and abutting properties. Existing non-residential structures may be allowed for the
housing of hens upon staff review.
4. Chicken coops shall be constructed of solid materials on all sides, including roof and door(s); the chicken coop must be constructed in such a
manner so as to protect the hens from predators and trespassers, provide adequate ventilation to minimize odors, allow easy ingress and egress
for hens and protection from weather elements including cold temperatures.
5. Hens may be allowed outside of the chicken coop between dawn and dusk only in an enclosed, covered area no larger than thirty two (32) square
feet and no taller than six feet (6'). Such area may only be located in a rear yard a minimum of three feet (3') from any lot and at least thirty feet
(30') from residential structures not occupied by the licensee. The screening enclosing this area must be buried at least twelve inches (12") deep
and six inches (6") flat to prevent predators from digging under the fence. Construction requirements; chicken wire shall not be used for screening.
If hardware cloth or welded wire mesh is used for screening, it must be a minimum of 19-gauge wire. To accommodate free range hens the outside
enclosure may be provided through the use of a mobile screened enclosure commonly referred to as a chicken tractor. All areas used for the
feeding and grazing shall be maintained to prevent soil erosion and runoff to neighboring properties. All chicken coops and enclosed
feeding/grazing areas shall be maintained in good, structurally sound repair and in a neat, clean, presentable and attractive condition. (Ord. 1870,
8-8-2018)
6. A chicken coop is to be considered an accessory structure and shall require the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 1877, 9-26-2018)
F. Inspections:
1. A license shall not be granted unless the property has been inspected and the inspector has found compliance with this section.
2. In addition to any other enforcement authority granted by this Code the Code Enforcement Officer and building inspector shall have the authority
to enforce this section.
G. License Revocation Hearing: A personal poultry license may be revoked by the Village Manager for failure to comply with the requirements of this
section. However, no license shall be revoked until the licensee is notified and has been given the opportunity to appear at a hearing before the
Village Manager. Based upon the record of such hearing, the Village Manager shall issue a written decision to the licensee. Such revocation of a
license may be in addition to any fine imposed by this Code. (Ord. 1870, 8-8-2018)
Chapter 3
GENERAL OFFENSES
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are hereby defined:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits, wine and beer which is capable of being consumed as
a beverage by a human being.
ATTEMPT: A person commits an attempt when, with intent to commit a specific offense, he does any act which constitutes a substantial step toward the
commission of that offense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 132/348
BODILY HARM: Physical harm which includes, but is not limited to, sexually transmitted disease, pregnancy and impotence.
CONSPIRACY: A person commits conspiracy when, within intent that an offense be committed, he agrees with another to the commission of that
offense. No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit an offense unless an act in furtherance of such an agreement is alleged and proved to
have been committed by him or by a coconspirator.
GENDER: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian of the person, or given custody, of a minor by a Circuit Court of this State or any other state but does
not include a person appointed guardian only of the estate of a minor, or appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile
Court Act1.
MINOR: Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by
the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PARENT: The lawful father or mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption.
PEACE OFFICER: Any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests
for offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific offenses.
PERSON: The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic incorporate as well as
to individuals.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Any intentional or knowing touching or fondling by the victim or the accused, either directly or through clothing, of the sex organs,
anus or breast of the victim or the accused, or any part of the body of a child under thirteen (13) years of age, for the purpose of sexual gratification or
arousal of the victim or the accused.
SEXUAL PENETRATION: Any contact, however slight, between the sex organ of one person and the sex organ, mouth or anus of another person, or
any intrusion, however slight, of any part of the body of one person or of any animal or object into the sex organ or anus of another person, including,
but not limited to, cunnilingus, fellatio or anal penetration. Evidence of emission of semen is not required to prove sexual penetration.
SHALL: The word "shall" is mandatory.
SOLICITATION: A person commits solicitation when, within intent that an offense be committed, he commands, encourages or requests another to
commit that offense.
VILLAGE: The village of Monee, Illinois. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995; amd. Ord. 1222, 3-26-2003)
5-3-2: ANIMALS AT LARGE ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS:
No person or owner of livestock shall allow livestock to run at large. All owners of livestock shall provide the necessary restraints to prevent such
livestock from so running at large. It shall be a defense to this section that reasonable care was used in restraining such animals from running at large.
(Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-3: OFFENSES AFFECTING OR INVOLVING CHILDREN:
A. Endangering Life Or Health Of Children: It shall be unlawful for any person having the care or custody of any child, wilfully to cause or permit the life
of such child to be endangered, or the health of such child to be injured, or wilfully cause or permit such child to be placed in a situation that its life or
health may be endangered.
B. Abandonment Of Refrigerators In Places Accessible To Children: Whoever abandons or discards in any place accessible to children any refrigerator,
icebox or ice chest, of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, which has an attached lid or door which may be opened or fastened
shut by means of an attached latch, or who, being the owner, lessee, manager of such place, knowingly permits such abandonment of any discarded
refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain there in such condition shall be guilty under this subsection.
C. Sale Of Certain Publications To Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, lend, give away or show, or have in his possession with
intent to sell or give away, or to show or advertise, or otherwise offer for loan, gift or distribution to any minor child, any book, pamphlet, magazine,
newspaper, story paper or other printed paper devoted to the publication, or principally made up of criminal news, police reports, or accounts of
criminal deeds, or pictures and stories of deeds of bloodshed, lust or crime.
D. Curfew:
1. Age And Hour Restrictions: It is unlawful for a person under the age of seventeen (17) years to be present at or upon any public assembly,
building, place, street or highway at the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible
companion at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or occupation in which the
laws of this state authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 133/348
Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Saturday;
Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Sunday; and
Between 11:00 P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 A.M. on the following day.
2. Parental Responsibility: It is unlawful for a parent or legal guardian to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate subsection D1
of this section. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-4: INDECENCY, OBSCENITY AND HARMFUL MATERIALS:
A. Public Indecency:
1. Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards, who performs any of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
a. An act of "sexual penetration" or "sexual conduct" as defined in section 5-3-1 of this chapter; or
b. A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
2. "Public place", for purposes of this subsection, means any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
B. Prostitution:
1. Defined: Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any act of "sexual penetration" as defined in section 5-3-1 of this chapter, for
money, or any touching or fondling of the sex organs of one person by another person, for money or anything of value, for the purpose of sexual
arousal or gratification commits an act of prostitution.
2. Soliciting For A Prostitute: Any person who performs any of the following acts commits soliciting for a prostitute:
a. Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution; or
b. Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of prostitution; or
c. Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose of prostitution.
3. Keeping A Place Of Prostitution: Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place which could offer seclusion or shelter for the
practice of prostitution who performs any of the following acts keeps a place of prostitution:
a. Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution; or
b. Grants or permits the use of such place under circumstances from which he could reasonably know that the place is used or is to be used for
purposes of prostitution; or
c. Permits the continued use of a place after becoming aware of facts or circumstances from which he should reasonably know that the place is
being used for purposes of prostitution.
4. Pimping: Any person who receives money or other property from a prostitute, not for a lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in
part from the practice of prostitution, commits pimping.
5. Juvenile Pimping:
a. Any person who receives money or other property from a prostitute under sixteen (16) years of age or from a prostitute who is an
institutionalized severely or profoundly mentally retarded person, not for a lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in part from
the practice of prostitution, commits juvenile pimping.
b. It is an affirmative defense to a charge of juvenile pimping that the accused reasonably believed the person was of the age of sixteen (16) years
or over or was not an institutionalized severely or profoundly mentally retarded person at the time of the act giving rise to the charge.
C. Obscenity; Elements Of The Offense: A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to
exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, he:
1. Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or embodiment
of the obscene; or
2. Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
3. Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene; or
4. Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of his body for gain; or
5. Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this subsection C, or of the penal laws
or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
6. Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
D. Harmful Materials:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 134/348
1. Elements Of The Offense: A person who, with the knowledge that a person is a child, that is, a person under eighteen (18) years of age, who fails
to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a child, knowingly distributes to or sends or causes to be sent to, or exhibits to, or offers
to distribute or exhibit any harmful material to a child, is guilty of this offense.
2. Definitions:
DISTRIBUTE: To transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration.
KNOWINGLY: As used in this subsection D, means having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the contents thereof.
MATERIAL: A. Material is harmful if, to the average person, applying contemporary standards, its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest, that is a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation or such matters, and is material the redeeming social importance of which is substantially less than its prurient
appeal.
B. "Material", as used in this subsection, means any writing, picture, record or other representation or embodiment.
3. Interpretation Of Evidence:
a. The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the
child to whom such material was offered, distributed, sent or exhibited, unless it appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its
dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for specially susceptible groups, in which case the predominant appeal of the material
shall be judged with reference to its intended or probable recipient group.
b. In prosecutions under this subsection D, where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate
the material is being commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the
material and can justify the conclusion that the redeeming social importance of the material is in fact substantially less than its prurient appeal.
4. Affirmative Defenses:
a. Nothing in this subsection D shall prohibit any public library or any library operated by an accredited institution of higher education from
circulating harmful material to any person under eighteen (18) years of age, providing such circulation is in aid of a legitimate scientific or
educational purpose, and it shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution of a violation of this subsection D that the act charged was
committed in aid or legitimate scientific or educational purposes.
b. Nothing in this subsection D shall prohibit any parent from distributing to his child any harmful material.
c. Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown and acted in reliance upon any of the following documents as proof of the age of a child, shall
be a defense to any criminal prosecution under this subsection D: a document issued by the federal government or any state, county or
municipal government or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate
issued under the federal selective service act or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.
5. Child Falsifying Age: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age who falsely states, either orally or in writing, that he is not under the age of
eighteen (18) years, or who presents or offers to any person any evidence of age or identity which is false or not actually his own for the purpose
of ordering, obtaining, viewing, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material shall likewise be guilty under this
subsection D. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-5: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
A. Assault: A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery.
B. Battery: A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any means:
1. Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
2. Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
C. Battery Of An Unborn Child:
1. A person commits battery of an unborn child if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any means causes bodily harm to an
unborn child.
2. For purposes of this subsection C, "unborn child" shall mean any individual of the human species from fertilization until birth, and "person" shall
not include the pregnant woman whose unborn child is harmed.
3. This subsection C shall not apply to acts which cause bodily harm to an unborn child if those acts were committed during any abortion, as defined
in section 2 of the Illinois abortion law, as amended, to which the pregnant woman has consented. This subsection C shall not apply to acts which
were committed pursuant to usual and customary standards of medical practice during diagnostic testing or therapeutic treatment.
D. Domestic Battery: A person commits domestic battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification by any means:
1. Causes bodily harm to any family or household member as defined in subsection (3) of section 112(a)-3 of the code of criminal procedure, as
amended;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 135/348
2. Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with any family or household member as defined in subsection (3) of section 112(a)-3 of
the code of criminal procedure, as amended. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-6: LOITERING:
No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace, or in any way contribute to such danger as it already exists.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place. This shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive,
disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to or in whose presence, they are made.
E. Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated above, that officer may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the peace and safety, order
that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of
this subsection. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-7: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
A. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another or to provoke a breach of the peace; or
B. Transmits in any manner to the fire department of the village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists; or
C. Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or
explosive is concealed in such place; or
D. Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed; or
E. Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or
F. While acting as a collection agency as defined in the collection agency act2 or as an employee of such collection agency, and while attempting to
collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
G. Transmits a false report to the department of children and family services under section 4 of the abused and neglected child reporting act3; or
H. Knowingly transmits a false report to the department of public health under the nursing home care reform act of 19794; or
I. Transmits in any manner to the police department or fire department or any privately owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an
ambulance, emergency medical technical ambulance or emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no reasonable
ground for believing that such assistance is required; or
J. Transmits a false report under article II of an act in relation to victims of violence and abuse, being 320 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/1 et seq. (Ord.
860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-8: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an individual by any means, commits reckless conduct if he performs recklessly
the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they otherwise are lawful or unlawful. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-9: FIREARMS DISCHARGE PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 136/348
It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or air gun in the village; provided, that this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law
to discharge a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor to any citizen to discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his person or property. (Ord. 860,
4-12-1995)
5-3-10: FIREWORKS SALE, USE OR EXPLOSION PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks. This section
shall not apply to the board of trustees in the village who shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for
supervised public display of fireworks, nor to those individuals granted a permit for that limited purpose. Applications for permits shall be consistent
with 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/2.
B. The police in lieu of filing of a long form complaint may issue a P-ticket or short form citation to a person violating this section.
C. Any person found to be in violation of this section is subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1450, 7-25-2007)
5-3-11: THEFT RELATED OFFENSES:
A. Theft Defined:
1. A person commits theft when he knowingly:
a. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
b. Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
c. Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
d. Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen or under such circumstances as to reasonably induce him to
believe that the property was stolen, and
(1) Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; or
(2) Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
(3) Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of
such use or benefit; or
(4) Obtains or exerts control over property in the custody of any law enforcement agency which is explicitly represented to him by any law
enforcement officer or any individual acting in behalf of a law enforcement agency as being stolen.
2. Theft of property, under this section, shall be limited to property not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) in value.
B. Theft Of Lost Or Mislaid Property: A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft when he:
1. Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner, and
2. Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner, and
3. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property.
C. Theft Of Labor Or Services Or Use Of Property: A person commits theft when he obtains the temporary use of property, labor or services of another
which are available only for hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the
property, labor or services. Theft under this subsection shall be limited to property, labor or services not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) in
value.
D. False Report Of Theft And Other Losses: A person who knowingly makes a false report of a theft, destruction, damage or conversion of any property
to a law enforcement agency or other governmental agency with the intent to defraud an insurer is guilty under this subsection.
E. Theft From Coin Operated Machines:
1. A person commits theft from a coin operated machine when he knowingly and without authority and with intent to commit a theft from such
machine, opens, breaks into, tampers with, or damages a coin operated machine.
2. As used in this section, the term "coin operated machine" shall include any automatic vending machine or any part thereof, parking meter, coin
telephone, coin laundry machine, coin dry cleaning machine, amusement machine, music machine, vending machine dispensing goods or
services, or money changer.
F. Coin Operated Machines; Possession Of Key Or Device: Whoever possesses a key, tool, instrument, explosive or device or a drawing, print or mold
of a key, tool, instrument, explosive or device to open, break into, tamper with or damage a "coin operated machine" as defined in subsection E2 of
this section, with intent to commit a theft from such machine, is guilty under this subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 137/348
G. Retail Theft: A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
1. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
2. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings with aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise
personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
3. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
4. Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or
5. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
6. Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts to
convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant;
or
7. Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-12: DECEPTIVE PRACTICES:
A. Definitions: As used in this section:
ACCOUNT HOLDER: Any person, having a checking account or savings account in a financial institution.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or other depository of money or medium of savings and collection
investments.
INTENT TO DEFRAUD: To act with "intent to defraud" means to act wilfully, and with the specific intent to deceive or cheat, for the purpose of
causing financial loss to another, or to bring some financial gain to oneself. It is not necessary to establish that any person was actually defrauded or
deceived.
B. General Deception: A person commits a deceptive practice when, with the intent to defraud:
1. He causes another, by deception or threat to execute a document disposing of property or a document by which a pecuniary obligation is incurred;
or
2. Being an officer, manager or other person participating in the direction of a financial institution, he knowingly receives or permits the receipt of a
deposit or other investment, knowing that the institution is insolvent; or
3. He knowingly makes or directs another to make a false or deceptive statement addressed to the public for the purpose of promoting the sale of
property or services; or
4. With intent to obtain control over property or to pay for property, labor or services of another, or in satisfaction of an obligation for payment of tax
under the Retail Obligation Tax Act or any other tax due to the State of Illinois, he issues or delivers a check or other order upon a real or fictitious
depository for the payment of money, knowing that it will not be paid by the depository. Failure to have sufficient funds or credit with the depository
when the check or other order is issued or delivered, or when such check or other order is presented for payment and dishonored on each of two
(2) occasions at least seven (7) days apart, is prima facie evidence that the offender knows that it will not be paid by the depository, and that he
has the intent to defraud.
5. He issues or delivers a check or other order upon a real or fictitious depository in an amount exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in
payment of an amount owed on any credit transaction for property, labor or services, or in payment of the entire amount owed on any credit
transaction for property, labor or services, knowing that it will not be paid by the depository, and thereafter fails to provide funds or credit with the
depository in the face amount of the check or order within seven (7) days of receiving actual notice from the depository or payee of the dishonor of
the check or order. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-13: ODOMETER FRAUD:
Any person who shall, with intent to defraud another, disconnect, reset, or alter, or cause to be disconnected, reset or altered, the odometer of any used
motor vehicle with the intent to conceal or change the actual miles driven shall be guilty under this section. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-14: PROPERTY RELATED OFFENSES:
A. Littering Prohibited: No person shall throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any Village street, alley, sidewalk or any yard or premises, public or private, any
filth of any kind, or cans, papers, trash, paper containers, rubbish, bottles, wood shavings, brush, tree trimmings, or any other form of litter or waste
matter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 138/348
Further, no person shall affix any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone, flagstone or other sidewalk or upon
any tree, lamppost, telephone, telegraph pole or hydrant upon the streets or alleys without the written consent of the Village. The placing of any sign,
poster, or similar material on private property must comply with the applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. 1726, 7-22-2015)
B. Injuring Sidewalk Or Bridge: Any person who purposely destroys or injures any sidewalk, public bridge, culvert, or causeway, or removes any of the
timbers or planks thereof, or obstructs the same, shall be guilty under this subsection and shall be liable for all damages occasioned thereby and all
necessary costs for rebuilding or repairing same. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
C. Deposit Of Snow Or Ice Upon Highway: No person, firm, corporation, or institution, public or private, shall plow or remove or cause to be plowed or
removed ice or snow from any shopping center, parking lot, commercial or institutional service area or driveway or any other public or private service
area or driveway and deposit such ice or snow on a public highway or dedicated right-of-way, or along the shoulder or edge of a public highway or
dedicated right-of-way. This said prohibition shall be applicable to a residential driveway or sidewalk. (Ord. 1160, 11-14-2001)
D. Vandalism:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act of vandalism upon public or private property within the Village.
2. It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides with such parent or legal guardian to suffer such
minor to commit an act of vandalism upon public or private property within the Village.
3. For purposes of this section, "vandalism" shall mean to maliciously, recklessly or knowingly:
a. Damage, deface or destroy any property of another person without his consent; or
b. Damage, deface or destroy any property of another by means of fire or explosive device; or
c. Start a fire on the land of another without his consent; or
d. Deposit on the land or in a building of another person, without his consent, any stink bomb, or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
interfere with the use and occupancy by another of the land or building.
E. Criminal Damage To Property: A person commits an illegal act when he:
1. Knowingly damages any property of another without his consent; or
2. Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damages property of another; or
3. Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without his consent; or
4. Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his consent; or
5. Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another, without his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intends to interfere with the use by another of the land or building; or
6. Knowingly damages the property of another without his consent by defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging such property by the use of paint
or any other similar substance.
F. Criminal Damage Of Firefighting Apparatus, Hydrants Or Equipment: Whoever wilfully and maliciously cuts, injures, damages, tampers with or
destroys or defaces any fire hydrant or any fire hose or any fire engine, or other public or private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus
appertaining to such equipment, or intentionally opens any fire hydrant without proper authorization is guilty under this subsection. (Ord. 860, 4-12-
1995)
5-3-15: TRESPASS:
A. Trespass Prohibited; Defined: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within the village on either public or private property. Trespass
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any owner
or occupant thereof.
2. The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to the premises or at any point or approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or
in writing by any owner or occupant thereof.
3. A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant
thereof.
4. An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession thereof, or a
failure or a refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right.
B. Criminal Trespass To A Residence: A person commits criminal trespass to a residence when, without authority he knowingly enters or remains within
any residence, including a house trailer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 139/348
C. Criminal Trespass To Vehicles: Whoever knowingly and without authority enters any part of or operates any vehicle, aircraft, watercraft or
snowmobile is guilty under this subsection.
D. Criminal Trespass To Real Property:
1. Whoever enters upon the land or a building, other than a residence, or any part thereof of another, after receiving prior to such entry, notice from
the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land or in a building, other than a residence, of another after receiving
notice from the owner or occupant to depart, is guilty under this subsection D.
2. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of this subsection D if he has been notified personally, either orally or
in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or
the forbidden part thereof.
3. This subsection D does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or otherwise, living on the land with the permission of the owner or of
his agent having apparent authority to hire workers on such land and assigns them living quarters or a place of accommodation for living thereon,
nor to anyone living on such land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing or other agreement or arrangement with the owner or his agent, nor
to anyone invited by such migrant worker or other person so living on such land to visit him at the place he is so living upon the land.
4. A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this subsection D if he beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial
properties located within the village. For the purpose of this subsection D, "unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial properties"
means any real estate: a) in which the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least two (2) years; and b) which has been left unoccupied and
abandoned for a period of at least one year; and "beautifies" means to landscape, clean up litter, or to repair dilapidated conditions on or to board
up windows and doors.
E. Tampering With Public Notice: A person who knowingly and without lawful authority alters, destroys, defaces, removes or conceals any public notice,
posted according to law, during the time for which the notice was to remain posted, commits a violation under this subsection. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-16: MOB ACTION:
Mob action consists of any of the following:
A. The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two (2) or more persons acting together and without authority of law; or
B. The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
C. The assembly of two (2) or more persons without authority of law, for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone supposed to
have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence. (Ord.
860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-17: OFFENSES INVOLVING VILLAGE OFFICIALS:
A. Resisting Or Obstructing A Peace Officer: A person who knowingly resists or obstructs the performance by one known to the person to be a peace
officer of any authorized act within his official capacity is guilty under this subsection.
B. Obstructing Service Of Process: Whoever knowingly resists or obstructs the authorized service or execution of any civil or criminal process or order
of any court is guilty under this subsection.
C. Refusing To Aid An Officer: Whoever upon command refuses or knowingly fails reasonably to aid a person known by him to be a peace officer in:
1. Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
2. Preventing the commission by another of any offense, is guilty under this subsection C. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-18: COMPOUNDING A CRIME:
A person compounds a crime when he receives or offers to another any consideration for a promise not to prosecute or aid in the prosecution of an
offender. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-19: LIQUOR RELATED OFFENSES BY UNDERAGE PERSONS5:
A. Purchase Or Acceptance Of Gift Of Liquor By Underage Persons:
1. Purchase Or Acceptance Of Gift: Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not
purchase, accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor or possess alcoholic liquor as set forth in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16. (Ord. 1215, 12-11-
2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 140/348
2. Positive Identification: If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery demand presentation of some form of
positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
3. False Identification Cards: No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a
false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have
possession of alcoholic liquor, in violation of this subsection A. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995; amd. Ord. 1222, 3-26-2003)
B. Misrepresentation Of Age By Minor: Any person, under the age of twenty one (21) years who, for the purpose of buying, accepting or receiving
alcoholic liquor from a licensee, represents that he is twenty one (21) years of age or older shall be guilty under this subsection. (Ord. 860, 4-12-
1995)
C. Consumption Of Alcohol By A Minor:
1. Prohibited: Consumption of an alcoholic liquor by a minor is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 1222, 3-26-2003)
2. Exceptions; Religious Ceremony, Privacy Of Home: The possession and dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under twenty
one (21) years of age in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years of age
under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent or those persons standing in loco parentis of such person under twenty one (21)
years of age in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited under subsection C1 of this section. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995; amd. Ord. 1222, 3-26-2003)
5-3-20: DRUG RELATED OFFENSES:
A. Possession Of Cannabis: It is unlawful for any person to knowingly possess not more than two and five-tenths gram (2.5 g) of any substance
containing cannabis. Any person who has not been previously convicted of, or placed on probation or court supervision for any offense under the
Illinois cannabis control act6, is eligible for a sentence for probation, at the discretion of the court, without entering a judgment and with the consent
of such offender. Such a probation shall be consistent with the terms, limitations and restrictions as set forth under 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
550/10 and any amendments thereto.
B. Prohibiting Sale And Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia:
1. Definition Of Drug Paraphernalia: The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagation, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the cannabis control act. It includes but is not limited to:
a. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
b. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances.
c. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
d. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled
substances.
e. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
f. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances.
g. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana.
h. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
i. Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
j. Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
k. Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body.
l. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into
the human body, such as:
(1) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured
metal bowls.
(2) Water pipes.
(3) Carburetion tubes and devices.
(4) Smoking and carburetion masks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 141/348
(5) Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held
in the hand.
(6) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
(7) Chamber pipes.
(8) Carburetor pipes.
(9) Electric pipes.
(10) Air driven pipes.
(11) Chillums.
(12) Bongs.
(13) Ice pipes or chillers.
m. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
(1) Statements made by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
(2) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any states or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
(3) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this chapter.
(4) The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
(5) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
(6) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or
should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this chapter. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, as to a direct violation of this chapter shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug
paraphernalia.
(7) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
(8) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.
(9) National and local advertising concerning its use.
(10) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
(11) Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
(12) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprises.
(13) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
(14) Expert testimony concerning its use.
2. Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who violates this section
may be fined up to five hundred dollars ($500.00).
3. Manufacture Or Delivery Of Drug Paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture, with intent to
deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who violates this subsection B,
upon conviction, may be imprisoned for not more than three (3) months or fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both.
4. Delivery Of Drug Paraphernalia To A Minor: Any person eighteen (18) years of age or over who delivers drug paraphernalia to a person under
eighteen (18) years of age who is at least three (3) years his junior, upon conviction, may be imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or fined
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both.
5. Advertisement Of Drug Paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any
advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is
to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. Any person who violates this subsection B, upon conviction,
may be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days or fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both.
6. Civil Forfeiture: All drug paraphernalia manufactured, delivered, possessed, intended for use, or designed for use defined in subsections B1a
through B1l of this section shall be seized without a warrant by a peace officer and the paraphernalia shall be subject to forfeiture.
7. Severability: If any provision of this subsection B or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or other applications of this subsection B which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this
end the provisions of this subsection B are severable. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 142/348
5-3-21: EAVESDROPPING:
A. Definition: An "eavesdropping device" is any device capable of being used to hear or record oral conversation whether such conversation is
conducted in person, by telephone, by any other means; provided, however, that this definition shall not include devices used for the restoration of
the deaf or hard of hearing.
B. Act Of Eavesdropping: A person commits eavesdropping when he:
1. Uses an eavesdropping device to hear or record all or any part of any conversation unless he does so: a) with the consent of all the parties to
such a conversation; or b) in accordance with article 108A or 108B of the code of criminal procedure of 1963, approved August 14, 1963, as
amended; or
2. Uses or divulges, except as authorized by this section or by article 108A or 108B of the code of criminal procedure of 1963, approved August 14,
1963, as amended, any information which he knows or reasonably should know was obtained through the use of an eavesdropping device. (Ord.
860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-22: HARASSMENT BY TELEPHONE:
Harassment by telephone is use of telephone communication for any of the following purposes:
A. Making any comment, requests, suggestion or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent with an intent to offend; or
B. Making a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues with intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number; or
C. Making or causing the telephone of another repeatedly to ring, with the intent to harass any person at the called number; or
D. Making repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, solely to harass any person at the called number; or
E. Knowingly permitting any telephone under one's control to be used for any of the purposes mentioned herein. (Ord. 860, 4-12-1995)
5-3-23: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 860, 4-12-
1995; amd. 1999 Code)
5-3-24: LASER POINTERS; SALE AND POSSESSION PROHIBITED:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, "laser pointer" shall be any helium neon (HeNe) laser which typically operates at a wavelength of 832.8 nMe
with the mandated power limit of 5mW of power. Said lasers are considered class 2 lasers with the potential for eye injury; and a diode laser which
typically operates at a wavelength of 670 nMe (although others are possible) with a power source providing 5mW. Said lasers are considered class
3a lasers, with the potential for eye injury.
B. Prohibited Acts:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession at any private or public place, except as provided herein, a laser pointer.
2. No person, firm or corporation shall sell to or provide a person with a laser pointer as described in this section.
C. Penalty: Any person found guilty of an offense under this section shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 1055, 5-12-1999)
5-3-25: EXCESSIVE NOISE:
A. Noise Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for a person to play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette
player or other similar device for receiving broadcast sound or reproducing recorded sound if such device is located: 1) on a public way, or 2) in any
motor vehicle on a public way, and if the sound generated by the device is clearly audible to a person with normal hearing at a distance greater than
seventy five feet (75').
B. Exception: This section shall not apply to any person participating in a parade or public assembly in which a permit has been issued or to authorized
emergency vehicles.
C. Penalties: Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
three hundred dollars ($300.00) per offense. (Ord. 1204, 9-25-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 143/348
5-3-26: USE OF CELLULAR PHONES WHILE DRIVING:
A. Definition:
VEHICLE: Any automobile, bus, motor home, minicamper, recreational vehicle, school bus, truck or any other vehicle of the second division as
defined in the Illinois vehicle code.
B. Use Of Cellular Phones:
1. Except as otherwise provided in subsection B2 of this section, no person shall drive a motor vehicle while using a mobile, cellular, analog wireless
or digital telephone. "Using a mobile, cellular, analog wireless or digital telephone" shall include, but not be limited to, the following activities: a)
talking or listening to another person on the telephone; b) text messaging; c) sending, reading or listening to an electronic message; or d) browsing
the internet via the mobile, cellular, analog wireless or digital telephone.
2. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
a. Law enforcement officers and operators of emergency vehicles, when on duty and acting in their official capacities.
b. Persons using a telephone with a "hands free" device allowing the driver to talk into and listen to the other party without the use of hands.
c. Persons using a telephone to call 911 telephone numbers or other emergency telephone numbers to contact public safety forces.
d. Persons using a telephone while maintaining a motor vehicle in a stationary parked position, and not in gear.
C. Penalties: A person who is found to be in violation of this section is subject to a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and no more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1532, 4-12-2010)
5-3-27: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON MUNICIPAL PROPERTY:
A. Definitions:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer,
and capable of being consumed as a beverage by human beings. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of
denatured alcohol produced in accordance with acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing onehalf
of one percent (0.5%), or less, of alcohol by volume.
PROPERTY: Any real estate owned and operated by the Village of Monee including, but not limited to, park and recreational facilities, Municipal
buildings, public streets and sidewalks.
B. Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages: No person shall bring within, have possession or control, sell or give away or consume any alcoholic
beverages at any time on Municipal owned property except as permitted by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. Any person or organization seeking
permission to allow for the consumption of alcoholic beverages shall file the request with the Village Administrator which will be forwarded to the
Mayor and Board of Trustees for their review. (Ord. 1610, 6-13-2012)
5-3-28: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES ON DETENTION PONDS:
A. Prohibited Activities: Swimming and skating are hereby prohibited activities on any detention pond located within the Village. Fishing, from the
shoreline only, shall be permitted for adults and for children under supervision of an adult. No boats shall be allowed at any time on a detention pond.
B. Posting Of Signs: Signs shall be prominently placed near all detention ponds indicating that such activities are prohibited. (Ord. 1616, 7-11-2012)
5-3-29: NUISANCES:
A. Prohibition Of Nuisances: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance on any property
under his control or do any act which constitutes a nuisance as described hereunder. It shall constitute a nuisance to commit any offense which is in
fact a nuisance or which is a nuisance according to common law or which is made such by this section, other ordinances of the Village of Monee or
by the statutes of the State of Illinois.
B. Nuisances Enumerated: The following acts, omissions, or conditions shall be deemed nuisances:
1. An act which shall annoy, injure, or endanger the safety or health of the public.
2. An act which shall offend public decency.
3. An act which shall unlawfully interfere with, obstruct, or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage, a public park, public way, or other public
place.
4. Obstruction of any gutter so as to cause water to stagnate therein or permitting foul or stagnant water to stand upon any premises.
5. Obstruction or pollution of any drainage ditch or watercourse in the Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 144/348
6. Causing or permitting any garbage or offensive substance of any kind, including, but not limited to unused paper, junk, non-functioning and
unlicensed motor vehicles, unused wood, ashes, tin cans, unused masonry or crockery, cinders, rubbish, refuse, tree branches, trimmings or
stumps, yard trimmings, cartons, and boxes, to be collected, deposited, or to remain in any place in the Village other than as prescribed by this
Code or other applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the Village.
7. All buildings, walls, and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay, or otherwise and which are so situated as to endanger the
safety of the public.
8. All buildings in the Village which have been abandoned and/or not conforming to this Code for a period in excess of sixty (60) days, unless a
written plan for the use of the building, or its demolition, is filed with the Village Clerk within said 60-day period.
9. All dangerous or unsanitary, unguarded, unprotected machinery or equipment in any public place or situated or operated on private property.
10. Causing or permitting any open burning of garbage or other discarded solid materials or cause or allow the burning of garbage or other discarded
solid materials in any chamber not approved by the State of Illinois Pollution Control Board or Environmental Protection Agency.
11. Keeping on any premises any type of material which may be injurious to the health or offensive to the neighborhood or by which any noxious or
offensive smell may be created.
12. Any person found to be in violation of the crime prevention rental housing ordinance shall be deemed to be in violation of this section.
13. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusual noise which
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others within the Village, except in cases of urgent necessity. The
following list shall be considered excessive noises in violation of this section. Said list shall not be considered exclusive.
a. Radio, television sets, musical instruments played at a level which disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring landowners;
b. The use of citizen band radios in excess of established limits which may cause noise to be received by other citizens on their electronic
equipment;
c. The sounding of any horns or other device on any automobile or other vehicle on any street or public place, except as a danger warning,
wherein the noise creates an unreasonable loud or harsh sound;
d. The use of hammer, derrick, hoist tractor, roller, pile driver, shovel or other similar equipment in building or construction operations other than
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. except in cases of urgent necessity to protect the public health and
safety or otherwise authorized by Village;
e. To keep any animal or bird enclosed which causes barking, howling, or frequent loud noises disturbing the comfort of persons within the vicinity;
and
f. Operating lawn care equipment other than between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
14. To dump or deposit or cause to be dumped or deposited or store material of any kind on any real property except when the dumping, depositing,
or storing is for a purpose which is customarily incidental to residential use or when building materials are deposited on a site for which a building
permit has been issued and the building materials are to be used for construction purposes.
15. It shall be unlawful when any person makes or maintains an excavation within the Village to be used for the construction of a building or for a use
accessory to the construction of a building, the development of a subdivision, or the construction or installation of public improvements, or makes
or maintains or allows to exist any other excavation which constitutes a danger to the public by reason of its depth or proximity to public ways or
walks or for any other reason.
16. It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, or other person in control or possession of any premises jointly or severally to permit any eave trough,
footing drain, drain, downspout, piping, sump pump, or other device or appliance, permanent or temporary, above or below grade, for collecting
and discharging surface water, rain water, or any other source of surface runoff water, ground water, or sub-surface water to be so designed,
located, or constructed on, over, or across any street, alley, public way, or any rights-of-way thereof, or public property other than by means of a
Village approved storm sewer, drainage swale, or other drainage system or structure, without approval of the Village and a written permit to do so
issued by the Building Commissioner and the Zoning Enforcement Officer. A violation of this subsection B16 is declared to be a nuisance. It shall
also be a nuisance to allow any such device to discharge water in such a manner as to allow the water to accumulate on any street, alley, public
way, or any other right-of-way.
17. To throw or permit the escape into any street or other public place, or unto or upon any adjacent ground, any unclean water or any foul or
noxious liquid from any premises.
18. To allow any pond, lake or body of water to be in a stagnant condition or in a condition that is detrimental to the public health.
19. All landscaping, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, plants, and flowers must be properly maintained in order for the landscaped areas to
fulfill the purposes for which they were established. The landscape areas shall be free of litter, weeds, and debris and all plantings shall be healthy
and orderly. The owner of the property and any tenant of the property shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of the property.
20. No person shall permit, cause, help, maintain or create a nuisance as defined by the State of Illinois.
21. All inoperable motor vehicles, whether on private or public property and in view of the general public are to be considered a nuisance. Inoperable
vehicles means any motor vehicle for which a period of at least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed or on which
the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered or so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power.
22. To park, store, keep any vehicle in any rear, side or front setbacks on private or public property on grass or gravel is prohibited.
23. To repair any motor vehicle including, but not limited to, changing or replacing parts, greasing or the performance of any type of maintenance,
service or work on a motor vehicle on any roadway or public right-of-way, except in emergency situations shall be prohibited.
24. To obstruct flow of traffic, pedestrians or Village events or use any roadways, public right-of-ways or public property to sell products, services, or
otherwise solicit or harass the public.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 145/348
25. To drive, operate or run any motorized vehicle on private or public property without adequate muffler or noise abatement system so as to permit
the emission of loud and disturbing noises is prohibited. (Ord. 1773, 12-14-2016)
26. To cause or to permit to remain on any premises vegetation which includes, but not limited to, dead trees, shrubs or trees or shrubs that are
infected with injurious insects, pests or infected with plant diseases which are liable to spread to other plants, trees or shrubs to the injury of said
plants, trees or shrubs or to the injury of a person or property.
No tree, shrub, or unkept vegetation shall be within two feet (2') or more of the street side of property line. Any canopy of a tree shall be pruned in
such a manner to allow at least eight feet (8') of clearance over sidewalks and fourteen feet (14') of clearance over roadways when spanning areas
outside of property lines.
Authorized Village personnel are hereby given the authority to issue a citation/ticket to individuals who are in violation of the provisions of this
subsection B26 and said citation will be heard through the administrative hearing process pursuant to section 1-14-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1772, 12-
14-2016)
C. Abatements: Whenever a nuisance as described herein is found on any premises and there is an eminent risk to the public health and safety, the
Mayor of the Board of Trustees is hereby authorized in his/her discretion or delegation to cause the same to be summarily abated in such manner as
he/she may direct.
1. Inspection: For the purpose of carrying the foregoing provisions of this section into effect, it shall be the duty of such officers or officials as may be
directed or deputized by the Mayor of the Board of Trustees, from time to time to ascertain a nuisance arising under this section to be abated. In all
cases where a nuisance shall be found upon any grounds or other premises which can be charged by assessment with the expense of removal,
notice shall be given to the owner or occupant of the building or other premises, when known and can be found, to remove the nuisance; and in
case of his refusal or neglect to comply with such notice, the officers or officials shall abate the same and report the expense thereof to the
President and Board of Trustees.
2. Abatement Notice: In all cases where a nuisance shall be found upon any ground or other premises within the jurisdiction of the Village, not less
than twenty four (24) hours' notice may be given in writing signed by the officer or official so directed by the Mayor of the Board of Trustees, to the
owner or occupant or person in possession, charge or control of the premises, if known and can be found, to remove such nuisance. It shall not be
necessary in any case for the notice to specify the manner in which any nuisance shall be abated, unless the officer or official shall deem it
advisable so to do. If the person so notified shall neglect or refuse to abate the same in accordance with such notice, he shall be chargeable with
the expense which may be incurred in the removal thereof, to be collected by suit, lien, termination of Municipal services or otherwise in addition to
any fine or penalty which may be imposed by law.
3. Emergency Situations: In an emergency situation where unless the Village acts, there is an immediate hazard, a serious risk to the public, or an
imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare from a nuisance existing in the Village, if a reasonable effort under the circumstances has
been made to notify the person causing or permitting the nuisance and that person is either unavailable or unwilling to abate the nuisance, said
nuisance may be abated without further notice, and a notice describing the action taken to abate the nuisance posed on the property.
Where the Village acts to abate a nuisance, the expenses incurred for the abatement shall be chargeable either individually or jointly to the person
causing or permitting the nuisance to continue or to the owner of the building, structure or premises on or from which the nuisance was abated.
D. Penalty: Any person found to be in violation shall be subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day for each day
each offense continues to exist. (Ord. 1773, 12-14-2016)
Chapter 4
MINORS
5-4-1: TOBACCO PRODUCTS; SALE AND POSSESSION:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of
payment, dispenses tobacco products.
B. Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco Products: It shall be unlawful for any licensee of a business or cigarette vending machine to engage, employ or permit
any person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell, deliver or accept payment for tobacco products.
C. Purchase By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any
false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products.
D. Possession By Minors Prohibited; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any tobacco products; provided, that the possession by
persons under the age of eighteen (18) years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or
guardian's home shall not be prohibited. (Ord. 969, 3-12-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 146/348
E. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, in addition to the revocation of its license, shall be liable to a fine or penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 969, 3-12-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
5-4-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR MINORS:
A. Purpose; Findings: The corporate authorities find that the incidence of acts of vandalism and similar offenses by juveniles resulting in damage to
property and injury to individuals within the village have increased, thus posing a threat to the value of the property within the village, and also
threatening the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the village, and also recognize the need to provide the means to eliminate such
problems in order to ensure the safety of the property and residents of the village. The corporate authorities further find that increased parental
responsibility is essential for the effective control and elimination of such juvenile offenses. Furthermore, the corporate authorities further find that it is
in the best interests of the village that such acts be prosecuted by the village as a local offense, that penalties therefor be imposed which are related
to the nature of the act and the type of offender, and that parents or legal guardians of minors found guilty of such acts be additionally held
responsible for any monetary penalty or order of restitution or reparation imposed. The diligent pursuit of such interest will tend to increase parental
supervision of minors and reduce the incidence of juvenile vandalism, and other offenses which threaten the property and health of individuals, thus
advancing the welfare of residents of the village.
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed legal guardian of the person or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state or any other state.
MINOR: A person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age, is unemancipated and resides with his parents or legal guardian.
PARENT: The lawful father or mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption.
PROHIBITED CONDUCT BY MINORS: For purposes of this section, the following conduct by minors is prohibited and no minor shall:
1. Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without his consent; or
2. Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over any motor vehicle, trailer, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft, or any part thereof of
another person without his consent; or
3. Knowingly commit any violation of a state statute or village ordinance concerning vandalism, battery, curfew, disorderly conduct, obscene
conduct, trespass, or possession or use of an alcoholic liquor, cannabis, or controlled substance, retail theft, fireworks, or any other offense or
wilful or malicious acts to persons or property.
C. Offense Of Failure To Exercise Parental Responsibility:
1. Offense: It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with that parent or legal guardian to fail to exercise
proper parental responsibility by allowing or permitting the minor to commit any violation of a village ordinance or state statute concerning that
"prohibited conduct" defined in subsection B of this section.
2. Presumption: A parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have allowed or permitted the minor to have committed a violation of a village
ordinance or state statute under all of the following conditions:
a. The minor has been either adjudicated to be in the violation of the offenses identified in this section, or has incurred nonjudicial sanctions from
any police officer resulting from an admission of guilt to any such offense; and (Ord. 968, 3-12-1997)
b. The parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by certified mail (return receipt requested) or by personal service in substantially the
following form:
LEGAL NOTICE
To: (Parents' or Guardians' Names)
From: Village of Monee
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been involved with a violation of an ordinance or State statute concerning vandalism, battery,
curfew, disorderly conduct, obscene conduct, trespass, or possession or use of alcoholic liquor, cannabis, or controlled substances, retail theft,
fireworks, or any other offense of willful or malicious acts to persons or property. If said minor is again found guilty of one of the stated ordinance
or comparable State statutes you may be found guilty of the offense of failure to exercise parental responsibility. Conviction for said offense can
result in a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $750.00. You are hereby notified that you must exercise proper parental responsibility over
said minor by controlling his unlawful conduct.
c. Said minor, within two (2) years of the receipt of such notice by the parent or legal guardian, has been either adjudicated to have committed, has
been charged with the violation (except if found not to be guilty) of, or has admitted to have committed any violation of any ordinance or state
statute as described in this section.
3. Notice: It is the policy of the village that a parent or legal guardian of a minor be notified and required to appear in court whenever that minor is
charged with a violation of an ordinance or state statute which requires the minor's appearance in court.
4. Penalty: Any parent or guardian found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each
and every violation thereof, and every day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 968, 3-12-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 147/348
5-4-3: MANDATORY COURT APPEARANCE FOR PARENTS OF CHARGED MINORS:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed legal guardian of the person or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state or any other state.
MINOR: A person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age, is unemancipated and resides with his parents or legal guardian.
PARENT: The lawful father or mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption.
B. Mandatory Court Appearance:
1. Notify Parent: It is the policy of the village that a parent or guardian of a minor be notified and required to appear in court whenever that minor is
charged with any misdemeanor, traffic violation requiring court appearance, or petty offense requiring court appearance, as provided in the
statutes of the state or the ordinances of the village.
2. Form Of Notice: Consistent with the above policy, notice will be directed to the parent or legal guardian by certified mail (return receipt requested)
or by personal service in substantially the following form:
LEGAL NOTICE
To: (Parents' or Guardians' Names)
From: Village of Monee
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been charged with an offense which is a violation of a Village ordinance or State statute and
which requires the appearance of said minor in Court. You are further notified that one of the parents or legal guardian of said minor shall appear
in Court before the case will be tried or be disposed.
If you fail to appear, the Village Prosecutor has been directed to have issued a subpoena to bring you into Court. Failure to obey such a
subpoena can result in contempt of Court findings with the penalty being a fine or imprisonment or both.
C. Subpoenas: The village prosecutor is hereby directed to have subpoenas issued whenever a parent or legal guardian of a minor does not appear in
court after the first two (2) times the case has been before the court. (Ord. 967, 8-12-1997)
D. Penalty:
1. Whoever violates any provision of this section, for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code for each and every violation thereof, and every day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
2. The above penalty provision shall in no way limit or restrict the court to assess a penalty which includes imprisonment on a finding of contempt of
court. (Ord. 967, 8-12-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 5
ALARM SYSTEMS
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment and devices or a single device, such as a solid state unit arranged to signal the presence of a hazard
requiring urgent attention, and to which the police department is expected to respond.
ALARM USER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other organization of any kind in control of any building, structure, or facility
where an alarm system is maintained or activated within the municipality, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. Also included are those systems
which employ an audible signal emitting sounds, or a flashing light or beacon designed to alert or signal persons outside the premises of an alarm
activation.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE: An electrically operated instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice alarm on receipt of a stimulus from the sensory apparatus
that has detected a physical force or condition inherently characteristic of an unauthorized intrusion. Also included are devices which are stimulated by
direct action by the alarm user or his employees.
DIRECT LINE: A telephone line leading directly into the communications center of the police department that is for use only to report emergency
messages and signals on a person to person basis.
FALSE ALARM: Any type of alarm signal necessitating a response by the police, or other municipal department, where an emergency situation does not
in fact exist.
LOCAL ALARMS: A signaling system which, when activated, causes an audible or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the premises within
which the system is installed.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or society, but such term does not include the village of Monee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 148/348
POLICE CHIEF: The chief of the police department of the village, or his authorized representative.
PUBLIC TRUNK LINE: A telephone line leading into the communications center of the police department that is for the purpose of handling emergency
and administrative calls on a person to person basis. (Ord. 720, 1-9-1991)
5-5-2: FALSE ALARMS:
The following provisions shall apply to "false alarms", as defined in section 5-5-1 of this chapter:
A. Warning From Police Chief; Issuance Of P-Ticket: When three (3) or more false alarms are received within a twelve (12) month period, commencing
on May 1 of each year, by the village, the chief of police or his representative shall cause a written warning to be sent via first class mail to the alarm
user notifying him of the number and dates of the false alarms. If further false alarms are received by the police department after the initial three (3)
false alarms, a P-ticket or quasi-criminal complaint may be initiated against the alarm user for each additional false alarm subsequent to those
identified in the first class mailing mentioned above.
B. Uncontrollable Circumstances: There shall be no penalty assessed for a false alarm when, upon investigation by the police department, it was
determined that the false alarm was caused by an uncontrollable extraordinary circumstance to include an act of God.
C. Appeal For Reconsideration: An alarm user may appeal to the chief of police, for consideration of a designated false alarm if that alarm user presents
written documentation to the chief of police, that he had undertaken reasonable action to discover and eliminate the cause or causes of any false
alarm. The appeal must be made within seven (7) days after the false alarm in question, which time may be extended by the chief of police for a
reasonable time. The decision of the chief of police on such reconsideration shall be final.
D. Permission For Testing: No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the police department shall be tested or
demonstrated without first obtaining permission from the police department. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not
transmitting emergency messages directly to the police department, unless the messages are to be relayed to the police department.
E. Failure To Notify Police Department: Failure to notify the police department prior to the testing of an alarm system shall constitute a false alarm. (Ord.
720, 1-9-1991)
5-5-3: LOCAL ALARM SYSTEMS:
The following provisions shall apply to "local alarms" as defined in section 5-5-1 of this chapter:
A. Automatic Shut Off Devices: All local alarms shall be equipped with an automatic shut off device which will deactivate within thirty (30) minutes of the
initial alarm. The person owning or operating an outside ringer shall have one year from the date of the amendatory ordinance to provide such
automatic shutoff.
B. Owner Responsibility: It shall be the sole responsibility of the persons owning or operating a local alarm to maintain the system at the sole expense of
the owner or operator.
C. Remedial Action: In addition to all other remedies provided by ordinance, the chief of police or his authorized representative, whenever he shall have
knowledge of the misuse or improper maintenance of a local alarm system, may order the removal or deactivation of the system.
D. Alarms On Vehicles Exempt: Alarms affixed to vehicles of any type are not classified as local alarms and are exempt. (Ord. 720, 1-9-1991)
5-5-4: AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICES:
The following provisions shall apply to "automatic protection devices" defined in section 5-5-1 of this chapter:
A. Telephone Devices: No person shall use or cause or permit to be used any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects a
public trunk line of the police department of the village and then reproduces any prerecorded message to report any robbery, burglary, fire or other
emergency.
B. Disconnection: Within ninety (90) days after the effective date hereof, all automatic protection devices in the village that were keyed on that date to a
public trunk line shall be disconnected therefrom. The owner or lessee of any such device shall be responsible for its disconnection and any related
costs. (Ord. 720, 1-9-1991)
5-5-5: DISCONNECTING DEFECTIVE SIGNALING DEVICE:
In the event that the village finds it necessary to disconnect a defective signaling device, or in the event of a local alarm sounding an alarm in excess of
one-half (1/2) hour, the village shall incur no liability by such action. (Ord. 720, 1-9-1991)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 149/348
5-5-6: PENALTIES:
The following penalties shall apply to the violation of the provisions of this chapter:
A. Issuance Of Ticket; Fines: For each false alarm, the village police department may issue a P-ticket for such violation defined in the amount of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per occurrence, which fine shall be payable to the village clerk within the time specified in said ticket. If said ticket is not paid
within said time, the police department may issue a written quasi-criminal complaint for each false alarm for which the fine shall be not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) upon conviction for each violation.
B. Penalty Imposed: Any person violating any other provision of this chapter shall, on conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (Ord. 720, 1-9-1991)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
6-1-1: CERTAIN PORTIONS OF STATE VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
Pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-204, the following portions of the Illinois vehicle code are adopted by reference, including any
subsequent amendments to or exclusions of such portions:
Chapter 1. Titles And Definitions, sections 1-101 through 1-224.
Chapter 2. Statutory Summary Alcohol Or Other Drug-Related Suspension; Opportunity For Hearing, section 2-118.1.
Chapter 3. Certificates Of Title And Registration Of Vehicles, sections 3-100, 3-401, 3-402, 3-413, 3-414, 3-414.1, 3-416 and 3-417.
Chapter 4. Abandoned, Lost Or Unclaimed Vehicles, sections 4-201 through 4-204, 4-213 and 4-214.
Chapter 6. The Illinois Driver Licensing Law, sections 6-101 through 6-105, 6-112, 6-113, 6-116, 6-301 through 6-301.2, 6-303 through 6-305.1.
Chapter 7. Safety Responsibility Law, sections 7-601 and 7-602.
Chapter 11. Rules Of The Road, sections 11-100, 11-203 through 11-206, 11-304 through 11-313, 11-402 through 11-410, 11-501.1 through 11-504, 11-
601, 11-605, 11-606, 11-608, 11-610, 11-611, 11-701 through 11-711, 11-801 through 11-806, 11-901 through 11-908, 11-1001 through 11-1010, 11-1104
through 11-1306, 11-1401 through 11-1414, 11-1415 through 11-1418, 11-1419.01 through 11-1427, 11-1501 through 11-1513.
Chapter 12. Equipment Of Vehicles, sections 12-100 through 12-405, 12-500 through 12-604, 12-606, 12-607, 12-610 through 12-711.
Chapter 15. Size, Weight, Load And Permits, sections 15-100 through 15-112(f), 15-113 through 15-115, 15-316 and 15-318.
Chapter 40. Snowmobile Operation, sections 40/5-1 through 40/7-1. (Ord. 859, 4-12-1995; amd. 1999 Code)
6-1-2: DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS:
A. Vehicle Operation Prohibited: A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle within this state while:
1. The alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath is ten-hundredths (0.10) or more based on the definition of blood and breath units in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.2;
2. Under the influence of alcohol;
3. Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving;
4. Under the combined influence of alcohol and any other drug or drugs to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving; or
5. There is any amount of a drug, substance, or compound in the person's blood or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of cannabis
listed in the cannabis control act1 or controlled substance listed in the Illinois controlled substances act2.
B. Entitlement To Use Not A Defense: The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has been legally entitled to use alcohol, or other
drugs, or any combination of both shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section.
C. Violation A Misdemeanor:
1. Except as provided under subsection D of this section, every person convicted of violating this section or similar provision of a local ordinance,
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and, in addition to any other criminal or administrative action, for any second conviction of violating this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 150/348
section or similar provision of a local ordinance committed within five (5) years of a previous violation of this section or a similar provision of a local
ordinance shall be mandatorily sentenced to a minimum of forty eight (48) consecutive hours of imprisonment or assigned to a minimum of one
hundred (100) hours of community service as may be determined by the court.
2. Every person convicted of violating this section or similar provision of a local ordinance shall be subject to a mandatory minimum fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and a mandatory five (5) days of community service in a program benefiting children if the person committed a violation
of subsection A of this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance while transporting a person sixteen (16) years of age or younger.
3. Every person convicted a second time for violating this section or similar provisions of a local ordinance within five (5) years of a previous violation
of this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance shall be subject to a mandatory minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and ten
(10) days of mandatory community service in a program benefiting children if the current offense was committed while transporting a person
sixteen (16) years of age or younger.
4. The imprisonment or assignment under this subsection shall not be subject to suspension nor shall the person be eligible for probation in order to
reduce the sentence or assignment.
D. Professional Evaluation: After a finding of guilt and prior to any final sentencing, or an order for supervision, for an offense based upon an arrest for a
violation of this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance, individuals shall be required to undergo a professional evaluation to determine if an
alcohol or other drug abuse problem exists and the extent of the problem. Programs conducting these evaluations shall be licensed by the
Department of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse. The cost of any professional evaluation shall be paid for by the individual required to undergo the
professional evaluation.
E. Emergency Response; Liability For Expense: Every person found guilty of violating this section, whose operation of a motor vehicle while in violation
of this section proximately caused any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, shall be liable for the expense of an emergency
response as provided under section 5-5-3 of the Unified Code of Corrections3.
F. Revocation Of Driving Privileges: The Secretary of State shall revoke the driving privileges of any person convicted under this section or of a similar
provision of a local ordinance. (Ord. 859, 4-12-1995)
G. Repeat Offenders Made Accountable: Every person who is sentenced for committing a third or subsequent violation of this section and who receives
a term of probation or conditional discharge shall be required to serve a minimum term of either thirty (30) days' community service or, beginning July
1, 1993, forty eight (48) consecutive hours of imprisonment as a condition of the probation or conditional discharge. This mandatory minimum term of
imprisonment or assignment of community service shall not be suspended and shall not be subject to reduction by the court. (Ord. 859, 4-12-1995;
amd. 1999 Code)
6-1-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY; CITATIONS:
A. Violation And Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-14-
11 of this Code for each offense, with the exceptions of those specific offenses adopted herein, other than by reference, which contain penalties for
such offenses.
B. Form Of Citation: In citing violators under this title, the violation shall be noted by referring to "village code section ", then listing the Illinois Vehicle
Code section number as adopted under this title.
C. Prima Facie Proof: The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which was illegally operated or parked is registered with the Secretary of State in the
name of said alleged violator; or, in the alternative, in the event that a vehicle sticker issued by the Village has been issued in the name of and to
said alleged violator, shall be considered prima facie proof that said alleged violator was in control of or was the operator of the automobile or motor
vehicle at the time of such alleged violation. (Ord. 1759, 8-24-2016)
Chapter 2
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING
6-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a motor vehicle who resides within the Village or for any firm, association or corporation having its principal office or
place of business in the Village to own, or have registered to, or cause or permit any of his or its agents or employees to use or house any motor vehicle
on any public street, alley, highway, public way or private property in the Village, unless such motor vehicle is licensed as provided by this chapter. (Ord.
1601, 4-30-2012)
6-2-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring a license for any motor vehicle as described in this chapter shall file an application therefor with the Village Clerk, upon a form
provided by the Clerk, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the description of the motor vehicle, the State license number thereof and
such other further information as may be required. Upon payment by the applicant of the license fee hereinafter provided, the Village Clerk shall issue or
cause to be issued a certificate of license authorizing the use of such motor vehicle within the Village until the expiration of such license. (Ord. 859, 4-
12-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 151/348
6-2-3: LICENSE FEES:
The fee to be paid for vehicle licenses purchased during the licensing period shall be for each vehicle as set forth hereafter under the columns entitled
"Initial Fee", "30 To 60 Day Late Application Fee" and "Over 60 Day Late Application Fee".
Description Of Motor Vehicle
Initial
Fee
30 To 60
Day
Late
Application
Fee
Over 60
Day
Late
Application
Fee
A.
Each motorcycle, motor bike, motor scooter, moped or other self-propelled 3 or less wheeled vehicle $ 40.00
$ 60.00 $100.00
B.
Each passenger automobile 50.00 75.00 125.00
C.
Each motor bus 130.00
195.00 325.00
D.
Each truck with a gross vehicle weight of 8,000 pounds or less 60.00 90.00 150.00
E.
Each truck with a gross vehicle weight of more than 8,000 pounds 130.00
195.00 325.00
F.
Each recreational vehicle, so registered with the Secretary of State of Illinois 60.00 90.00 150.00
G.
Each vehicle, regardless of weight, owned by religious organizations or school districts 20.00 30.00 50.00
H.
1 vehicle, regardless of weight, owned by active duty military personnel whose legal residence is the Village
of Monee
20.00 30.00 50.00
I.
1 vehicle, except a truck with a gross weight of more than 8,000 pounds or a motor bus, owned by a person
who has been determined physically disabled by the Social Security Administration
20.00 30.00 50.00
J.
2 vehicles, except trucks with a gross vehicle weight of more than 8,000 pounds or a motor bus, owned by a
person over 65 years of age
10.00 15.00 25.00
K.
Additional vehicles owned by a person over 65 years of age 20.00 30.00 50.00
L.
Replacement sticker (if a sticker was purchased for the current period and said vehicle was sold, a
replacement sticker must be purchased for the balance of the period)
4.00
(Ord. 1637, 3-27-2013)
6-2-4: AGE OR DISABILITY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Evidence Of Age: Prior to the issuance of a license for a person over sixty five (65) years of age at the reduced rate as provided in subsection 6-2-3J
of this chapter, such person shall be required to furnish the Village Clerk with evidence of said individual's age, legal residence within the Village and
ownership of the vehicle to be licensed.
B. Evidence Of Disability: Prior to the issuance of license to a disabled person at the reduced rate as provided in subsection 6-2-3I of this chapter, such
person shall be required to furnish the Village Clerk with evidence determination by the Social Security Administration of the claimed disability,
residence within the Village and proof of ownership of the vehicle requested to be licensed. (Ord. 859, 4-12-1995)
C. Disabled Veterans: Any resident who has been adjudicated as a disabled veteran of any branch of the United States armed forces shall not be
required to purchase a motor vehicle sticker as set forth in section 6-2-3 of this chapter. Said individual is required to furnish the Village Clerk with
proof of his or her disability, residence within the Village and proof of ownership of the vehicle requested to be licensed. (Ord. 1637, 3-27-2013)
6-2-5: LICENSE PERIOD:
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be two (2) year licenses and shall be issued for the period beginning on July 1 of each odd numbered
calendar year and expiring on June 30 of the next odd numbered calendar year after the year of issuance. The license fee shall be due and payable in
advance of July 2 of each odd numbered calendar year; provided, that the owner of such vehicle subject to this chapter coming into possession of a
vehicle or becoming a resident of the Village after December 31 of any even numbered calendar year, shall pay one-half (1/2) of the license fee. (Ord.
1637, 3-27-2013)
6-2-6: LATE APPLICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 152/348
The owner of any vehicle subject to this chapter coming into possession of a vehicle or becoming a resident of the Village during the licensing periods
provided in this chapter shall be required to obtain such license within thirty (30) days after the date thereof. In the event such owner does not obtain
said license within said thirty (30) day period, or in the event an owner subject to this chapter on the first day of the licensing period, as provided in this
chapter, shall not have obtained a license by July 31 in the odd numbered calendar year, the fee for each such license shall be as follows:
A. For an owner not obtaining a license by July 31 in each odd numbered calendar year or within thirty (30) days of coming into possession of a vehicle
or becoming a resident of the Village during the licensing periods provided in this chapter, the fee for each such license shall be as set forth in
section 6-2-3 of this chapter under the column heading "30 To 60 Day Late Application Fee", as penalty for such late application.
B. For an owner not obtaining a license by August 31 in each odd numbered calendar year or within sixty (60) days of coming into possession of a
vehicle or becoming a resident of the Village during the licensing period provided in this chapter, the fee for each such license shall be as set forth in
section 6-2-3 of this chapter under the column heading "Over 60 Day Late Application Fee", as penalty for such late application. (Ord. 1637, 3-27-
2013)
Chapter 3
LOCAL TRAFFIC RESTRICTIONS
6-3-1: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. Authority: Whenever deemed by the President and Board of Trustees that the placement, erection and maintenance of any traffic control device, sign
or marking is necessary and proper for the safety of the public and safe operation of motor vehicles within the Village, said President and Board of
Trustees shall, by ordinance duly enrolled upon the minutes of the Board, direct and cause such device, marking or sign to be placed, erected and
maintained.
B. Conformance With State Requirements: All traffic control devices used in the Village shall conform to all State requirements.
C. Currently Placed Signs Remain In Effect: All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected by the Village prior to the effective
date hereof and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic control
devices, provided such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this title or State law. (Ord. 859, 4-12-1995)
6-3-2: PARKING CONTROL SIGNS:
Whenever deemed by the President and Board of Trustees that the placement, erection and maintenance of any parking control sign or marking is
necessary and proper for the regulation of parking within the Village, said President and Board of Trustees shall, by ordinance duly enrolled upon the
minutes of the Board, direct and cause such sign or marking to be placed, erected and maintained. All such parking control signs or markings shall
conform to all State requirements. All parking control signs or markings placed or erected by the Village prior to the effective date hereof and in use for
the purpose of controlling parking are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official parking control regulations, provided same are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this title or State law. (Ord. 859, 4-12-1995)
6-3-3: SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED:
Maximum speed limits on streets in the Village are hereby established as follows, and appropriate signs shall be posted:
Bruns Road, thirty (30) miles per hour on all portions, from Route 50, west to the existing Village limits.
Court Street, forty (40) miles per hour from Steger-Monee Road to Will Center Road.
Court Street, twenty five (25) miles per hour from Route 50 to Will Center Road.
Ridgeland Avenue, thirty five (35) miles per hour in both directions from Monee Manhattan Road north two thousand six hundred feet (2,600') to the
Village corporate limits.
Ridgeland Avenue, thirty five (35) miles per hour in both directions from Monee Manhattan Road to Lakeway Drive. (Ord. 930, 10-9-1996; amd. Ord.
1319, 10-13-2004; Ord. 1692, 8-26-2014; Ord. 1826, 1-24-2018)
6-3-4: STOP STREETS DESIGNATED:
The following streets in the Village are hereby designated stop streets and appropriate signs shall be posted to so designate said streets:
A. Two-Way Stop Streets:
Stop Street At Intersection With Ord. No.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 153/348
Astor Place Linden Avenue 859
Astor Place Middlepoint Avenue 859
Astor Place Oak Road 1139
Briar Lane Court Street 1199
Briar Lane Main Street 859
Briar Lane Margaret Street 1199
Briar Lane Mill Street 1199
Briar Lane Williams Street 1199
Cherry Lane Locust Place 1139
Chestnut Road Court Street 859
Chestnut Road Main Street 859
Compass Lane Main Street 859
Compass Lane Margaret Street 859
Compass Lane Mill Street 859
Court Street Egyptian Trail 1199
Court Street Governors Highway 859; amd.
1999 Code
Court Street Polk Avenue 1199
Eastgate Avenue Court Street 859
Eastgate Avenue Main Street 859
Eastgate Avenue Margaret Street 859
Egyptian Trail Court Street 859
Egyptian Trail Governors Highway 859; amd.
1999 Code
Egyptian Trail Main Street 859
Egyptian Trail Monee-Manhattan Road 859; amd.
1999 Code
Elder Lane Court Street 1199
Fairground Court Ruby Street 1139
Herbert Court Ruby Street 859
Herbert Place Compass Lane and Locust Place 859
Herbert Place Eastgate Avenue 859
Herbert Place Linden Avenue 859
Herbert Place Middlepoint Avenue 859
Lilac Avenue Violet Lane 1156
Linden Avenue Astor Place 900
Linden Avenue Court Street 859
Linden Avenue Main Street 859
Linden Avenue Margaret Street 859
Locust Place Margaret Street 859
Locust Place Orchard Trail 1139
Lynne Lane Main Street 859
Main Street Eastgate, both east and west 859
Main Street Governors Highway 1199
Main Street Linden, both east and west 859
Main Street Oak Road 900
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 154/348
Main Street Ruby Street 1103
Main Street Will Center Road 859
Margaret Street Chestnut Road 859
Margaret Street Governors Highway 859; amd.
1999 Code
Margaret Street Linden Avenue 864
Margaret Street Oak Road 859
Margaret Street Ruby Street 864
Margaret Street Will Center Road 859
Marigold Lane Jasmine Lane 1156
Marigold Lane Violet Lane 1156
Middlepoint Avenue Astor Place 1199
Middlepoint Avenue Court Street 859
Middlepoint Avenue Main Street 859
Middlepoint Avenue Margaret Street 859
Mill Street Oak Road 859
Mulberry Lane Apple Blossom Lane 1269
Mulberry Lane Locust Place 1139
Mulberry Lane Park Lane 1223
Oak Road Court Street 859
Oak Road Main Street 859
Oak Road Mill Street 859
Park Lane Mulberry Lane 1223
Park Lane Ruby Street 1139
Peach Tree Lane Orchard Trail 1139
Plum Tree Lane Orchard Trail 1139
Polk Avenue Court Street 859; amd.
1999 Code
Polk Avenue Roosevelt Street 859; amd.
1999 Code
Ribbon Court Ruby Street 1139
Roosevelt Street Egyptian Trail 859
Roosevelt Street Polk Avenue 1199
Rose Lane Tulip Avenue 1156
Ruby Street Main Street 1103
Ruby Street Margaret Street 864
Tulip Avenue Lilac Lane 1262
Tulip Avenue Rose Lane 1156
Violet Lane Lilac Avenue 1156
Von Avenue Egyptian Trail 859
Williams Street Chestnut Street 859
Williams Street Governors Highway 859; amd.
1999 Code
Wilson Street Egyptian Trail 859
Wilson Street Governors Highway 859; amd.
1999 Code
Wilson Street Polk Avenue 1199
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 155/348
B. Three-Way Stop Streets:
Ord. No.
McKinley Street and West Court Street 1137
C. Four-Way Stop Streets:
Ord. No.
Colonial Drive and Will Center Road 1414
Court Street and Will Center Road 1394
Locust Place and Mill Street 1120
Margaret Street and Linden Avenue 1528
Ribbon Drive and Eagle Drive 1544
6-3-5: YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED:
The following streets in the Village are hereby designated yield right-of-way streets, and appropriate signs shall so designate said streets:
East Lynne Lane at the intersection with Compass Lane.
Locust Place at the intersection with Compass Lane. (Ord. 859, 4-12-1995)
6-3-6: NO U-TURN OR LEFT TURN INTO PARKING DESIGNATED:
A U-turn or left hand turn to park is hereby prohibited at the following locations within the Village, and appropriate signs shall be posted to so indicate:
On Main Street, eastbound or westbound, or any location so posted. (Ord. 859, 4-12-1995)
6-3-7: NO PARKING AREAS DESIGNATED:
The following portions of streets within the Village are hereby designated no parking areas, and appropriate signs shall be posted to so designate said
streets:
A. Village Streets:
Cleveland Avenue at any time.
Court Street to Governors Highway to Lynne Lane, on both sides.
Egyptian Trail from Monee-Manhattan Road to Route 50 and on Court Street from Egyptian Trail to Route 50 and west from the roundabout on Court
Street for fifty feet (50'). Any person found to be in violation is subject to a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) per offense.
Friendship Drive at any time.
Herbert Place, south side, between Pinewood Lane and Compass Lane.
Pinewood Lane, east side, from Herbert Place to Court Street. (Ord. 859, 4-12-1995; amd. Ord. 883, 12-13-1995; Ord. 912, 7-24-1996; 1999 Code;
Ord. 1714, 2-11-2015; Ord. 1818, 11-20-2017)
B. Cul-De-Sac Streets: No parking shall be permitted on either side of a cul-de-sac street less than twenty four feet (24') wide. No parking shall be
permitted on the hydrant side of a cul-de-sac street between twenty four feet (24') and thirty feet (30') wide. Parking is permitted on both sides of a
cul-de-sac street greater than thirty feet (30') wide located within the corporate limits of the Village of Monee. All dimensions are curb face to curb
face. (Ord. 1270, 12-10-2003)
C. Semitrucks In Residential Areas: It shall be unlawful to park any semitractor or semitrailer or any combination thereof on any public street, road,
highway, parking lot or any private driveway, parking lot or accessway located within a residential zoning district within the boundaries of the Village.
Any person found to be in violation shall be fined not less than thirty five dollars ($35.00) if paid prior to final notice or fifty dollars ($50.00) if paid
after final notice. (Ord. 1292, 4-14-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 156/348
D. Parkways Or Driveways:
1. Vehicles: The word vehicle used herein shall pertain to automobiles, buses, vans, trucks, campers, or other similar vehicles. (Ord. 1514, 11-9-
2009)
2. Prohibited Parking: No person shall park a vehicle on any parkway or driveway apron located within the Village of Monee.
3. Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of this subsection shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per offense. (Ord. 1609,
5-23-2012)
6-3-8: PARALLEL PARKING AREAS:
The following portions of streets within the Village are hereby designated as parallel parking only areas, and appropriate signs shall be posted to so
designate said streets:
Main Street from Oak to Linden on both sides. (Ord. 859, 4-12-1995)
6-3-9: SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD:
A. The Village, with respect to all streets or highways within the Village except Federal, County or State routes, may prohibit the operation of vehicles
upon any such street or highway or impose restrictions as to the weight of vehicles to be operated upon any such street or highway for a period of
not to exceed ninety (90) days in any one (1) calendar year whenever such street or highway by reason of deterioration, ruts, snow or other climatic
conditions will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles thereon is prohibited for the permissible weights thereon reduced. The
Village shall erect or cause to be erected and maintained signs designating such prohibition or restriction at each end of that portion of that street or
highway affected thereby.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any Village street
designated by a maximum weight limitation sign, any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight exceeding said posted weight limitation, unless under
the terms of a special permit issued as provided by the provisions of this section herein set forth. A gross weight restriction of eight thousand (8,000)
pounds (4 tons) shall apply to all Village streets and highways with the exception of the following:
Cleveland Avenue in its entirety
Crete-Monee Road east of Will-Center Road
Hamilton Avenue
Industrial Drive in its entirety
Ridgeland Avenue from Bruns Road North to the Village limits
Sunset Drive in its entirety
Triton Way in its entirety
Whiting Way in its entirety
Will Center Road from Court Street South to the Village limits
The following roads are within our Village limits and are also currently recognized as truck routes through the authority of other jurisdictions as
indicated:
Governors Highway (State of Illinois)
Monee-Manhattan Road (Will County)
Steger-Monee Road (Will County)
This restriction shall not apply to vehicles used to collect garbage or refuse from residences or commercial establishments within the Village,
highway maintenance vehicles, or firefighting equipment. Additionally, this restriction shall not apply to private recreational vehicles or buses that are
actively engaged in transporting passengers to or from their Monee residence or school.
Additionally residents with noncommercial vehicles or trailers registered to their home address may exceed this weight limit by two (2) tons, but
should not be parked on Village streets for more than four (4) days at a time.
C. All police officers of the Village of Monee are hereby authorized to verify weight of vehicles and require or cause to be required the removal of excess
loads on any vehicles unlawfully operated by any persons who drive, move or by any owners of said vehicles who cause to or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved on any street in the Village of Monee any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the limitations as provided in this
section hereinabove set forth in accordance with section 15-111 through 113 inclusive of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended.
D. When any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of this section hereinabove set forth, the owner or driver of the vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of a violation and either the owner or driver of the vehicle may be prosecuted for the violation. Pursuant to Illinois Supreme Court Rule 526(g),
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 157/348
persons charged with a violation of this section shall post cash bail in the amount of the minimum fine fixed by ordinance, plus penalties and costs.
(Ord. 1757, 8-24-2016)
6-3-10: ONE-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED:
The following streets in the Village are hereby designated one-way streets as indicated, and appropriate signs shall be posted to so designate said
streets:
Compass Lane one way only northbound from Main Street to Court Street.
Eastgate Avenue one way only northbound from Court Street to Astor Place.
Lynne Lane one way only southbound from Court Street to Main Street.
Oak Street one way only southbound from Court Street to Main Street. (Ord. 1061, 6-23-1999; amd. Ord. 1420, 12-13-2006; Ord. 1421, 12-13-2006;
Ord. 1542, 8-25-2010)
6-3-11: PARKING AFTER A SNOWSTORM; FAILURE TO COMPLY:
A. It shall be unlawful to park or leave a vehicle on any public street in the Municipality at any time within twelve (12) hours after a snowfall of two inches
(2") or more has occurred, unless the snow has been plowed off or to the side of the street; however, a vehicle may park for a period of not more
than ten (10) minutes to load or unload passengers or for not more than thirty (30) minutes to load or unload freight or property.
B. In addition to the penalties heretofore provided for, the Chief of Police shall cause to have removed or towed at the owner's expense to the nearest
public garage any vehicle standing or parked contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1121, 2-14-2001)
6-3-12: PARKING OF TRAILERS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
A. Definitions: The following words shall have the following definitions for the purpose of this section:
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power in operation designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
B. Prohibition Of Trailer Parking: It shall be unlawful to park a trailer on residential streets within the corporate limits.
C. Penalty: Any individual found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. (Ord. 1537, 7-14-2010)
6-3-13: NON-DESIGNATED HIGHWAYS WEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
A. On non-designated highways, the gross weight of vehicles and combination of vehicles including the weight of the vehicles or combination and its
maximum load shall be subject to the limitations set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code section 15-111 and further shall not exceed the gross weights
set forth in same section 15-111 dependent upon the number of axles and distance between extreme axles of the vehicle or combination measured
longitudinally to the nearest foot.
B. Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of this section the owner or driver of the vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a violation and either the
owner or driver of the vehicle may be prosecuted for the violation. Any person, firm, or corporation, found guilty of violating this section shall be
subject to the terms as set forth by Illinois Vehicle Code section 15-113.
C. Pursuant to Illinois Supreme Court Rule 526(g), persons charged with a violation of this section shall post cash bail in the amount of the minimum fine
fixed by ordinance, plus penalties and costs.
D. All police officers of the Village of Monee are hereby authorized to verify weight of vehicles and require or cause to be required the removal of excess
loads on any vehicles unlawfully operated by any persons who drive, move or by any owners of said vehicles who cause to or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved on any street in the Village of Monee any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the limitations as provided in this
section hereinabove set forth in accordance with section 15-112 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended. (Ord. 1758, 8-24-2016)
6-3-14: EXCESSIVE USE OF BRAKING SYSTEMS:
A. Engine Braking Prohibited On Designated Streets: No person shall operate any engine braking system (jake brakes) on streets designated by
ordinance and properly signed except in case of an emergency.
B. Designation Of Streets: The operation of any engine braking system (jake brakes) is prohibited within the entire corporate limits of the Village. The
Village shall post signs stating "Excessive Engine Braking Noise is Prohibited".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 158/348
C. Penalties: Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) per offense. (Ord. 1686, 6-11-
2014)
Chapter 4
MOTOR VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
6-4-1: CONDUCT PROHIBITED:
A motor vehicle operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, that is used in connection with any of the following violations
shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the village. The owner of record of said vehicle shall be liable to the village for an administrative penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any towing and storage fees and other fees deemed applicable. As used in this chapter, the owner of
record of a motor vehicle means the record titleholder:
A. Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving while his/her driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or
revoked in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303 or this code. For the purposes of this section, the terms "revoked" or "suspended",
when used in the context of driving privileges or driver's licenses, shall have the same meaning as contained in the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-100 et seq.
B. Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or
compounds of any combination thereof, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501(a).
C. Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving against whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit court in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated subsection A or B of this section.
D. Any motor vehicle that contains any controlled substance or cannabis, as defined in the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 570/100 et seq., and the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., or that is used in the purchase, attempt to
purchase, sale or attempt to sell such controlled substances or cannabis.
E. Any motor vehicle used in connection with the unlawful use of weapons in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq. ("deadly
weapons"), of the Illinois criminal code, or that contains a firearm or ammunition for which a firearms owner's identification card is required under the
Illinois owners identification card act, 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/0.01 et seq.
F. Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of prostitution as defined in the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11 et seq.,
solicitation of a prostitute or a sexual act as defined in said code, or pimping or juvenile pimping as defined in said code.
G. Any motor vehicle that is used by a person who does not hold a valid Illinois driver's license or permit or a restricted driver's permit issued under 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes sections 5/6-205, 6-206 or 6-113 of the Illinois motor vehicle code.
H. Any motor vehicle which is used by a person during the aiding or abetting or commission of a misdemeanor, felony or forcible felony as those terms
are defined in the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-7, 2-8 and 2-11. (Ord. 1508, 8-26-2009)
6-4-2: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. A vehicle used in the violation that was stolen at the time of the violation and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty
four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or
B. If the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle. (Ord. 1508, 8-
26-2009)
6-4-3: CONFLICT OF FEDERAL OR STATE LEGISLATURE:
This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing federal or state laws or village ordinances or codes pertaining to vehicle seizure and
impoundment. The penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be in addition to any penalties that may be assessed by a court for any criminal
charges. (Ord. 1508, 8-26-2009)
6-4-4: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer
shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the village. Before or at the time the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 159/348
any person identifying him/herself as the owner of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, of the fact of the seizure and the vehicle owner's right to request a vehicle impoundment hearing to be conducted under this chapter. (Ord.
1508, 8-26-2009)
6-4-5: VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT HEARINGS:
A. Preliminary Hearing: If the owner of record of the vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter desires to appeal the seizure, said owner must make a
request within twenty four (24) hours of the seizure for a vehicle impoundment hearing. Said request shall be made in person and in writing and filed
with the chief of police or his/her designated agent. If the appeal is timely filed, the chief of police or his/her designated agent shall conduct such
preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the written request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. All interested
persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not
apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the
conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the chief of police or his/her designated agent determines there is probable cause to believe that the
vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police chief or his/her designated agent shall order the continued
impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this chapter, unless the owner of the vehicle posts a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00) with the village and pays the towing company any applicable towing and storage fees. If the chief of police or his/her designated agent
determines that there is no such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without penalty or other fees.
B. Administrative Hearing: Unless a preliminary hearing has been held pursuant to this chapter, within ten (10) business days after a vehicle has been
seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the village shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of record of the date,
time and location of the scheduled hearing that will be conducted pursuant to this subsection. The name and address of the person to whom a
vehicle is registered as shown on the records of the state in which the vehicle is registered shall be conclusive evidence of the name and address of
the owner of record of the vehicle, unless the owner of record has given the village actual written notice of a different name and/or address. The
hearing shall be scheduled, unless continued by order of the hearing officer, no later than thirty (30) days after the vehicle was seized. All interested
persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. Any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request
of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay
evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the
hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in connection with a violation set forth in this
chapter, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative penalty in an
amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). The vehicle shall remain impounded until the owner pays the administrative penalty to the
village and pays the towing company any applicable towing and storage fees. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer
shall enter a default order in favor of the village. If the hearing officer finds that no such violation has occurred, the hearing officer shall order the
return of the owner's vehicle along with the previously paid cash bond and any additional fees.
All vehicle impoundment hearings held pursuant to this subsection, shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the chief of police and/or his
designated agent.
C. Driving While Intoxicated; Standard Of Evidence: A sworn report of a police officer, prepared in conformity with section 5/11-501.1 of the Illinois
vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.1, establishing that person has refused testing or has submitted to a test that discloses a blood
alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more, or any amount of a drug, substance, or intoxicating compound in the person's breath, blood or urine resulting
from the unlawful use or consumption of cannabis listed in the cannabis control act, controlled substance listed in the controlled substances act, or
an intoxicating compound listed in the use of intoxicating compounds act, shall constitute prima facie evidence under this chapter sufficient to
establish a finding of the vehicle owner's liability under this chapter. The presumption may be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence or a sworn
report pending laboratory results. (Ord. 1508, 8-26-2009)
6-4-6: PENALTY:
A. If the administrative penalty is imposed pursuant to this chapter, such penalty shall constitute a debt due and owing the village. When the cash bond
has been posted pursuant to this chapter, the bond shall be applied to the total penalty assessed at the hearing. If a vehicle has been impounded
when such penalty is imposed, the village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicle as provided by
law. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until: 1) the penalty is paid to the village, and any towing
and storage fees are paid to the towing company, in which case the possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to
possess the vehicle; or 2) the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law.
B. If the administrative penalty and applicable fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after an administrative penalty is imposed under this chapter
against the owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the hearing, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the
manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative penalty and applicable fees are not paid
within thirty (30) days after the expiration of time during which administrative review of the hearing officer's determination may be sought, or within
thirty (30) days after an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the village, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be
deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under section 4-208 of the Illinois
vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-208; provided, however, where proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug set
forfeiture laws, the vehicle may not be disposed of by the village except in a manner consistent with the disposition of vehicles that is provided for in
those proceedings. (Ord. 1508, 8-26-2009)
6-4-7: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of any vehicle
impounded under this chapter until the civil penalty and applicable fees under this chapter have been paid. (Ord. 1508, 8-26-2009)
6-4-8: VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 160/348
A. The owner of a vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed an administrative penalty in the amount of five hundred
dollars ($500.00), towing and storage fees, any other fees deemed applicable and shall have the right to request a preliminary hearing in person and
in writing at the village police department within fifteen (15) days after the vehicle is seized and impounded. A towing adjudicator, appointed by the
mayor or the chief of the police department, shall conduct such preliminary hearing within forty eight (48) hours of the request, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays, unless the vehicle was seized and impounded and the police department determines that it must retain custody of the
vehicle under applicable state or federal forfeiture law or if the vehicle is being held pending an investigation. If, after the preliminary hearing, the
towing adjudicator determines that there is probable cause to show that the vehicle was used in violation of this code, the towing adjudicator shall
order the continued impoundment of the vehicle unless the owner of the vehicle pays to the village the amount of the administrative penalty, plus
fees for towing and storing the vehicle, and any other fees deemed applicable. If the vehicle is also subject to immobilization for unpaid final
determinations of parking and/or compliance violations, the owner of the vehicle must also pay the amounts due for all such outstanding violations
prior to the release of the vehicle. If the towing adjudicator determines that there is no such probable cause the vehicle shall be returned without
penalty or other fees.
B. Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded, the police department shall notify, by personal service or certified mail, the owner of
record and any lienholder of record of the owner's right to request a hearing before an administrative hearing officer on the seizure and impoundment
of the vehicle. The notice shall state the penalties which may be imposed if no hearing is requested or where penalty and fees assessed remain
unpaid, include the village's right to sell such vehicle and apply all proceeds from the sale thereof to the payment of all penalties and fees due and
owing. The owner of record seeking a hearing must file a written request for a hearing with the village police department no later than fifteen (15)
days after the date the notice was mailed. The hearing date must be no more than thirty (30) days excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays,
after a request for a hearing has been filed. If, after the hearing, the administrative hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence
that the vehicle was used in violation of this code the administrative hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record liable to the
village for the amount of the administrative penalty, plus towing and storage fees, and any other applicable fees. If, after a hearing, the administrative
hearing officer does not determine by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in such a violation, the administrative hearing
officer shall enter an order finding for the owner and for the return of the vehicle or previously paid penalty and fees; provided that if the vehicle was
seized and impounded pursuant to an investigation the vehicle shall not be returned unless and until permitted by investigating division; and
provided that the vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to state and/or federal law, the vehicle shall not be returned unless and until the
village receives notice from the appropriate state, or where applicable, federal officials that: 1) forfeiture proceedings will not be instituted; or 2)
forfeiture proceedings have concluded and there is a settlement or a court order providing that the vehicle shall be returned to the owner of record.
C. If the owner of record requests a full hearing before an administrative hearing officer but fails to appear at the hearing; fails to request a hearing in a
timely manner; or signs a waiver to the right to an administrative hearing, the owner of record shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a
hearing and an administrative hearing officer of the village shall enter a default order in favor of the village in the amount of the administrative penalty
prescribed hereinafter for the violation, plus towing and storage fees, and any applicable fees.
D. When a vehicle violates this section the administrative penalty, plus towing and storage fees, and any applicable fees shall constitute a debt due and
owing to the village. Any such fine, other sanction or costs imposed by an administrative hearing officer's order that remain unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law. After the expiration of the period in which judicial review may be sought, unless stayed by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of an administrative hearing officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a
court of competent jurisdiction. Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the code of civil procedure or by the uniform commercial
code, a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the respondent in the amount of a debt due and owing the village. The
lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. Nothing in this section shall
prevent the village from enforcing or seeking to enforce any order of an administrative hearing officer in any manner which is in accordance with
applicable law. Any amounts paid pursuant to this section shall be applied to the penalty.
E. Except as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until: 1) the administrative penalty, plus any applicable fees
including towing and storage fees are paid to the village, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled
to possess the vehicle; or 2) the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section, whenever a person with a lien of record against a vehicle impounded under this section has commenced
foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she pays the applicable fees including towing and storage
fees and agrees in writing to refund to the village the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts necessary to pay all lienholders of
record, up to the total amount of penalties imposed under this section. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no vehicle that was seized
and impounded pursuant to an investigation shall be returned unless and until permitted by investigating division. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this section, no vehicle that was seized and impounded pursuant to state and/or federal law shall be returned to the record owner unless
and until the village has received notice from the appropriate state, or where applicable, federal officials that: 1) forfeiture proceedings will not be
instituted; or 2) forfeiture proceedings have concluded and there is a settlement or a court order providing that the vehicle shall be returned to the
owner of record.
F. Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within ten (10) days after the expiration of the time during which the owner of record may seek judicial review
of the village's action under this section; or, if judicial review is sought, the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the village; or the
time a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in default, and no motion to vacate said default has been filed, may
be disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as provided by law; provided that, if the vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to state and/or federal
laws and proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the vehicle may not be disposed of by the village except
as consistent with those proceedings.
G. As used in this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle means the record titleholder.
H. In a hearing on the propriety of impoundment under this section, any sworn or affirmed report, including a report prepared in compliance with section
11-501.1 of the Illinois vehicle code, that: 1) is prepared in the performance of a law enforcement officer's duties and 2) sufficiently describes the
circumstances leading to the impoundment, shall be admissible evidence of the vehicle owner's liability under this section of the vehicle code, and
shall support a finding of the vehicle owner's liability, unless rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 161/348
I. For purposes of this section, a vehicle is not considered to have been used in a violation that would render the vehicle eligible for towing if: 1) the
vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty four (24) hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; 2) the vehicle was operating as a common carrier and the violation occurred
without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or 3) the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been sold to
another person prior to the violation.
J. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for
the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the village or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is
found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's
right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted under this section.
K. Vehicles used in the violation of the following subsections shall be impounded as governed by this section:
1. Driving While Intoxicated; Impoundment: No person shall drive or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within the village of Monee while
under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof, as defined in paragraph
5/11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code1.
2. Unlawful Drugs In Motor Vehicle; Impoundment: No vehicle shall contain cannabis as defined by the Illinois cannabis act2 or a controlled
substance as defined by the Illinois controlled substances act3 or be used in the purchase, attempt to purchase, sale, or attempt to sell such
controlled substances or cannabis. This subsection shall not apply if the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the presence of the controlled
substance or cannabis was authorized under the controlled substances act or the cannabis control act.
3. Driving Without A License Or While Driver's License, Permit Or Privilege Is Suspended Or Revoked; Impoundment: No person shall drive or be in
actual physical control of a motor vehicle within the village without a valid driver's license or when such person's driver's license, permit or privilege
to drive or the privilege to obtain a driver's license or permit is revoked or suspended. This subsection shall not apply in instances where a driver's
license was validly issued to the vehicle operator but has been expired for a period of less than one year. If the immediate and efficient removal of
the vehicle by an adult who is validly licensed and insured is able to be provided for, the vehicle shall not be towed but be released to that adult.
4. False, Stolen, Or Altered State Registration Or Temporary State Registration; Impoundment: No person shall operate or park on the public way
any vehicle bearing false, stolen or altered state registration or temporary state registration. If the vehicle is unattended, notice shall be sent to the
last registered owner of the vehicle at the address indicated in the last valid registration of the vehicle.
5. Unlawful Firearm In Motor Vehicle; Impoundment: Any motor vehicle: a) used in connection with a violation of article 24 of the Illinois criminal code
of 19614 or section 62-141; or b) that contains a firearm or ammunition for which a firearm owner's identification card is required under the Illinois
owner's identification card act5 and one is not presented; or c) an unregistered firearm; or d) a firearm that is not broken down in a nonfunctioning
state shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section.
6. Unlawful Fireworks In Motor Vehicle; Impoundment: No motor vehicle shall contain any illegal fireworks as defined by the Illinois criminal code.
Nothing contained in this part of this chapter dealing with fireworks shall be construed as applying to the transportation of any article or thing
shipped in conformity with the regulations prescribed by the interstate commerce commission, nor as applying to the military or naval forces of the
United States.
7. Illegal Dumping; Nuisance; Impoundment: No vehicle shall be used to dump, deposit or place or cause to be dumped, deposited or placed on any
lot or parcel of improved or unimproved real estate within the village the following materials: abandoned vehicles; ashes; construction or demolition
debris; garbage; litter; manure; miscellaneous waste; refuse; trash; unrimmed tires; or any other substance that may contain disease and germs or
may be scattered by the wind, or be decomposed, or become filthy, noxious or unhealthful; except when a permit is properly issued pursuant to the
provisions of this code. Such dumping without a permit hereby is declared a nuisance. Any person violating this provision of this section will be
fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Offenses may also be punishable as a
misdemeanor by incarceration in the Will County Jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months under the procedure set forth in section 1-2-1.1 of the
Illinois municipal code as amended, and in a separate proceeding. In addition to any other penalties imposed under this chapter, if any person or
business performing work under any contract with the village is found guilty of violating this section, they may terminate the contract by giving
written notice of the termination to the person or business. The contract shall be null and void upon delivery of such notice. Any business license
issued by the village to any person who violates this section two (2) or more times within a five (5) year period shall be subject to revocation if the
violation occurred in the course of the business for which the license was issued.
8. Motor Vehicle Involved In An Unlawful Attempt To Flee Or Elude A Police Officer; Impoundment:
a. No motor vehicle shall be involved in an unlawful attempt to flee or elude a police officer.
b. A police officer shall, if possible, record the vehicle make and color, and the issuing state and number of the license plate of a vehicle that the
officer has attempted to stop through use of the emergency signal equipment on the officer's vehicle. If the operator of the other vehicle fails or
refuses to stop, and if the police officer foregoes or abandons pursuit of the other vehicle for reasons of public safety, the officer shall report the
recorded information to the watch commander on duty, for delivery to appropriate sections of the police department responsible for
impoundment and towing of vehicles.
c. The police officer's report shall also include: the date, approximate time and approximate location of the attempted stop; the reason for the
attempted stop; the emergency signal equipment activated by the police officer; the public safety considerations that caused the police officer to
forego or abandon pursuit of the described vehicle.
d. The police department shall send a notice of intent to impound the vehicle described in the police officer's report to the owner of record of the
vehicle. The notice shall be sent either by first class mail or by messenger to the address of the owner of record as indicated in state registration
records. The notice shall include the following: a statement that the operator of the vehicle failed or refused to stop when ordered to do so by a
village of Monee police officer; the date, approximate time and approximate location of the event, the description of the vehicle as contained in
the officer's report; and notice of an opportunity to contest eligibility for impoundment. A copy of the notice shall be forwarded to the department
of administrative hearings. A notice is presumed delivered upon being deposited with the United States postal service with proper postage
affixed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 162/348
9. Use Of Vehicle For Prostitution; Impoundment: No motor vehicle shall be used in violation of this code, in the commission of prostitution as defined
in the criminal code of 1961, or soliciting for a prostitute as defined in said code.
10. Sound Device Restriction Violation; Impoundment: No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any radio, tape
recorder, cassette player or any other device for receiving broadcast sound or reproducing recorded sound if the device is located:
a. On the public way; or
b. In any motor vehicle on the public way;
and if the sound generated by the device is clearly audible to a person with normal hearing at a distance greater than seventy five feet (75').
This section shall not apply to any person participating in a parade or public assembly for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to this
code.
11. Driving With A Warrant Of Court; Impoundment: No person shall drive or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle if a warrant for their
arrest has been issued by a circuit court in Illinois for failing to answer charges that the driver violated 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303 or
5/11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code.
12. Other Violations; Impoundment: No motor vehicle shall be used during the aiding or abetting or commission of a misdemeanor, felony, or forcible
felony; as those terms are defined in the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-7, 2-8, and 2-11.
13. Multiple Violations: Nothing in this code shall prohibit the issuance of more than one administrative penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00) on a single owner of record or vehicle impounded pursuant to this code. (Ord. 1513, 10-28-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1912 - GOLF CARTS. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 5
GOLF CARTS
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
GOLF CART: A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE: A self-propelled, electric powered, four (4) wheeled motor vehicle (or a self-propelled, gasoline powered, 4 wheeled motor
vehicle with an engine displacement under 1,200 cubic centimeters) that is capable of attaining in one mile a speed of more than twenty (20) miles per
hour, but not more than twenty five (25) miles per hour, and which conforms to Federal regulations under title 49 CFR part 571.500.
NONHIGHWAY VEHICLE: The following motor vehicles not specifically designed to be used on a public highway; a golf cart; a neighborhood vehicle;
and a recreational off highway vehicle.
RECREATIONAL OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES: Any motorized off highway device designed to travel primarily off highway, sixty four inches (64") or less
in width, having a manufacturer's dry weight of two thousand (2,000) pounds or less, traveling on four (4) or more nonhighway tires, designed with a
nonstraddle seat and a steering wheel, except equipment such as lawnmowers. (Ord. 1878, 9-26-2018)
6-5-2: OPERATION OF A NONHIGHWAY VEHICLE:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be lawful to operate a nonhighway vehicle upon any roadway in the Village of Monee subject to
the following conditions:
1. No nonhighway vehicle shall be driven or operated upon any roadway in the Village of Monee with a speed limit greater than thirty (30) miles per
hour. Provided however, a nonhighway vehicle may cross a roadway at an intersection where the roadway to be crossed has a posted speed limit
of more than thirty five (35) miles per hour.
2. No person shall drive or operate a nonhighway vehicle upon any roadway in the Village of Monee without a valid driver's license issued in his or
her name.
3. All nonhighway vehicles shall yield to motor vehicles in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
4. All nonhighway vehicles shall have properly installed car seats if so applicable.
5. It shall be unlawful to operate a nonhighway vehicle in a Municipal park or upon a Village controlled sidewalk or trail.
6. No person operating a nonhighway vehicle shall make a direct crossing upon or across any highway under the jurisdiction of the State of Illinois,
toll road, interstate highway, or controlled access highway unless at an intersection controlled by a traffic light or a four-way stop sign and the
speed limit of the highway to be crossed is the forty (40) miles per hour or less at the place of crossing.
7. No nonhighway vehicle shall be driven or operated on any roadway not exclusively under the jurisdiction of the Village of Monee unless the Village
and the unit of local government with the concurrent jurisdiction authorizes the same.
8. No all-terrain vehicles, as defined by section 1-101.8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or off highway motorcycles as defined by section 1-153.1 of the
Illinois Code, shall be driven or operated on any roadway in the Village of Monee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 163/348
9. No nonhighway vehicle may be operated on any roadway in the Village of Monee, unless at a minimum, it has the following: brakes, a steering
apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red reflectors in the front and rear, a slow moving emblem on the rear of the nonhighway vehicle, a headlight
that emits a white light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front, a taillight that emits a red light visible from at least one
hundred feet (100') to the rear, brake lights and turn signals. All nonhighway vehicles shall have their headlights and taillights illuminated when
driven or operated upon a roadway in the Village of Monee as required by section 12-201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
10. Any person who operates a nonhighway vehicle on a street or roadway shall be subject to the mandatory insurance requirements under article
VI, chapter 7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
11. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a nonhighway vehicle upon any roadway within the Village of Monee while transporting or
carrying more occupants than the nonhighway vehicle is designed to transport or carry as determined by the number of permanent individual seats
provided in the nonhighway vehicle.
12. It shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a nonhighway vehicle (excluding low speed vehicles that are required by the Secretary of
State to register with the State of Illinois) upon any roadway in the Village of Monee that is not registered with the Monee Police Department, or
that does not have displayed conspicuously on the rear of said nonhighway vehicle, a corresponding current registration number placard/sticker.
a. Commencing June 1, 2019, and annually thereafter, all owners of nonhighway vehicles shall apply to register their nonhighway vehicle with the
Monee Police Department by fully and truthfully completing a nonhighway vehicle registration application. In order to be registered, the
nonhighway vehicle shall be subject to inspection by the Monee Police Department and must comply with the condition requirements of this
section, including providing proof of compliance with the mandatory insurance requirements.
b. Nonhighway vehicle registration, and the corresponding placard/sticker, shall be valid for a period of June 1 of the current calendar year through
May 31 of the following calendar year.
c. Commencing June 1, 2019, a nonrefundable registration fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid by the owner at the time of application
for registration. Said fee shall then be due every two (2) years thereafter to be applied on the same cycle as vehicle stickers.
d. Registration shall be subject to the revocation in the event the Monee Police Department determines the applicable insurance policy for the
nonhighway vehicle has been revoked, has lapsed or is otherwise invalid.
e. All owners of the nonhighway vehicles registered with the Monee Police Department will be issued a corresponding registration number
placard/sticker, which shall be affixed and remain conspicuously visible on the rear of the nonhighway vehicle. (Ord. 1878, 9-26-2018)
6-5-3: USE BY THE MONEE FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT AND THE VILLAGE:
A. Any employee, officer, volunteer or unpaid person working under the direction, supervision and control of and performing work for the Village of
Monee or Monee Fire Protection District may operate a nonhighway vehicle on Village streets subject to compliance with the following rules and
regulations:
1. The person must have a valid driver's license in his or her name.
2. The nonhighway vehicle must be owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Village of Monee, the Monee Fire Protection District, or the Will
County Forest Preserve District.
3. Nonhighway vehicles may be operated only on the streets where the posted or authorized speed limit is thirty five (35) miles per hour or less,
recreational trails or public ways. In addition, a nonhighway vehicle may also operate on sidewalks. This does not prohibit a nonhighway vehicle
from crossing a street at an intersection where the street has a posted speed limit of more than thirty five (35) miles per hour.
4. Nonhighway vehicles shall operate in conformance with all applicable laws of the State of Illinois and ordinances of the Village of Monee not
inconsistent with this section.
5. The nonhighway vehicles shall be operated in conformance with any rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police of the Village of
Monee regarding the operation of nonhighway vehicles.
6. The Chief of Police may promulgate and publish rules and regulations for the operation of nonhighway vehicles not inconsistent with this section.
(Ord. 1878, 9-26-2018)
6-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1878, 9-26-2018)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7-1-1: DRAINAGE DITCHES, WATERWAYS AND CULVERTS:
A. New Construction: Whenever unimproved property adjacent to and abutting on a village street or roadway is improved by the owner, and there is no
existing curb and gutter connected to a storm sewer or to a ditch or waterway for drainage of water, the property owner shall be required to take the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 164/348
following action:
1. Install a drainage ditch or waterway if none exists at the time of the improvement, to drain surface water, according to specifications to be
established for the site as provided hereafter; or
2. Improve any existing drainage ditch or waterway to conform to specifications to be established for the site by the village as provided hereafter; and
3. Install a culvert for any driveway crossing such drainage ditch or waterway, according to specifications to be established by the village as provided
hereafter.
B. Field Entrances: Whenever the owner of property adjoining and abutting on a village street or roadway desires to provide an entrance to said
property crossing an existing drainage ditch or waterway, said property owner must install a culvert in accordance with specifications to be
established for the site by the village as provided hereafter. (Ord. 615, 12-10-1986)
C. Existing Drainage Ditches, Waterways And Culverts:
1. Permit Required To Move Or Replace: Whenever a property owner owning property adjoining or abutting on a village street or roadway, on which
there is an existing drainage ditch or waterway and/or driveway culvert desires to replace, change or move said drainage ditch or waterway or
replace or move said culvert or eliminate said drainage ditch by the installation of new culvert, said property owner shall obtain a permit prior to
initiating such work as provided hereafter.
2. Stormwater Collection: Where new culvert is to be installed to eliminate the existing drainage ditch, positive drainage shall be maintained from the
roadway to the road right of way. In no instance shall stormwater runoff be allowed to flow from private property across the road right of way onto
the roadway pavement. A minimum of one stormwater inlet shall be required to collect stormwater runoff from private property and the road right of
way. Additional inlets may be required if considered necessary by the village. Culvert size shall also be determined by the village and is to be
installed according to village specifications. (Ord. 633, 1-13-1988)
D. Replacement At Village Request: Whenever the village requires the replacement or relocation of any drainage ditch, waterway or driveway culvert
presently existing along a village street or roadway, in order to improve drainage or provide for drainage of water, the village and the adjoining
property owner shall share equally in the cost thereof. In the event that such replacement or relocation of a drainage ditch or waterway or culvert is
required by improvements undertaken by the village, other than for improving water drainage, the village shall pay the entire cost thereof.
E. Application For Permit; Fee:
1. Contents Of Application: Prior to the installation, replacement or relocation of any drainage ditch, waterway or driveway culvert as provided in
subsections A, B and C of this section, the property owner shall make application with the village clerk for a permit for such work. Applications
shall be on forms to be provided by the village and shall contain such information as required by the village.
2. Inspection Fee: An inspection fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid at the time of application.
3. Review Of Application: As soon as reasonably possible after filing of an application, the village shall cause the application to be reviewed and the
site inspected and specifications as to the size, location and installation of the drainage ditch, waterway, and/or culvert shall be furnished to the
property owner and a permit shall be issued allowing the property owner to proceed with such work.
4. Compliance With Specifications: All work performed under the permit shall be in accordance with Village specifications provided the property
owner.
5. Right To Reject Application: The Village reserves the right to reject any application which is determined by the Board of Trustees to be detrimental
to the welfare, health or safety of the residents of the Village. (Ord. 615, 12-10-1986)
6. Culvert Permit Required:
a. Application: A culvert permit application and supporting information must be filed with Monee for review and approval prior to installation of a
culvert in a Monee right-of-way. Said culvert permit application is available at the Village Hall.
b. Fees: The required fees noted on the culvert permit application shall be paid for by the applicant or their designated representative prior to
review of the application by Monee.
c. Application Approval: No work shall commence relative to installation of a culvert in a Monee right-of-way until the culvert permit application has
been signed and dated approved by Monee.
d. Work To Be Completed: All work associated with the culvert installation shall be completed as represented by the approved culvert permit
application and supporting information.
e. Inspection: Monee may inspect the culvert installation as deemed necessary to verify the work is performed in accordance with the approved
culvert permit application.
f. Timely Completion; Extension: The culvert installation shall be satisfactorily completed by the applicant and the permit application subsequently
signed and dated as inspected by Monee within one (1) year of the approval date of the permit unless an extension is granted in writing by
Monee.
g. Penalties: Any contractor, developer, subdivider or builder who is found to be in violation of this subsection E6 shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for
each day that a violation exists. In addition to the monetary penalties, the Village shall have the right to rescind any building permit that may
have been issued in connection with a development. (Ord. 1388, 3-22-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 165/348
F. Maintenance Required: The owners of property adjoining and abutting on the right-of-way of any Village street or roadway in which there presently
exists or in which there is hereafter installed a drainage ditch or waterway or driveway culvert, shall be required to maintain such drainage ditch or
waterway or culvert in an operating condition free of obstructions.
G. Obstructions: No person shall dump any leaves, trash, soil or other material into any such drainage ditch, waterway or culvert, and no person shall
obstruct same. No railroad ties, stones or other materials which may obstruct the flow of water, or hinder cleaning the ditch or snow removal by the
Village shall be placed in said drainage ditch, waterway or culvert or elsewhere in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 615, 12-10-1986)
H. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 615, 12-10-1986; amd. 1999 Code)
7-1-2: ENCROACHMENTS:
No person shall install, place, maintain or construct any structure that encroaches upon the State right-of-way on Illinois Route 50 within the limits of the
Village (improvement over the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad in the Village). (Ord. 882, 12-13-1995)
7-1-3: PLANTING OF TREES:
See chapter 4 of this title for tree regulations. (Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-1-4: PARKS:
A. Park And Recreational Facility: It shall be unlawful for anyone to occupy or use any park or recreational facility after sunset. This provision shall not
apply to individuals or groups who obtained a permit from the Village for public gathering purposes which include parades, ceremonies,
entertainment, games, shows, concerts, picnics and children's parties.
B. Short Form Complaints: The Police Department shall be authorized to issue short form complaints to any individual who is found to be violating the
terms of this section.
C. Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense. For every subsequent
offense, a person who violates this section shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00) per offense. (Ord. 1456, 9-12-2007)
D. Park Facility Staffing Fee: The following fees shall be imposed for the use of Municipal owned properties:
Site Staffing Fee Security Deposit
Parks, pavilions, park buildings $30.00 per hour $200.00
There shall be a two (2) hour key to key minimum use of a facility. All such staffing fees shall be paid in advance of the scheduled event date in the
form of a check or cash. The security deposit shall be returned to the applicant upon the determination that no damage was incurred and all
garbage was disposed of in receptacles. Cancellations must be made at least thirty (30) days prior to the reservation date to recover full refund of
the security deposit. Applicants may also receive a refund in the case of inclement weather.
E. Multiple Requests: In the event of multiple requests the following organizations or individuals shall be given the first opportunity to use the subject
facility in sequence:
1. Village sponsored functions;
2. Organizations contracted with the Village (i.e., baseball, softball);
3. Organizations not contracted with the Village;
4. Residents;
5. Non-residents. (Ord. 1647, 7-10-2013)
7-1-5: PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS:
A. Standing On Sidewalk: It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as near as reasonably possible to the building line or
curb line, if such standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians.
B. Walking Along Roadway: Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an
adjacent roadway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 166/348
C. Crossing Roadway:
1. At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any place
other than a crosswalk, he shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
2. No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway, other than in a safety zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.
D. Penalties: The Village Police Department may issue a P-ticket for such a violation in the amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) per occurrence
with said fine payable to the Village Clerk within the time specified in said ticket. If said ticket is not paid within said time, the Police Department may
issue a written/quasi-written complaint for each occurrence for which the fine shall not be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) upon conviction for each violation. (Ord. 1486, 8-13-2008)
7-1-6: SKATEBOARDS:
A. Definitions: The following words and terms used in this section shall have the following meanings unless the context or use clearly indicates another
or different meaning is intended:
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY: Any Municipal property controlled by the Village of Monee.
SKATEBOARDING: A toy consisting of a short oblong board with a pair of small wheels at each end riding, usually, in a standing position.
B. Prohibiting Skateboarding On Municipal Property: It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in the activity of skateboarding on any Municipal
property including in the public parks.
C. Posting Of Signs: Signs shall be posted within the Village indicating that skateboarding is prohibited on Municipal property.
D. Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. (Ord. 1505, 7-22-2009)
Chapter 2
RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS
7-2-1: LOWERING PLANE OF ROADBED AUTHORIZED:
The village hereby gives its consent and, so far as it has authority in the premises, authorizes the Illinois Central Railroad Company to lower the plane of
its roadbed and tracks within the corporate limits of the village approximately twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 138, 3-16-1922)
7-2-2: DEPOT LOCATION:
The present depot and depot facilities shall be located on the west side of the right of way between First North Street and Second North Street. (Ord.
138, 3-16-1922)
7-2-3: BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION OVER TRACKS:
Bridges shall be constructed over the tracks of the Illinois Central Railroad Company at Second North Street, First North Street and First South Street,
and Mill Street, said bridges shall conform to the following stipulations, and where necessary the railroad company shall change the grades of the
adjacent and intersecting streets and alleys to conform to such bridge construction and changes of the tracks of the railroad company:
A. Second North Street Bridge: A bridge shall be constructed in Second North Street over the tracks of the Illinois Central Railroad Company as follows:
1. The elevation of the highest point of the roadway on said bridge shall be not more than three and thirty-five hundredths feet (3.35') higher than the
present elevation of top of rail of the southbound main track of the railroad company as it now exists at the center of Second North Street. At the
intersection of Chestnut Street and Second North Street, the elevation of the crown of roadway shall be approximately the same as now exists.
2. On the east approach to said bridge the grade shall descend at a rate not to exceed four feet (4') in one hundred feet (100') to an intersection with
the present surface of roadway in Second North Street.
3. The north and south approaches in Oak Road shall descend from the grade of Second North Street as above established at a rate not to exceed
four feet (4') in one hundred feet (100') to intersection with the present surface of roadway in Oak Road.
4. The width of the roadway on the bridge and approaches shall be twenty feet (20').
5. A sidewalk five feet (5') in width shall be provided on each side of said bridge. The width of sidewalk on the approaches shall be the same as now
exists.
6. A suitable handrail to be not less than three feet six inches (3'6") in height shall be provided on the outside of said sidewalks extending the full
length of the bridge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 167/348
7. Before beginning work on said bridge, the railroad company shall submit detailed plans of the structure to the village president and board of
trustees for approval and work shall not commence until such plans have been approved by said president and board of trustees.
B. First North Street Bridge: A bridge shall be constructed in First North Street over the tracks of the Illinois Central Railroad Company as follows:
1. The elevation of the highest point of the roadway on said bridge shall be not more than two feet (2') higher than the present elevation of the top of
the rail of the southbound main track of the Illinois Central Railroad Company as it now exists at the center line of First North Street.
2. On the east and west approaches to said bridge in First North Street, the grade shall descend at a rate not to exceed four feet (4') in one hundred
feet (100') to an intersection with the present surface of roadway in First North Street.
3. The north and south approaches in Chestnut Street and Oak Road shall descend from the grade of First North Street as above established at a
rate not to exceed four feet (4') in one hundred feet (100') to intersections with the present surface of the roadway in the respective streets.
4. Two (2) driveways each sixteen feet (16') in clear width shall be provided over the bridge structure. The width of roadway on the approaches shall
be thirty two feet (32').
5. A sidewalk five feet (5') in width shall be provided on each side of said bridge. The width of sidewalk on the approaches shall be the same as now
exists.
6. A suitable handrail to be not less than three feet six inches (3'6") in height shall be provided on the outside of each sidewalk extending the full
length of the bridge.
7. Before beginning work on said bridge, the railroad company shall submit detailed plans of the structure to the village president and board of
trustees for approval and work shall not commence until such plans shall have been approved by said president and board of trustees.
C. Mill Street Bridge: A bridge shall be constructed in Mill Street over the tracks of the Illinois Central Railroad Company as follows:
1. The elevation of the highest point of the roadway on said bridge shall be not more than five and one-tenth feet (5.1') higher than the present
elevation of the top of the rail of the southbound main track of the Illinois Central Railroad Company as it now exists at the center line of Mill Street.
On the east and west approaches to said bridge in Mill Street, the grade shall descend at a rate not to exceed four feet (4') in one hundred feet
(100') to an intersection with the present surface of the roadway in Mill Street. The north and south approaches in Oak Road and the north
approach in Chestnut Street shall descend from the grade of Mill Street as above established at a rate not to exceed four feet (4') in one hundred
feet (100') to intersections with the present surface of the roadway in the respective streets.
2. The width of the roadway on bridge and approaches shall be twenty feet (20').
3. One sidewalk five feet (5') in width shall be provided on each side of said bridge.
4. The width of sidewalk on the approaches shall be the same as now exists.
5. A suitable handrail to be not less than three feet six inches (3'6") in height shall be provided on each side of said bridge extending the full length of
the bridge.
6. Before beginning work on said bridge, the railroad company shall submit detailed plans for the structure to the village president and board of
trustees for approval and work shall not commence until such plans have been approved by said president and board of trustees.
D. First South Street Bridge:
1. A foot bridge with a clear walk of not less than six feet (6') with necessary approaches on each end shall be constructed over the tracks of the
Illinois Central Railroad Company on or near the south line of First South Street.
2. A suitable handrail to be not less than three feet six inches (3'6") in height shall be provided on each side of said foot bridge extending the full
length of the bridge.
3. Before beginning work on said bridge, the railroad company shall submit detailed plans of the structure to the village president and board of
trustees for approval and work shall not commence until such plans have been approved by said president and board of trustees.
Provided, that if at any time within ninety (90) days from the adoption of this chapter the village desires to change the location of the bridge across
Mill Street and the foot bridge across First South Street, it may do so by adopting an amendment to this chapter by locating the bridge at First
South Street and the foot bridge at Mill Street. (Ord. 138, 3-16-1922)
7-2-4: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS FOR BRIDGES AND APPROACHES:
A. Bridges and approaches thereto shall be constructed by the Illinois Central Railroad Company within the area covered by this chapter.
B. The roadway on the bridges shall be paved with a good quality creosoted block, portland cement, or asphaltic concrete, the work being done in an
approved and workmanlike manner.
C. The sidewalks and roadway pavement on the approaches shall be constructed of portland cement concrete of standard quality and workmanship,
shall be made, finished and put in place in accordance with the standard specifications of the Illinois Central Railroad Company.
D. Before beginning work on any of the bridges provided by this chapter, the railroad company shall submit detailed plans and specifications of the
structures to the department of public works and buildings, division of highways, of the state of Illinois for its approval, and work shall not commence
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 168/348
until such plans and specifications shall have been approved by said department of public works and buildings, division of highways. (Ord. 138, 3-
16-1922)
7-2-5: COSTS BORNE BY RAILROAD COMPANY:
The cost of construction of all bridges together with their approaches, as they are provided for in this chapter, shall be borne by the Illinois Central
Railroad Company, and the cost of maintenance of all bridges together with their approaches shall be borne by the Illinois Central Railroad Company
except as may be otherwise provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 138, 3-16-1922)
7-2-6: STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADES:
Any streets or sidewalks herein mentioned, the grades of which are changed or made necessary by the provisions of this chapter, shall be restored or
made to conform to the new grade by the Illinois Central Railroad Company at its own expense, and such streets and sidewalks as are at present paved
or provided with sidewalks, such paving or sidewalks shall be restored by the railroad company at its own expense using the present material whenever
the same is in as good condition as when disturbed. (Ord. 138, 3-16-1922)
7-2-7: NONAPPLICABILITY OF LAWS:
For and in consideration of the improvement to the village in the elimination of three (3) grade crossings of streets within the limits provided in this
chapter, the village hereby agrees that any laws or ordinances which are passed or may be passed by the village relating to the speed of trains, the
length of trains and the maintenance of gates, flagmen, watchmen, signals and signal towers shall cease to be applicable to said railroad company, and
none such shall ever be applicable to said railroad company. (Ord. 138, 3-16-1922)
7-2-8: RAILROAD COMPANY RESPONSIBILITY:
A. The railroad company agrees to maintain, repair and renew, when necessary, all pavements, sidewalks, drainage and other street improvements
provided for in this chapter or made necessary by the same for that portion of the bridges and approaches which lie inside the right of way lines.
B. The railroad company shall construct and maintain a substantial fence on both sides of its right of way within the corporate limits, the same to be
constructed of woven wire on concrete base with concrete posts.
C. The railroad company shall at its own expense construct and maintain steps from First North Street to the railroad company's depot on the new track
level.
D. The railroad company shall construct and maintain a suitable driveway leading from Chestnut Street to the depot at its new location.
E. The railroad company shall at its own expense relocate all water pipes owned by the village, which shall be necessary on account of the work to be
performed by the railroad company under this chapter.
F. The railroad company shall at its own expense deepen all wells in the vicinity of its right of way which shall have gone dry on account of the railroad
company's excavation, to such an extent as shall ensure the owners of such wells a supply of water equal to that obtainable from said wells before
the excavation is made. (Ord. 138, 3-16-1922)
7-2-9: OVERHEAD WIRES AND CABLES:
All overhead wires and cables crossing the tracks of the Illinois Central Railroad shall be disposed of by the persons, companies or corporations owning
them in such manner as not to interfere with the progress and construction of the railroad company's work and to provide suitable clearance over the
railroad tracks. (Ord. 138, 3-16-1922)
7-2-10: TEMPORARY CROSSINGS DURING CONSTRUCTION:
Permission and authority are hereby granted to the said Illinois Central Railroad Company, whenever the same shall be necessary in the prosecution of
the work it is herein authorized to perform, to obstruct temporarily any public street to such extent and for such length of time as may be necessary, and
the railroad company is also hereby required, whenever the same shall be necessary, to erect and maintain temporary crossings during the construction
work authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 138, 3-16-1922)
7-2-11: STARTING AND COMPLETION TIME FOR CONSTRUCTION:
The construction work specified in this chapter may be begun at any time within one year from the final passage, approval and acceptance of this
chapter, and shall be completed within two (2) years from the final passage and approval and acceptance of the same; provided, however, that no time
shall be counted during which said work is delayed by injunctions or other court process, or by act of government, or by unforeseen casualty. (Ord. 138,
3-16-1922)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 169/348
7-2-12: DRAINAGE FACILITIES REQUIRED:
The railroad company shall provide adequate drainage facilities in its cut to carry off all natural surface drainage flowing into same from both sides of its
right of way; and in addition, drainage which shall be diverted by the village into said cut from the area of the business section of the village bounded on
the north by the south line of First South Street, on the west by Oak Road, on the east by the east line of Locust Place, and on the south by the south
limits of the village. Such drainage shall be established and constructed under the supervision of the engineer of the railroad company and of the village
engineer or an engineer employed by it. (Ord. 138, 3-16-1922)
7-2-13: TRESPASS UPON RAILROAD RIGHTS OF WAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, save employees of the Illinois Central Railroad Company in the discharge of their duties, to go or to be upon or to
walk along or across the tracks of the Illinois Central Railroad within the limits of the village, where said tracks are on depressed railroad rights of way,
as provided in this chapter, under a penalty of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) and cost of suit. (Ord. 814, 6-8-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
7-2-14: AGREEMENT BETWEEN VILLAGE AND RAILROAD COMPANY:
A. Additional Bridges Over Tracks: In consideration of the acceptance of ordinance 138 (codified in this chapter) by the Illinois Central Railroad
Company, the village undertakes and agrees that it will not hereinafter require or attempt to compel the said railroad company to build any additional
or other bridges over its tracks than those provided for in this chapter as long as the corporate limits of the village remain as they now exist, or within
the present corporate limits. It is also hereby agreed that if the village shall at any time hereafter, so long as the corporate boundaries of the village
remain as they now exist, open and extend any streets, avenues or alleys by means of bridges or otherwise over the tracks of the Illinois Central
Railroad Company, the sole cost and expense of constructing and maintaining such bridges, including approaches, shall be borne and paid by the
village without expense to the railroad company; and in no case shall any bridge be inferior in any respect to the bridges to be built by the railroad
company in accordance with the terms of this chapter. The work of construction shall be done by the railroad company and the amount paid by the
village for such work and construction shall not exceed the actual and reasonable cost thereof.
B. Nonliability Of Village: The Illinois Central Railroad Company hereby agrees to protect and save harmless the village from any and all damages it
may be or become legally liable for by reason of the construction and making of the changes and improvements in this chapter provided for,
authorized or permitted, including all costs and expenses of defending any litigation that might result therefrom.
C. Action For Damages: Provided, notice of the bringing of any suit for damages shall be given the railroad company within seven (7) days after service
of summons on the village in any action of damages, and the railroad company shall take charge of the defense of any such action. (Ord. 138, 3-16-
1922)
7-2-15: CONTRACT BETWEEN VILLAGE AND RAILROAD COMPANY:
This chapter shall constitute a contract between the village and the Illinois Central Railroad Company, when and after it shall have been accepted in
writing by said railroad company. The acceptance shall be filed with the village clerk within ninety (90) days after its final passage of ordinance 138 and
approval of same by the village president and the board of trustees. The benefits of this chapter shall inure in favor of, and the obligations of the same
shall be binding upon the village and the Illinois Central Railroad Company and their respective successors, lessees and assigns in perpetuity unless
changed by mutual consent of the parties hereto. (Ord. 138, 3-16-1922; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 3
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
7-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MONEE CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE ORDINANCE, hereinafter "franchise" or "chapter".
(Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
ADDITIONAL SERVICE: Any subscriber service provided by the grantee for which a special charge is made based on program or service content, time,
or spectrum space usage.
BASIC SERVICE: All subscriber services provided by the grantee in one or more service tiers, which includes the delivery of local broadcast stations,
and public, educational and government access channels. The basic service does not include optional program and satellite service tiers, a la carte
services (to the extent such services are not basic service under FCC rules), per channel, per program, or auxiliary services for which a separate charge
is made. However, grantee may include other satellite signals on the basic service.
CABLE MILE: Any extension of feeder or trunk measured from the nearest point of distribution with adequate signal strength to allow for expansion.
CABLE SYSTEM OR SYSTEM OR CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM: A system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, or other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 170/348
conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and
distributing, audio, video, data and other forms of electronic, electrical or optical signals, which includes cable television service and which is located in
the village. The definition shall not include any such facility that serves or will serve only subscribers without using village rights of way.
CLASS IV CHANNEL: A signaling path provided by a cable communications system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another
point in the cable communications system.
COMMUNITY TELEVISION: Cablecasting of programming by residents or designees of the village through an association with village government and
the grantee.
CONTROL AND/OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control or ownership of a system in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable
presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person or entity
(except underwriters during the period in which they are offering securities to the public) holding twenty percent (20%) or more of a cable system or the
franchise under which the system is operated. A change in the control or controlling interest of an entity which has control or a controlling interest in a
grantee shall constitute a change in the control or controlling interest of the system under the same criteria. Control or controlling interest as used herein
may be held simultaneously by more than one person or entity.
CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency within the television receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel
selector also permits a subscriber to view more than twelve (12) channels delivered by the system at designated converter dial locations.
FCC: The federal communications commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
FRANCHISE FEE: The fee that a company is required to pay to the village pursuant to section 7-3-27 of this chapter. This fee includes any tax, fee or
assessment of any kind imposed by the franchising authority or other governmental entity on a cable operator or cable subscriber, or both, solely
because of their status as such. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
A. Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators, or
their services but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
B. In the case of any franchise in effect on the date of enactment of the 1984 cable act, payments which are required by the franchise to be made by
the grantee during the term of such franchise for, or in support of the use of, public, educational or governmental access facilities;
C. In the case of any franchise granted after such date of enactment, capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by the grantee
for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
D. Requirements or changes incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
E. Any fee imposed under title 17, United States Code.
GRANTEE: A person or entity to whom or which a franchise under this chapter is granted by the village, along with the lawful successors or assigns of
such person or entity.
GROSS REVENUES: All revenue collected directly or indirectly by the grantee, arising from or attributable to the provision of cable service by the
grantee within the village including, but not limited to: periodic fees charged subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per channel or per program
service; franchise fees; installation and reconnection fees; leased channel fees; converter rentals and/or sales; program guide revenues; late or
administrative fees; upgrade, downgrade or other change in service fees; advertising revenues; revenues from home shopping channels; revenues from
the sale, exchange, use or cable cast of any programming developed on the system for community or institutional use; and any value (at retail price
levels) of any nonmonetary remuneration received by grantee in consideration of the performance of advertising or any other service of the system;
provided, however, that this shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee herein imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the
state, local or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee on behalf of the governmental unit. The term "gross revenues" also includes
revenues collected directly or indirectly from other ancillary telecommunications services, including, but not limited to: point to point telecommunications,
point to point multipoint telecommunications, data transmissions, etc., but only to the extent that all other providers of such telecommunications services
in the village are subject to the same compensation requirements of the village.
INITIAL GRANTEE: The person and his/her lawful successor who was granted a cable television franchise by the village of Monee in 1982 and
proceeded to construct the first cable television system in the village. "Initial grantee" also includes the person who may obtain a renewal of the above
referenced cable television franchise.
INITIAL SERVICE AREA: All residential areas in the village having a density of at least twenty (20) occupied dwelling units per cable mile.
INSTALLATION: The connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers' terminals.
MAY: Is permissive.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: As applied to the grantee, those hours during which similar businesses in the village are open to serve customers. In all
cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours at least one night per week, and some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions that are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions that are not within the
control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or
unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions,
pay per view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
RENEWED FRANCHISE: Any franchise renewed pursuant to the franchise renewal procedures in section 626 of the 1984 cable act, as amended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 171/348
SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
STREET: The surface of and all rights of way and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place,
sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement now or hereafter held by the village for the purpose of public travel and shall include other
easements or rights of way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the village which shall, within their proper use and meaning entitle the grantee to
the use thereof for the purposes of installing poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments,
pedestals, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a cable television system.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person, firm, grantee, corporation, or association lawfully receiving any service provided by a grantee pursuant to this chapter.
USER: A party utilizing a cable television system channel for purposes of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with
receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
VILLAGE: The village of Monee, Illinois. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-3: RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF GRANTEE:
Any franchise granted by the village pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-42-1 shall grant to the grantee, subject to the terms and conditions of
the franchise agreement between the village and the grantee, the right and privilege to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across,
above, over and under the streets now in existence and as may be created or established during its terms any poles, wires, cable, underground
conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of a cable system. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-
1998)
7-3-4: AGREEMENT AND INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION BY REFERENCE:
A. Upon adoption of any franchise agreement and execution thereof by the grantee, the grantee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions
contained in this chapter.
B. Any grantee also agrees to provide all services specifically set forth in its application, if there is one, and to provide cable television service within the
confines of the village; and by its acceptance of the franchise, the grantee specifically grants and agrees that its application is thereby incorporated
by reference and made a part of the franchise, except that the grantee may from time to time change its services in response to market and financial
decisions. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-5: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
Any franchise is for the current territorial limits of the village and for any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise. (Ord. 1021, 8-
12-1998)
7-3-6: DURATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
A. Any franchise and the rights, privileges and authority hereby authorized shall take effect and be in force from and after the signing of a franchise
agreement by the village, as provided by law, and shall continue in force and effect for a term of no longer than fifteen (15) years; provided, that thirty
(30) days prior to the date of signing of the franchise agreement the grantee shall file acceptance of the franchise and its promise to comply with and
abide by all its provisions, terms and conditions. Such franchise shall be nonexclusive and revocable only under the terms herein or in the franchise
agreement with grantee.
B. In the event the village enters into an additional franchise agreement to use and occupy the public right of way for the purpose of operating a cable
system, said additional franchise agreement should only be granted if the terms, conditions, and requirements relating to payments, facilities,
equipment and services to be provided by the subsequent cable operator satisfy the applicable requirements set forth in section 11-42-11 of the
Illinois municipal code1, as now or hereafter amended. Notwithstanding the applicability or repeal of section 11-42-11, to maintain a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory environment as required by the telecommunications act of 1996, any additional grantee shall provide terms,
conditions, and requirements relating to the payments, facilities, equipment and services and regulatory requirements for use of the public right of
way that are substantially equivalent to the payments, facilities, equipment and services and regulatory requirements imposed on the grantee
previously granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-7: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
A. Renewal Procedure: Franchise renewal shall be prescribed by applicable law. Village and company by mutual consent may enter into informal
renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. Pursuant to 47 USC section 546, the following procedure shall apply:
1. The village may, on its own initiative, during the six (6) month period which begins with the thirty sixth month before the franchise expiration,
commence a proceeding which affords the public in the village appropriate notice and participation for the purpose of: a) identifying the future
cable related community needs and interests, and b) reviewing the performance of the grantee under the franchise. If the grantee submits, during
such six (6) month period, a written renewal notice requesting the commencement of such proceeding, the village shall commence such
proceeding not later than six (6) months after the date such notice is submitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 172/348
2. Upon completion of the proceeding under subsection A1 of this section, the grantee may, on its own initiative or at the request of the village,
submit a proposal for renewal. The village may establish a date by which such proposal shall be submitted.
3. Upon submittal by the grantee of a proposal to the village for the renewal of the franchise, the village shall provide prompt, public notice of such
proposal and renew the franchise or issue a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed, and at the request of the grantee or
on its own initiative, commence an administrative proceeding, after providing prompt, public notice of such proceeding.
4. The village shall consider in any administrative proceeding whether: a) the grantee has substantially complied with material terms of the existing
franchise and with applicable law; b) the quality of the grantee's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints and billing
practices, but without regard to the mix or quality of cable services or other services provided over the system, has been reasonable in the light of
community needs; c) the grantee has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in the
grantee's proposal; and d) the grantee's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable related community needs and interests, taking into
account the costs of meeting such needs and interests.
5. In any proceeding under subsection A4 of this section, the grantee shall be afforded adequate notice and the grantee and the village, or its
designee, shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence (including evidence related to issues
raised in the proceedings under subsection A1 of this section), to require the production of evidence and to question witnesses. A transcript shall
be made of any such proceeding.
6. At the completion of a proceeding under subsection A4 of this section, the village shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal
for renewal based upon the record of such proceeding and transmit a copy of such decision to the grantee. Such decision shall state the reasons
therefor.
7. Any denial of a proposal for renewal that has been submitted in compliance with the procedures set forth above, shall be based on one or more
adverse findings made with respect to the factors described at subsection A4 of this section pursuant to the record of the proceeding under said
subsection. The village may not base a denial of renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise or on events
considered under subsection A4 of this section unless the village has provided the grantee with notice and the opportunity to cure or in any case in
which it is documented that the village has waived its right to object.
8. The grantee may appeal any final decision or failure of the village to act in accordance with the procedural requirements of this section. The court
shall grant appropriate relief if the court finds that: a) any action of the village is not in compliance with the procedural requirements of this section;
or b) in the event of a final decision of the village denying the renewal proposal, the grantee has demonstrated that the adverse finding of the
village with respect to each of the factors described in subsection A4 of this section on which the denial is based is not supported by a
preponderance of the evidence, based on the record of the administrative proceeding.
B. Renewal In Event Of Change In Federal Law: In the event that any or all of the above referenced provisions of federal law are repealed, the following
relevant subsection(s) shall apply unless superseded by new law:
1. At least twenty four (24) months prior to the expiration of the franchise, the grantee shall inform the village in writing of its intent to seek renewal of
the franchise.
2. The grantee shall submit a proposal for renewal which demonstrates:
a. That it has been and continues to be in substantial compliance with the terms, conditions, and limitations of its franchise;
b. That its system has been installed, constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with its franchise;
c. That it has the legal, technical, financial, and other qualifications to continue to maintain and operate its system, and so as to assure its
subscribers high quality service; and
d. That it has made a good faith effort to provide services and facilities which accommodate the cable related needs of the community as may be
reasonably ascertained through findings of fact given due consideration to the cost of meeting such needs by the village.
3. After giving public notice, the village shall proceed to determine whether the grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the
franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, the village shall consider technical developments and performance of the system, mix, quality
and level of service received, and any other particular requirements set forth in this chapter. The grantee will supply cable television services
sufficient to meet cable related community needs and interests given due consideration to the costs of meeting such needs.
4. The village shall then work with the grantee to prepare any amendments to this chapter that both parties agree evidence shows are required
based on cable related community needs and interests.
5. If the village finds the grantee's performance satisfactory, and finds the grantee's technical, legal, and financial abilities acceptable, and finds the
grantee's renewal proposal meets the future cable related needs of the village, giving due consideration to the costs of meeting same, a new
franchise shall be granted pursuant to this chapter as amended for a period to be determined. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-8: POLICE POWERS:
In accepting a franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights thereunder are subject to the police power of the village to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the
village pursuant to such power. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-9: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
No cable television system shall be allowed to operate or to occupy or use the streets (i.e., rights of way) for system installation and maintenance
purposes without a franchise. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 173/348
7-3-10: USE OF GRANTEE FACILITIES:
The village shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the grantee any wire or pole fixtures that do not unreasonably
interfere with the cable television system operations of the grantee. The village shall indemnify and hold harmless the grantee from any claim that might
arise due to or as a result of the village's use. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-11: INITIAL FRANCHISE COSTS:
Costs to be borne by the grantee shall include any requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the initial franchise, but shall not
be limited to: all costs of publications of notices prior to any public meeting provided for pursuant to this chapter, and any costs not covered by
application fees, incurred by the village in its study, preparation of proposal documents, evaluation of all applications, and examinations of the
applicant's qualifications, including reasonable fees for attorneys and cable television consultants. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-12: NOTICES:
All notices from the grantee to the village pursuant to any franchise shall be to the village president's office. The grantee shall maintain with the village,
throughout the term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. The grantee shall maintain a central office to address any issues relating
to operating under this chapter. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-13: LETTER OF CREDIT/SECURITY DEPOSIT:
A. Within fifteen (15) days after the award of the franchise, the grantee shall deposit with the village either an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial
institution or a security deposit in the amount of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00), or three dollars ($3.00) per basic subscriber in the
village, whichever is greater, with the form to be established by the village. The form and content of such letter of credit or security deposit shall be
approved by the village attorney. These instruments shall be used to ensure the faithful performance of the grantee of all provisions of this chapter,
and to ensure compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of the village
having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this chapter, and to ensure the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens, and taxes due the
village which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system.
B. The letter of credit or security deposit shall be maintained at the amount established above or as otherwise specified in a franchise agreement.
C. If the grantee fails to pay to the village any compensation within the time fixed herein; or fails after thirty (30) days' notice to pay to the village any
taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay the village within thirty (30) days, any damages, costs or expenses which the village is compelled to pay by
reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the franchise, or fails, after three (3) days' notice of such failure by the village to comply
with any provision of the franchise which the village reasonably determines can be remedied by demand on the letter of credit or security deposit, the
village may immediately demand payment of the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the letter of credit or security deposit. Upon
such demand for payment, the village shall notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof.
D. The rights reserved to the village with respect to the letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved by the franchise
or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such letter of credit shall affect any other right the village may
have.
E. The letter of credit shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this letter of credit or security deposit may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be
stated by the surety until thirty (30) days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew.
F. Upon receipt of the thirty (30) day notice, this shall be construed as a default granting the village the right to demand payment from the bank for either
the security deposit or letter of credit.
G. The village, at any time during the term of this chapter, may waive in writing grantee's requirement to maintain a letter of credit or security deposit or
may lessen the amount. The waiver of the requirement can be initiated by the village or grantee. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-14: CONSTRUCTION BOND:
A. Performance Bond: Within thirty (30) days after the award of the franchise (excluding renewed franchises), the grantee shall file with the village a
performance bond in the amount of not less than fifty percent (50%) of the costs to install the system contained in the application in favor of the
village. This bond shall be maintained throughout the construction period and until such time as determined by the village, unless specified in the
franchise agreement.
B. Failure To Comply: If the grantee fails to comply with any law, ordinance or resolution governing the franchise, or fails to fulfill and perform each term
and condition of the franchise as it relates to the conditions relative to the construction of the system, including the franchise agreement that is
incorporated herein by reference, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally, from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss
suffered by the village as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 174/348
of the grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney fees, including the village's legal staff, and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. This
section shall be an additional remedy for any and all violations outlined in section 7-3-13 of this chapter.
C. Requirements Waived: The village shall, upon completion of construction of the service area, waive the requirement of the grantee to maintain the
bond. However, the village may require a construction bond to be posted by the grantee for any construction subsequent to the completion of the
initial service areas where the estimated cost of the project exceeds forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00).
D. Bond Endorsement: The bond shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until
thirty (30) days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail, a written notice of such intent to cancel and not to renew.
E. Right To Demand Payment: Upon receipt of a thirty (30) day notice, this shall be construed as default granting the village the right to demand
payment on the bond except to the extent another bond is provided.
F. Waiver Of Requirement: The village, at any time during the term of this chapter, may waive in writing grantee's requirement to maintain a performance
bond. The waiver of the requirement can be initiated by the village or the grantee. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-15: LIABILITY AND INSURANCE:
A. The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, liability
insurance insuring the village and the grantee in the minimum amount of:
1. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage to any one person;
2. Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for property damage from any one accident;
3. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury to any one person; and
4. Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for personal injury from any one accident.
B. The certificate of insurance obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section may be reviewed by the village attorney, name the village as an
additional insured, and shall be filed and maintained with the village during the term of the franchise.
C. Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the village thereunder, shall be construed to or limit the liability of the grantee
under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages.
D. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to the franchise shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the
surety until thirty (30) days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail, a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew. This insurance
shall be primary to any insurance obtained by the Village on its own behalf, notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein.
(Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-16: INDEMNIFICATION:
A. Disclaimer Of Liability: The village shall not at any time be liable for injury or damage occurring to any person or property from any cause whatsoever
arising out of the construction, maintenance, repair, use, operation, condition or dismantling of the grantee's cable television system or due to the act
or omission of any person or entity other than the village or those persons or entities for which the village is legally liable as a matter of law.
B. Indemnification: The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold harmless the village, all associated, affiliated, allied and
subsidiary entities of the village now existing or hereinafter created, and their respective officers, boards, commissions, employees, agents, attorneys
and contractors (hereinafter referred to as "indemnitees"), from and against the following:
1. Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable
fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees
by reason of any act or omission of the grantee, its personnel, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily
injury, sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of
privacy and unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name, copyright, patent, service mark or any other right of any person, which may arise out
of or be in any way connected with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance, use or condition of the cable television system caused by
grantee, its subcontractors or agents or the grantee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation.
2. Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable
fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which are imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by
reason of any claim or lien arising out of work, labor, materials or supplies provided or supplied to the grantee, its contractors or subcontractors, for
the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of the cable television system.
3. Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable
fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 175/348
by reason of any financing or securities offering by grantee or its affiliates for violations of any laws, statutes or regulations of the state of Illinois or
of the United States, including those of the federal securities and exchange commission, whether by the grantee or otherwise; excluding
therefrom, however, claims which are solely based upon and arise solely out of information supplied by the village to the grantee for consideration
and in writing, and included in the offering materials with the express written approval of the village prior to the offering.
C. Assumption Of Risk: The grantee undertakes and assumes for its officers, agents, contractors and subcontractors and employees all risk of
dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any village owned or controlled property, including public rights of way, and the grantee hereby agrees to
indemnify and hold harmless the indemnitees against and from any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the indemnitees for personal injury or
property damage to any person arising out of the installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the cable television system or the grantee's
failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation except that nothing herein shall be construed to indemnify the above
noted parties from negligent acts on their part or the village's part.
D. Defense Of Indemnitees: In the event any action or proceeding shall be brought against the indemnitees by reason of any matter for which the
indemnitees are indemnified hereunder, the grantee shall, upon notice from any of the indemnitees, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, resist
and defend the same.
E. Notice, Cooperation And Expenses: The village shall give the grantee prompt notice of the making of any written claim or the commencement of any
action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the village from cooperating with
the grantee and participating in the defense of any litigation by the village's own counsel.
F. Nonwaiver Of Statutory Limits: Nothing in this agreement is intended to express or imply a waiver by the village of statutory provisions, privileges or
immunities of any kind or nature as set forth in Illinois statutes, including the limits of liability of the village as exists presently or may be increased
from time to time by the legislature. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-17: RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS:
A. The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of
race, color, religion, national origin, income, sex, marital status, sexual preference or age. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby
incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference.
B. The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the federal communications commission and of state and local
governments, and as amended from time to time.
C. The grantee shall, at all times, comply with the privacy requirements of state and federal law.
D. Grantee is required to make all services available to all residential dwellings throughout the service area or as otherwise specified in a franchise
agreement. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-18: SERVICE AVAILABILITY AND RECORD REQUEST:
The grantee shall provide cable television service throughout the entire franchise area pursuant to the provisions of the franchise and shall keep a
record for at least three (3) years of all requests for service received by the grantee. This record shall be available for public inspection at the regional
office of the grantee during regular office hours. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-19: SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION:
A. New Construction Timetable:
1. Within two (2) years from the date of the award of the initial franchise, the grantee must make cable television service available to every dwelling
unit within the initial service area.
a. The grantee must make cable television service available to at least twenty percent (20%) of the dwelling units within the initial service area
within twelve (12) months from the date of the award of the franchise.
b. The grantee must make cable television service available to at least fifty percent (50%) of the occupied dwelling units within the initial service
area within eighteen (18) months from the date of the award of the franchise.
2. The grantee, in its application, may propose a timetable of construction which will make cable television service available in the initial service area
sooner than the above minimum requirements, in which case the said schedule will be made part of the franchise agreement, and will be binding
upon the grantee.
3. In special circumstances the village may waive one hundred percent (100%) completion within the two (2) year time frame, provided substantial
completion is accomplished within the allotted time frame, substantial completion to be not less than ninety five percent (95%). Justification for less
than one hundred percent (100%) must be submitted subject to the satisfaction of the village.
4. The grantee shall install conduit, pedestals and vaults underground as required by subsection 7-3-20B8 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 176/348
B. Line Extensions:
1. Requirements: In areas of the franchise territory not included in the initial service areas, the grantee shall be required to extend its system
pursuant to the following requirements:
a. No customer shall be refused service arbitrarily. Grantee is hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary within the village. To
expedite the process of extending the cable system into a new subdivision, the village will forward to the grantee an approved engineering plan
of each project. Subject to the density requirements in subsection B1b of this section, the grantee shall commence the design and construction
process upon receipt of the final engineering plan. Upon notification from the village that the first home in the project has been approved for a
building permit, the grantee shall have a maximum of three (3) months to complete the construction/activation process within the applicable
project phase.
b. The grantee shall extend and make cable television service available to every dwelling unit in all unserved, developing areas having at least
twenty (20) occupied dwelling units per cable mile, as measured from the existing system, and shall extend its system simultaneously with the
installation of utility lines to the extent practical.
c. The grantee shall extend and make cable television service available to any isolated resident outside the initial service area requesting
connection at the standard connection charge, if the connection to the isolated resident would require no more than a standard one hundred
twenty five foot (125') drop line.
2. Early Extension: In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory extension of service, the grantee shall provide, upon the request of a
potential subscriber desiring service, an estimate of the grantee's costs required to extend service to the subscriber. The grantee shall then extend
service upon request of the potential subscriber. The grantee may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to the grantee
within a period of thirty six (36) months of payment. In the event the area subsequently reaches the density required for mandatory extension, such
payments which exceed the standard installation costs for said installation shall be refunded to the subscriber.
3. New Development Undergrounding: In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the
developer or property owner shall give the grantee reasonable notice of such construction or development, and of the particular date on which
open trenching will be available for the grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at the grantee's
expense. The grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the
development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if the grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and
laterals within ten (10) working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner to
the grantee, then should the trenches be closed after the ten (10) day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by the grantee.
C. Special Agreements: Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the grantee from serving geographical areas not covered under this section upon
agreement with developers, property owners residents, or businesses.
D. Line Extension Policy: The grantee, in its application, may propose a line extension policy that will result in serving more residents of the village than
as required above, in which case the grantee's policy will be incorporated into the franchise agreement and will be binding on the grantee. (Ord.
1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-20: CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
A. Compliance With Construction And Technical Standards: The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent
with all laws, ordinances, construction standards and governmental requirements. In addition, the grantee shall provide the village, upon request, a
written report of the results of the grantee's annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to federal communications commission standards
and requirements.
B. Additional Specifications:
1. Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable television system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and
wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and
bundled with due respect for engineering considerations.
2. The grantee shall at all times comply with:
a. National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau Of Standards);
b. National Electrical Code (National Bureau Of Fire Underwriters);
c. Bell System Code Of Pole Line Construction; and
d. Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations.
3. In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area or other areas where the
grantee may have equipment located.
4. Any antenna structure used in the system shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structure, required by the United States
department of transportation.
5. All working facilities and conditions used during construction, installation and maintenance of the cable television system shall comply with the
standards of the occupational safety and health administration.
6. RF leakage shall be checked at reception locations for emergency radio services to prove no interference signal combinations are possible. Stray
radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation radio sites to prove no interference to airborne navigational
reception in the normal flight patterns. FCC rules and regulations shall govern.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 177/348
7. The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power for headend, transportation and trunk amplifiers for a minimum of two
(2) hours.
8. In all areas of the village where all the cables, wires and other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its
cables, wires and other like facilities underground. When public utilities relocate their facilities from pole to underground, the grantee must
concurrently do so. If said utilities are reimbursed for such relocation, the grantee shall be entitled to like reimbursement. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-21: USE OF STREETS:
A. Interference With Persons And Improvements: The grantee's system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so
that none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or interfere with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin any of the streets and public ways, or interfere with any improvements the village may deem proper to make, or hinder or obstruct the
free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or public property.
B. Restoration To Prior Condition: In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, landscaping, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its
own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the village, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any
street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before the work was commenced and in accordance with standards for such work set by the village.
Village approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
C. Erection, Removal And Common Uses Of Poles:
1. No poles or other freestanding wire holding structures for aerial plant shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the village with
regard to location, height, types, and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or wire holding structure of the grantee shall be
a vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee whenever the village determines that the public
convenience would be enhanced thereby.
2. Where poles or other wire holding structures already existing for use in serving the village are available for use by the grantee, but it does not
make arrangements for such use, the village may require the grantee to use such poles and structures if it determines that the public convenience
would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the grantee are just and reasonable.
D. Relocation Of Facilities: If at any time during the period of the franchise the village shall elect to alter, or change the grade of any street, alley or other
public way, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the village, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.
E. Cooperation With Building Movers: The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the village,
temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be
paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given
not less than seventy two (72) hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
F. Tree Trimming: The grantee shall not remove any tree without the prior consent of the village, and must trim trees in accordance with all village
regulations and procedures. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-22: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
A. The grantee shall maintain all parts of the system in good condition throughout the entire franchise period.
B. Upon the reasonable request for service by any person located within the franchise territory, the grantee shall, within thirty (30) days, furnish the
requested service to such person within terms of the line extension policy in subsection 7-3-20B of this chapter. A request for service shall be
unreasonable for the purpose of this subsection if no trunk or feeder line installation capable of servicing that person's block has been installed.
C. The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
D. The grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of subscribers or persons not served by the grantee, nor
shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents within the confines of the
village nor shall other utilities interfere with the grantee's system. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-23: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS:
A. Applicability: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the enforcement of any federal, state or local law or regulation concerning
customer service or consumer protection that imposes customer service standards or consumer protection requirements that exceed the customer
service standards set out in this chapter or that address matters not addressed in this chapter.
B. Twenty Four Hour Access: The grantee shall maintain a Chicago area (standard metropolitan statistical area) telephone access line which is available
to its subscribers and shall have knowledgeable, qualified representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries twenty four (24)
hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 178/348
C. Telephone Response Time: Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time, including wait time and the time required to transfer the call,
shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. This standard shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time as measured on a quarterly basis.
D. Limited Busy Signals: Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the total time that
the office is open for business.
E. Payment Convenience: Customer service centers and bill payment locations will be open for walk-in customer transactions a minimum of eight (8)
hours per day Monday through Friday, unless there is a need to modify those hours because of the location or customers served. The grantee and
village by mutual consent shall establish supplemental hours on weekdays and weekends as fits the needs of the community.
F. Installations; Service Calls: Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards will be met no less than ninety five percent (95%) of
the time as measured on an annual basis:
1. Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed. A standard installation is one that is within
one hundred twenty five feet (125') of the existing system.
2. Excluding those situations that are beyond its control, the grantee will respond to any service interruption promptly and in no event later than
twenty four (24) hours from the time of initial notification. All other regular service requests will be responded to within thirty six (36) hours during
the normal work week for that system except to the extent that other arrangements acceptable to the customer can be made. The appointment
window alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities will be: "morning" or "afternoon", not to exceed a four (4) hour
"window" during normal business hours for the system, or at a time that is mutually acceptable. The grantee may schedule supplemental hours
during which appointments can be scheduled based on the needs of the consumers. If at any time an installer or technician is running late, an
attempt to contact the customer will be made and the appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time that is convenient to the customer.
G. Subscriber Credit For Outages: Upon service interruption of a subscriber's cable service, and upon subscriber request, the following shall apply:
grantee shall provide a credit for lost cable service of not less than the value of the actual time without service due to an outage or interruption of
cable service lasting at least four (4) or more hours.
H. Written Information Provided: The grantee shall provide written information for each of the following areas at the time of installation and at any future
time upon the request of the customer:
1. Product and services offered.
2. Prices and service options.
3. Installation and service policies.
4. How to use the cable television services.
I. Bills: Bills will be clear, concise and understandable, with all charges for cable services and packages itemized.
J. Late, Administrative Or Other Fee: A grantee may impose a late, administrative or other fee on a customer for nonpayment of a bill after thirty (30)
days have elapsed in the billing cycle which is the subject of the unpaid bill.
K. Rate Or Channel Change Notification: The grantee shall notify customers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of any rate or channel change.
L. Adherence To Regulations: The grantee shall maintain and operate its network in accordance with the rules and regulations incorporated herein or as
may be promulgated by the federal communications commission, the United States congress, or the state of Illinois.
M. Maintain Standards And Quality Of Service: The grantee shall continue, through the term of the franchise, to maintain the technical standards and
quality of service set forth in this chapter. Should the village obtain evidence and determine by findings of fact that the grantee has failed to maintain
the technical standards and quality of service, and should it, by resolution, specifically enumerate said failures, the grantee shall correct said failures.
Failure to make such improvements within three (3) months of such resolution will constitute a breach of a condition for which penalties contained in
section 7-3-44 of this chapter are applicable.
N. Monthly Service Log: The grantee shall keep a monthly service log which indicates the nature of each service complaint received in the last six (6)
months, the date and time each complaint was received, the disposition of each complaint, and the time and date thereof. This log shall be made
available for periodic inspection by the village. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-24: CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY:
A. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If the
grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the system, the grantee shall reasonably act so as to ensure that the system provides continuous,
uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances.
B. If there is a change of franchise, or if a new operator acquires the system, the grantee shall cooperate with the village, new franchisee or operator in
maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it
operates the system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services until it no longer operates the system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 179/348
C. If the grantee fails to operate the system for seven (7) consecutive days without prior approval of the village or without just cause, the village may, at
its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the village or a
permanent operator is selected. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-25: COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
A. The village president or his/her designee is designated as having primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and
implementation of complaint procedures.
B. During the terms of the franchise and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain a central office reachable by a Chicago area (standard
metropolitan statistical area) telephone call to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment functions and similar matters. The grantee
will make good faith efforts to arrange for one or more payment locations in a central location where customers can pay bills within twenty (20) miles
of the village.
C. As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, the grantee shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information
concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or
employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed.
D. When there have been similar complaints made, or where there exists recurring evidence, which casts doubt on the reliability or quality of cable
service, the village shall have the right and authority to require the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system. The grantee
shall fully cooperate with the village in performing such testing and shall prepare results and a report, if requested, within thirty (30) days after notice.
Such report shall include the following information:
1. The nature of the complaint or problem that precipitated the special tests;
2. The system component(s) tested;
3. The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
4. The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved;
5. Any other information pertinent to the tests and analysis which may be required.
E. The village may require that tests be observed by an independent professional engineer or equivalent of the village's choice at the village's expense.
The engineer shall be given records of special tests and may forward to the village such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests.
F. The village's rights under this section shall be limited to requiring tests, analysis and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based on
recurring complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the village has reasonable grounds in its judgment to believe that the
complaints or other evidence require that tests be performed to protect the public against violations of this chapter and an attendant franchise
agreement. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-26: GRANTEE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise, and to assure uninterrupted service to
each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or
applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-27: FRANCHISE FEE:
A. A grantee shall pay to the village a franchise fee in the amount designated in the franchise agreement. Unless otherwise specified in the franchise
agreement, such franchise fee shall be five percent (5%) of the grantee's gross revenues. If the statutory five percent (5%) limitation on franchise
fees is raised or the federal statute deletes the franchise fee limitation entirely, then the franchise fee may be subject to renegotiation.
B. The franchise fee payment shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owed to the village by the grantee and shall not be construed as payment
in lieu of municipal property taxes or other state, county or local taxes.
C. The franchise fee and any other penalties assessed shall be payable quarterly on a calendar year basis to the village within sixty (60) days of the end
of each quarter. The grantee shall also file a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross receipts as previously defined within sixty (60)
days after the end of the quarter.
D. The village shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be
payable under this chapter; provided, however, that such audit shall take place within sixty (60) months following the close of each of the grantee's
fiscal years. Any additional amount due the village as a result of an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee by
the village, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report, except where grantee may reasonably dispute such an amount.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 180/348
E. If any franchise payment or recomputed amount, or penalty, is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be
charged daily from such date at an annual rate of eighteen percent (18%). (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-28: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL:
A. A franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of the village. The grantee may, however,
transfer or assign the franchise to a wholly owned subsidiary of the grantee and such subsidiary may transfer or assign the franchise back to the
grantee without such consent, providing that such assignment is without any release of liability of the grantee. Any proposed assignee must possess
the necessary legal, technical and financial qualifications to establish its ability to operate the system in conformity with federal law and this chapter,
proof of which shall be provided by the grantee and/or assignee to the reasonable satisfaction of the village. Any proposed assignee must agree to
comply with all provisions of the franchise. The village shall have one hundred twenty (120) days to act upon any request for approval of a sale or
transfer submitted in writing that contains or is accompanied by all such information as is required. The village shall be deemed to have consented to
a proposed transfer or assignment if its refusal to consent is not communicated in writing to the grantee within one hundred twenty (120) days
following receipt of written notice together with all necessary information as to the effect of the proposed transfer or assignment upon the public,
unless the requesting party and the village agree to an extension of time. The village shall not unreasonably withhold consent to a proposed transfer.
B. The grantee shall promptly notify the village of any actual or proposed pending change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of
the grantee. The word "control", as used herein, is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner
exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group
of persons of twenty percent (20%) of the voting shares of the grantee. Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the
franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the village shall have consented thereto, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the
purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the village may investigate the legal, technical, and
financial qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee and/or assignee shall reasonably cooperate with the village's
investigation.
C. The consent or approval of the village to any transfer of the grantee, franchise, or control thereof, shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights
of the village in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of the franchise.
D. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the village shall not be required to approve any transfer or assignment of a new franchise prior to
substantial completion of the initial construction of the proposed system.
E. In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor(s) in interest executing a written acceptance of the franchise
agreement. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-29: AVAILABILITY OF BOOKS AND RECORDS:
A. The grantee shall fully cooperate in making available at reasonable times, and the village shall have the right to inspect, where reasonably necessary
or desirable for the enforcement of the franchise, books, records, maps, plans and other like materials of the grantee applicable to the cable
television system, at any time during normal business hours; provided, where volume and convenience necessitate, the grantee may require
inspection to take place on the grantee premises.
B. The following records and/or reports are to be made available to the village upon request, but not more frequently than on a quarterly basis, unless
mutually agreed upon by the grantee and the village:
1. A quarterly progress report submitted by the grantee to the village which may include major construction progress reports, service call reports and
outage history;
2. Periodic preventive maintenance reports;
3. Any copies of FCC form 395-A (or successor form) or any supplemental forms related to equal opportunity or fair contracting policies;
4. Subscriber inquiry/complaint resolution data and the right to review documentation concerning these inquiries and/or complaints on an aggregate
basis periodically with respect for federal subscriber privacy legislation;
5. During the rebuild of a substantial portion or all of the system in the village, periodic construction update reports including, where appropriate, the
submission of as built maps. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-30: OTHER PETITIONS AND APPLICATIONS:
Upon request, company shall submit copies of any public document issued or filed by any federal or state regulatory agencies which are nonroutine in
nature that will materially and directly affect the company's cable television operations within the franchise area. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-31: FISCAL REPORTS:
The grantee shall file annually with the village no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year, a copy of a gross
revenues statement certified by the chief financial officer of the grantee. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-32: REMOVAL OF CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 181/348
Upon termination of the rights granted hereunder the grantee shall remove designated portions of the cable television system from the streets and
public property within the village as may be required to serve the public interest. Upon such notice of removal, a bond shall be furnished or an existing
bond maintained by the grantee in an amount sufficient to cover this expense. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-33: REQUIRED SERVICES AND FACILITIES:
A. Minimum Bandwidth: The cable television system plant shall have a minimum bandwidth of seven hundred fifty (750) MHz.
B. Two-Way Communications: Such system shall include the technical ability to be activated for "two-way" communications.
C. Specially Designated Channels: The grantee shall maintain the following:
1. At least one specially designated, noncommercial public access channel available on a first come, nondiscriminatory basis;
2. At least one specially designated channel for use by local educational authorities;
3. At least one specially designated channel for local governmental uses;
4. Provided, however, these uses may be combined on one or more channels until such time as additional channels become necessary in the
opinion of the village. Studios and associated production equipment will be located in a mutually agreed upon site to meet the public's need for
public access, educational and local government access programming as noted in subsections C1, C2, and C3 of this section.
5. Where the village uses the community television form of local programming, subsection C1 through C4 of this section may be revised in the
franchise agreement, provided that technical and video production requirements remain intact.
D. Emergency Alert Override System: The grantee shall incorporate into its cable television system the capacity to permit the village, in times of
emergency, to override by remote control the audio of all analog channels simultaneously, which the grantee may lawfully override. The grantee shall
cooperate with the village in the use and operation of the emergency alert override system. The village agrees to indemnify and hold the grantee
harmless from any damages or penalties arising out of the actions of the village, its employees or agents in using such service.
E. Separate Network For Use Of Franchising Authority: As more specifically delineated in a franchise agreement any grantee shall provide a separate
network for the use of the franchising authority. Such network shall be referred to herein, as the institutional network (I-NET). The I-NET shall be
capable of transmitting two-way audio, video and data information.
F. Cooperation Required: The grantee shall cooperate to a reasonable degree with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or
village, county, state and federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise
providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the village. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-34: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. In addition to the statutory powers of the village to regulate and control any cable television franchise, and those powers expressly reserved by the
village, or agreed to and provided for herein, the right and power is hereby reserved by the village to promulgate such additional regulations as it
shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful police powers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in
conflict with the provisions herein, or those in a franchise agreement or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
B. The village may also adopt such regulations at the request of grantee upon application. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-35: PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SESSIONS:
A. The village and the grantee may hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions within thirty (30) days of the third, sixth, and twelfth anniversary
dates of the grantee's award or renewal of the franchise and as may be required by federal and state law. All such evaluation sessions shall be open
to the public.
B. Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the village or the grantee.
C. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but are not limited to: service rate structures; franchise
fee, penalties, free or discounted services; application of new technologies; system performance; services provided; programming offered; customer
complaints; privacy; amendments to this chapter; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and grantee or village rules. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-
1998)
7-3-36: RATE CHANGE PROCEDURES:
Pursuant to the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992, as amended, the village may regulate the basic service rates charged
by grantee. Under these rules, grantee may be required to obtain approval from the village for a rate increase for any change to the rates for basic
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 182/348
service. Should federal or state law permit further rate regulation beyond the basic service the village may assume such rate regulation and adopt
appropriate procedures for such regulation. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-37: INVOLUNTARY TERMINATION:
A. In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the village under this chapter or otherwise, the village reserves the right to terminate the
franchise agreement and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder in the event of a substantial breach of its terms and conditions. A
substantial breach by the grantee shall include:
1. The grantee continues to wilfully violate a material provision of the franchise or any material rule, order, regulation or determination after written
notice from the village made pursuant to the franchise;
2. The grantee practices any material fraud in its conduct in obtaining or operating the franchise;
3. Failure to begin or complete system construction;
4. Wilful failure to pay taxes or franchise fees, or penalties when and as due the village;
5. Wilful failure to maintain required insurance coverage;
6. Failure to restore system service after seventy two (72) consecutive hours of interrupted service, provided the grantee's failure to restore system
wide service is not caused by circumstances or events beyond the grantee's reasonable control;
7. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee;
8. Transfer of the franchise without village approval pursuant to section 7-3-28 of this chapter;
9. The grantee abandons its franchise. The grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned its franchise if it wilfully refuses or is unable to operate the
cable system as required by this franchise, when there is no event beyond the grantee's control that prevents the operation of the cable system,
and where operation would not endanger the health or safety of the public or property.
B. The foregoing shall not constitute a major breach if the violation occurs but is without fault of the grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances
beyond its control. The grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or
employees.
C. The village, at its option, may make a written demand that the grantee comply with any such provision, rule, order or determination under or pursuant
to the franchise. If the violation by the grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand is received by the grantee
without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the village may place the issue of
termination of the franchise before the village council. The village shall give the grantee written notice, at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of
such meeting of the village board, of its intent to request such termination and the time and place of the board meeting. Public notice shall be given
of the meeting and the issue(s) which the board is to consider.
D. The village board shall hear and consider the issue(s) and shall hear any person interested therein and shall determine findings of fact whether or not
any violation by the grantee has occurred.
E. If the village board determines that the violation by the grantee was the fault of the grantee and within its control, the board may, by resolution,
declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be involuntarily terminated; however, the village shall also allow the grantee an opportunity for
compliance within such period as the board may fix, which period shall be reasonable to effect compliance;
F. The issue of involuntary termination may automatically be placed upon the village's agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance. The
village may then terminate the franchise forthwith upon finding that the grantee has failed to achieve compliance or it may further extend the period
at its discretion. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-38: FORECLOSURE:
Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the system, the grantee shall notify the village of such fact, and such notification
shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken place, and the provisions of the franchise governing the consent of the
village to such change in control of the grantee shall apply. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-39: RECEIVERSHIP:
The village shall have the right to cancel a franchise one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and
conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or
trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:
A. Within one hundred twenty (120) days after his/her election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of
this chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder or presented a reasonable plan for said remedy; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 183/348
B. Such receiver or trustee, within the one hundred twenty (120) days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction
in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this chapter and the franchise
granted to the grantee or as may otherwise be agreed to by the village. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-40: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the franchise to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state
and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof.
B. If the village determines that a material provision of this chapter is affected by any subsequent action of the state or federal government, the village
and the grantee shall negotiate to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and
purpose of this agreement to the extent practicable and enforceable. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-41: LANDLORD/TENANT:
A. Interference With Cable Service Prohibited: Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall interfere
with the right of any tenant or lawful resident thereof to receive cable television service, cable installation or maintenance from a cable television
grantee regulated by and lawfully operating under a valid and existing franchise issued by the village.
B. Penalties And Charges To Tenants For Service Prohibited: Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative
shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident, or discriminate in any way
against such tenant or resident who requests or receives cable television service from a grantee operating under a valid and existing cable television
franchise issued by the village.
C. Reselling Service Prohibited: No person shall resell, without the expressed, written consent of both the grantee and the village, any cable service,
program or signal transmitted by a cable television grantee under a franchise issued by the village.
D. Protection Of Property Permitted: Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring that cable television system facilities conform to laws
and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning, appearance and value of premises or the convenience and
safety of persons or property.
E. Risks Assumed By Grantee: Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring a grantee to agree to indemnify the owner, or his agents or
representatives for damages or from liability for damages caused by the installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable television facilities.
(Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-42: APPLICANTS' BIDS FOR INITIAL FRANCHISE:
A. All bids received by the village from the applicants for an initial franchise will become the sole property of the village.
B. The village reserves the right to reject any and all bids and waive informalities and/or technicalities where the best interest of the village may be
served.
C. All questions regarding the meaning or intent of this chapter or application documents shall be submitted to the village in writing. Replies will be
issued by addenda mailed or delivered to all parties recorded by the village as having received the application documents. The village reserves the
right to make extensions of time for receiving bids as it deems necessary. Questions received less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date for the
opening of bids will not be answered. Only replies to questions by written addenda will be binding. All bids must contain an acknowledgment of
receipt of all addenda.
D. Bids must be sealed, and submitted at the time and place indicated in the application documents for the public opening. Bids may be modified at any
time prior to the opening of the bids, provided that any modifications must be duly executed in the manner that the applicant's bid must be executed.
No bid shall be opened or inspected before the public opening.
E. Before submitting a bid, each applicant must:
1. Examine this chapter and the application documents thoroughly;
2. Familiarize himself/herself with local conditions that may in any manner affect performance under the franchise;
3. Familiarize himself/herself with federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations affecting performance under the franchise; and
4. Carefully correlate the bid with the requirements of this chapter and the application documents.
F. The village may make such investigations as it deems necessary to determine the ability of the applicant to perform under the franchise, and the
applicant shall furnish to the village all such information and data for this purpose as the village may request. The village reserves the right to reject
any bid if the evidence submitted by, or investigation of, such applicant fails to satisfy the village that such applicant is properly qualified to carry out
the obligations of the franchise and to complete the work contemplated therein. Conditional bids will not be accepted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 184/348
G. All bids received shall be placed in a secure depository approved by the village and shall not be opened nor inspected prior to the public opening.
(Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-43: FINANCIAL, CONTRACTUAL, SHAREHOLDER AND SYSTEM DISCLOSURE FOR FRANCHISES:
A. No franchise will be granted to any applicant unless all requirements and demands of the village regarding financial, contractual, shareholder and
system technology disclosures have been met.
B. Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall fully disclose all agreements and undertakings, whether
written or oral, or implied with any person, firm, group, association or corporation with respect to the franchise and the proposed cable television
system. The grantee of a franchise shall disclose all other contracts to the village as the contracts are made. This section shall include, but not be
limited to, any agreements between local applicants and national companies.
C. Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall submit all requested information as provided by the terms of
this chapter or the application documents, which are incorporated herein by reference. The requested information must be complete and verified as
true by the applicant.
D. Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose the numbers of shares of stock, and the holders
thereof, and shall include the amount of consideration for each share of stock and the nature of the consideration.
E. Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose any information required by the application
documents regarding other cable systems in which they hold an interest of any nature, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Locations of all other franchises and the dates of award for each location;
2. Estimated construction costs and estimated completion dates for each system;
3. Estimated number of miles of construction and number of miles completed in each system as of the date of this application; and
4. Date for completion of construction as promised in the application for each system.
F. Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose any information required by the application
documents regarding pending applications for other cable systems, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Location of other franchise applications and date of application for each system;
2. Estimated dates of franchise awards;
3. Estimated number of miles of construction; and
4. Estimated construction costs.
5. Applicants shall also provide the following information to establish their technical, legal and financial qualifications:
a. A detailed corporate structure of the applicant including identities of parent and subsidiary corporations or partnership.
b. The identities of shareholders of five percent (5%) or more of the stock of applicant and any parent organizations. The identities of all officers
and directors of the applicant.
c. A detailed financial pro forma for the proposed cable system including sources and uses of funds and detailed capital and operating projections
by category. (Ord. 1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-44: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; PROCEDURES:
A. Penalties For Violations: For the violation of any of the following provisions of this chapter, penalties shall be chargeable as follows:
1. Failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance, construction bond, performance bond, or other required financial security: fifty dollars
($50.00) per day, per violation, for each day such failure occurs or continues up to ten (10) days, at which time, the penalty is doubled and then
tripled if the violation continues past thirty (30) days;
2. Failure to provide access to data, documents, records, or reports to the village as required by law, sections 7-3-19, 7-3-29, 7-3-30, 7-3-31 and 7-3-
37 of this chapter: twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day, per violation, for each day such failure occurs or continues up to ten (10) days, at which
time, the penalty is doubled and then tripled if the violation continues past thirty (30) days;
3. Failure to comply with applicable construction, operation, or maintenance standards: fifty dollars ($50.00) per day per violation, for each day such
failure occurs or continues up to ten (10) days, at which time, the penalty is doubled and then tripled if the violation continues past thirty (30) days;
4. Any violations for noncompliance with the customer service standards of sections 7-3-23 through 7-3-25 of this chapter, the grantee shall pay fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance continues per violation, for each day such failure occurs or
continues up to ten (10) days, at which time, the penalty is doubled and then tripled if the violation continues past thirty (30) days;
Grantor may impose any or all of the above enumerated measures against grantee, which shall be in addition to any and all other legal or
equitable remedies it has under the franchise or under any applicable law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 185/348
B. Procedures:
1. Whenever the village believes that the grantee has violated one or more terms, conditions or provisions of the franchise, and wishes to impose
purely monetary penalties, a written notice shall be given to the grantee informing it of such alleged violation or liability. The written notice shall
describe in reasonable detail the specific violation so as to afford the grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation. The grantee shall have thirty
(30) days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation before the village may impose penalties unless the violation is of such
a nature so as to require more than thirty (30) days and the grantee proceeds diligently within the thirty (30) days to correct the violation. In any
case where the violation is not cured within sixty (60) days of notice from the village, or such other time as the grantee and the village may
mutually agree to, the village may proceed to impose liquidated damages. The fact that the grantee has diligently remedied the violation shall be
taken into consideration by the village in imposing any monetary penalty for such violation.
2. The grantee may, within ten (10) days of receipt of notice, notify the village that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact,
occurred. Such notice by the grantee to the village shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by the grantee and shall stay the running of
the thirty (30) day cure period pending council decision as required below. The village shall hear the grantee's dispute. Grantee must be given at
least five (5) days' notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the grantee shall be entitled to the right to present evidence and the right to be
represented by counsel. After the hearing, the village shall provide grantee a copy of its action, along with supporting documents. In the event the
village upholds the finding of a violation, the grantee shall have the balance of the thirty (30) day period subsequent, or such other time period as
the grantee and the village mutually agree, to correct the violation.
3. The rights reserved to the village under this section are in addition to all other rights of the village whether reserved by this chapter or authorized
by law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to penalties shall affect any other right the village may have. (Ord.
1021, 8-12-1998)
7-3-45: SEVERABILITY:
If any section of this chapter or the franchise, or any portion thereof, is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or
administrative agency, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, except as otherwise provided for herein. (Ord. 1021, 8-
12-1998)
Chapter 4
TREE REGULATIONS
7-4-1: POLICY INITIATIVES:
A. Best Management Practices: It is hereby declared the policy of the Village to ensure we lead by example by using research-based and nationally
recognized programs and Best Management Practices for tree care and maintenance on Village rights-of-way trees.
B. Regulation Of Planting: It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village to regulate and control the planting, transplanting, removal, maintenance
and protection of trees and shrubs in the Village in order to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons
using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or property of the Village; to promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the public; to prevent
damage to any street, sidewalk or other Village property; to protect trees and shrubs located in public areas owned by the Village from undesirable
and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance practices; and to guard all trees and shrubs on Village property against the spread of
pests and disease. It is the intent of the Village that the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all trees and plants growing or planted in or upon any
public right-of-way or other premises owned or controlled by the Village. (Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-2: ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER:
The Superintendent of Public Works or his designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and the issuance of permits. Said
Superintendent shall consult with a Village certified arborist on an as needed basis. (Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-3: PERMIT:
No person shall plant a tree or plant in a public right-of-way or other premises controlled by the Village until a permit has been issued. Permits may only
be issued based upon the following conditions:
A. The tree must be an approved tree as so designated in section 7-4-4 of this chapter; and
B. No more than ten percent (10%) of one (1) species per subdivision or region of the Village and no more than twenty percent (20%) of one (1) species
throughout the entire Village will be permitted. (Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-4: APPROVED SPECIES:
Tree species planted in the parkway must conform to the parkway tree planting list as approved by the Superintendent of Public Works and the Village
certified arborist. (See below for list of approved species.) The Village will take into account that it desires no more than ten percent (10%) of one (1)
species per subdivision or region of the Village and no more than twenty percent (20%) of one (1) species in the total Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 186/348
SHADE TREES ALLOWED IN CONFINED PARKWAYS
(4' - 5' WIDE) WITH NO OVERHEAD UTILITIES
Native to Illinois:
Catalpa CatalpaSpeciosa
Honeylocust, Thornless Gleditsiatriacanthos
Non-native to Illinois:
AristrocratCallery Pear Pyruscalleryana `Aristrocrat'
Gingko GingkoBiloba
Linden, American (Basswood) Tilia Americana
Linden, Littleleaf Tiliacordata
SHADE TREES ALLOWED IN REGULAR PARKWAYS
(7'+ WIDE) WITH NO OVERHEAD UTILITIES
Native to Illinois:
Buckeye, Ohio Aesculusglabra
Baldcyrpress Taxodiumdistichum
Catalpa Catalpaspeciosa
Coffeetree, Kentucky Gymnocladusdioicus
Hackberry, Common Celtisoccidentalis
Hickory, Bitternut Caryacordiformis
Hickory, Shagbark Carya ovate
Honeylocust, Thornless Gleditsiatriacanthos
Horsechestnut, Common Aesculushippocastanum
Ironwood Carpinuscaroliniana
Linden Beetree Tiliaheterophylla
Maple, Black Acer nigrum
Maple, Freeman Acer x freeman
Maple, Red Acer rubrum
Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum
Oak, Black Quercusvelutina
Oak, Bur Quercusvelutina
Oak, Chestnut Quercusprinus
Oak, Chinkapin Quercusmuehlenbergii
Oak, English Quercusrobur
Oak, Red Quercusrubra
Oak, Sawtooth Quercusacutissima
Oak, Schumard Quercusshumardii
Oak, Shingle Quercusimbracaria
Oak, Swamp white Quercus bicolor
Oak, White Quercusalba
Pear, Callery Pyruscalleryana
Pecan Caryailolinoensis
Persimmon, Common Diospyrosvirginiana
Sassafras, Common Sassafras albidum
Serviceberry, Allegheny Amelanchierlaevis
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 187/348
Serviceberry, Apple Amelanchier x grandiflora
Serviceberry, Downy Amelanchierarborea
Sourgum (Black Tupelo) Nyssa sylvatica
Sycamore Platanusoccidentalis
Yellowwood Cladrastiskentukea
Non-native to Illinois:
Buckeye, Yellow Aesculusflava
Catalpa, Chinese Catalpa ovate
Cherry, Amur chokeberry Prunusmaackii
Cherry, Sargent Prunussargentii
Chestnut, Chinese Castaneamollissima
Corktree, Amur Phellodendronamurense
Elm, English Ulmusprocera
Elm, Homestead Ulmus x `Homestead'
Elm, Chinese or Lacebark Ulmusparvifolia
Elm, Regal Ulmus x `Regal'
Filbert, Turkish Coryluscolurna
Ginkgo Gingko biloba
Holly, American Ilex opaca
Lilac, Japanese Tree Syringareticulater
Lily of the Valley, Sourwood Oxydendrum arboretum
Linden, American (Basswood) Tilia Americana
Linden, Bigleaf Tiliaplatyphyllos
Linden, Silver Tiliatomentosa
Maple, Burpleblow Acertruncatum
Maple, Hedge or Field Acer campestre
Maple, Miyabe Acer miyabei
Maple, Norway Acerplatanoides
Maple, Sycamore or Plantree Acer pseudoplatanus
Maple, Tartarian Acer tataricum
Oak, English Quercusrobur
Oak, Sawtooth Quercusacutissima
Pagoda-tree, Japanese Sophora japonica
Pear, Callery Pyruscalleryana
Serviceberry, Apple Amelenchier x grandiflora
Serviceberry, Shadblow Amelenchier Canadensis
Sweetgum, Liquidamber Liquidambar styraciflua
Other trees were eliminated due to susceptibility to salt, lack of longevity, lack of drought resistance and need for shade. Coniferous trees are not
permitted in parkways except for parkways which face the rear lots and no driveways or overhead lines exist. Allowed species include Austrian
pine, blue spruce, Norway spruce, and others as deemed appropriate by Village Administrator, DPW, and certified arborist. These trees must be
spaced at least ten feet (10') from the sidewalk and kept trimmed by the adjacent homeowner to avoid blocking pedestrian passage on the
sidewalk.
ALLOWABLE TREES WITH
OVERHEAD UTILITIES ALL PARKWAYS 4'+ WIDE
Native to Illinois:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 188/348
Buckeye, red Aesculus x carnea
Crabapple, variety Malus
Fringetree, White Chionanthusvirginicus
Ironwood Carpinuscaroliniana
Viburnum, Blackhaw Viburnum prunifolium
Non-native to Illinois:
Dogwood, Cornelian-cherry Cornus mas
HawthrnThornless Cockspur Crataeguscrusgalli (thornless)
Lilac, Japanese Tree Syringaretuculata
Lilac, Pekin Syringapekinensis
Maple, Amur Acer ginnala
Maple, Autumn Blaze Acer
Maple, Hedge Acer campestre
Pear, Chanticleer Callery Pyruscalleryana
Redbud, (Northern selection) Cercis Canadensis
Serviceberry, Apple Amelanchier x grandiflora
Smoketree, Common Cotinuscoggyria
Viburnum, Siebold Viburnum sieboldii
Zelkova, Japanese Zelkova serrate
(Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-5: PROHIBITED TREES:
The following trees are prohibited in parkways and parking lot landscaping due to disease potential and invasive nature:
All Ash (green, white, blue and all their varieties) Fraxinus
Boxelder Acer negundo
Cottonwood, Eastern Populous deltoids
Maple, Silver Acer sacchiarinum
Maple, Soft Acer Dasycarpum
Poplar Populus
Siberian Elm Ulmispumila
Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissima
Willow Salix
(Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-6: PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
All trees which are to be planted must conform with the following requirements:
A. Trees, when planted, shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches (2") measured at a distance of thirty six inches (36") above ground level and
shall be free from deformity and indication of undesirable growth characteristics.
B. Trees, when planted, shall be free of infectious disease or insect infestation.
C. No trees may be planted on parkways less than three feet (3') wide, unless, in the opinion of Superintendent of Public Works, the planting and the
species of tree approved will not endanger the sidewalk, curb or other property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 189/348
D. All new plantings shall have a spacing of thirty feet (30') unless otherwise permitted by the Superintendent of Public Works. (Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-7: PROHIBITED TREE PLANTING:
The planting of trees shall not be permitted under any of the following circumstances:
A. If such planting interferes with existing or planned structures or existing or planned underground or overhead utilities, such as sewers, pipes, or
cables. In such cases, the Com Ed approved species list will be followed in accordance with those specifications.
B. If, in the sole discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works, such planting would create a hazardous traffic situation by impairing driver or
pedestrian visibility at intersections or where traffic controls are located. (Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-8: TREE PROTECTION:
The following steps shall be required at all times:
A. During any type of construction work, the owner or contractor shall place guards around all nearby trees on the parkway or any other public ways to
prevent injury to such trees or plants. In case of injury to a tree or plant, an approved replacement must be furnished.
B. No person shall permanently attach or connect any electric or other wire to any tree or permit any such wire to come in contact with any tree.
C. No person shall place or maintain upon the ground around a parkway tree any surfacing or material which will impede free passage of water and air
to the roots without leaving an open space of not less than two feet (2') in width around the tree.
D. Spraying and injections of trees in parkways for the prevention and elimination of diseases and insect infestation shall be performed by the Village to
meet the specific requirements of the species of tree and the particular disease or insect infestation which exists or threatens. It shall be the
responsibility of the Village Administrator or designee to determine the need and extent of spraying, injections and pruning requirements. (Ord. 1656,
8-28-2013)
7-4-9: REMOVAL OF DISEASED TREES:
All crippled, deformed and physically damaged trees, regardless of species, if professional opinion indicates that recovery and normal development
cannot be expected, shall be removed. All trees infected with a non-curable disease that will result in deformation, death and infection of other trees
shall be removed. Said removal shall solely be undertaken by the Village and its staff. All such trees will be removed in accordance with this chapter and
prioritization and as replacement plan and budget allows. Trees inspected by a Village certified arborist that are fifty percent (50%) or more diseased or
dead, those that have the greatest potential to harm human life or property and those on a main artery or parkway with most Village visibility will take the
highest priority. (Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-10: REPLACEMENT PROGRAM:
All parkway trees removed because of disease or physical damage shall be incorporated into the Village Replacement Program. In accordance with this
section, parkway trees shall be replaced as Village funds allow during the spring and fall planting seasons. Plantings shall be supervised by a certified
Village arborist and will prioritize planting sites and species. If a homeowner desires to plant a removed parkway tree before allotted Village planting, the
homeowner may do so after receiving a proper permit from the Village. (Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-11: TRIMMING OF TREES:
A. No person shall, without a permit from the Village, remove, destroy, break, cut, deface, trim or injure or interfere with any tree or plant growing in any
street, parkway, or public place in the Village.
B. When such trees or shrubs are damaged or broken by the force of nature in such a manner as to constitute a threat to life or property, then such
owner or person in control shall promptly remove them or the parts thereof which constitute the danger and shall report such person's actions to the
Village within a reasonable period thereafter. (Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-12: ANNEXATION PROGRAM:
In the event of a conflict pertaining to tree planting in residential subdivisions as per an annexation agreement and the terms of this chapter, the
provisions herein shall prevail. (Ord. 1656, 8-28-2013)
7-4-13: RECOGNITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 190/348
This chapter and its tree planting policies will be reviewed on an annual basis with the goal that the Village will be recognized as a Tree City. (Ord. 1656,
8-28-2013)
Title 8
WATER AND SEWER
Chapter 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this chapter shall have the following definitions:
COMMITTEE ON WATER: Committee of Village Trustees as appointed by the Village President, sometimes hereinafter referred to as "committee".
NONRESIDENT USERS: Those individuals receiving or applying for water services who do not reside within the corporate limits of the Village of
Monee.
RESIDENT USERS: Those individuals receiving or applying for water services who actually reside within the corporate limits of the Village of Monee.
(Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977)
8-1-2: COMMITTEE ON WATER; SUPERVISION AND DUTIES:
A. General Oversight: The Water Committee, with the assistance of the Village Administrator, shall be charged with the oversight of the entire
waterworks system throughout the Village. The Water Committee shall also review any and all rules and regulations that may be applicable to the
operation of the system.
B. Duties And Powers Of Committee:
1. The Water Committee shall monitor and oversee the budget expenditures allocated to the Water Department periodically during each fiscal year.
2. The committee shall develop and recommend policies in an effort to implement and maintain efficient operations of the Village water system. Said
policies shall be forwarded to the Village Board for review and input.
3. The committee shall develop new and/or modify existing ordinances and make recommendations to the Village Board for review and input.
4. The committee shall hold a strategy and planning meeting at least once per fiscal year for the discussion of maintenance and future needs of the
Village of Monee waterworks and water system. (Ord. 1573, 10-26-2011)
8-1-3: APPLICATION AND FEES FOR WATER CONNECTION:
A. Connection Required; Exceptions: Every owner of a structure within the corporate limits of the Village wherein water services are required by this
Code, and where there is available Village water service to the premises, shall be connected to the Village water service, within six (6) months of the
date that the water mains are available for connection to the premises, except in the following specific cases:
1. Where on July 11, 1984, there was no Village water service connected to the premises, and there was an existing operating private well, the
owner of such a well may use same to provide water services to the premises as long as said well remains operable. In the event that such
existing well becomes inoperable, or where there is a need to drill a new private well or extend the existing well, or in the event that the ownership
of the premises is transferred, then in any of the said events, the premises shall be connected to the village water service within the time period
above provided.
2. Where there is a new construction of a structure within the village where no village water service is then available, the owner of the premises shall
notify the village in writing of the owner's intention to use water services for the premises, and the village shall have the option for thirty (30) days,
from the date of notice, to either agree to provide water service to the premises, or waive its right to provide said service. If the village determines
not to provide water service to the premises, the owner of the premises shall have the right to install a well or to obtain water service from a source
other than the village to service the premises. Nevertheless, it shall be required that the owner provide the village with written notice as described
above, before the installation of a well or to obtain other than village water service. (Ord. 915, 8-14-1996)
B. Application And Fees For Connection: All applications for connection to village water service shall be filed with the village clerk, on forms provided by
the village, and shall as soon as reasonably possible thereafter be referred to the director of water and sewer for his approval. A tap-in fee for
connection in the following amounts shall accompany each application:
1. Newly Available Service: Where water service is newly made available to a resident user's premises by the village, the tap-in fee shall be the sum
of two thousand three hundred dollars ($2,300.00), provided an application is made and water connected to the subject premises within one
hundred twenty (120) days of the water system becoming operational. If application is made within the one hundred twenty (120) day period and
the premises are not connected to the water service within said period, or if no application is made during said period, the fee shall thereafter be
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
2. Resident Users: The tap-in fee for resident users shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 191/348
3. Nonresident Users: The tap-in fee for nonresident users shall be the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
4. Developments:
a. The tap-in fee for residential developments shall be as follows:
Line Size Amount
1 inch $2,500.00
11/2 inch 3,100.00
2 inch 4,000.00
b. The tap-in fee for commercial developments shall be as follows:
Line Size Amount
1 inch $3,000.00
11/2 inch 3,600.00
2 inch 4,500.00
3 inch 5,000.00
4 inch 6,000.00
6 inch 7,000.00
c. The tap-in fee for industrial developments shall be as follows:
Line Size Amount
1 inch $3,500.00
11/2 inch 4,100.00
2 inch 5,000.00
3 inch 5,500.00
4 inch 6,500.00
6 inch 7,500.00
C. Approval Or Disapproval Of Application: The director of water and sewer shall have the right to approve or disapprove any application based on the
particular circumstances and costs involved and shall report his decision to the water committee who shall make the final determination as to
whether the connection shall be allowed. In the event the water committee disapproves an application for connection, the fees paid therefor shall be
refunded to the applicant.
D. Fees Deposited In Certain Accounts: The fees collected under the provisions of this section shall be deposited into two (2) separate accounts. The
accounts shall be known as "capital expansion" account, and as "inspection" account. The portion to be deposited into each account shall be as
herein specified:
New resident as described in subsection B1 of this section:
Line Size Capital Expansion Inspection Total
1 inch $2,300.00 or $2,500.00 $200.00 $2,500.00 or $2,700.00
11/2 inch 2,900.00 200.00 3,100.00
2 inch 3,800.00 200.00 4,000.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 192/348
Resident as described in subsection B2 of this section:
Line Size Capital Expansion Inspection Total
1 inch $2,500.00 $200.00 $2,700.00
11/2 inch 3,100.00 200.00 3,300.00
2 inch 4,000.00 200.00 4,000.00
Nonresident as described in subsection B3 of this section:
Line Size Capital Expansion Inspection Total
1 inch $3,000.00 $500.00 $3,500.00
11/2 inch 3,600.00 500.00 4,100.00
2 inch 4,500.00 500.00 5,000.00
Commercial development, the amount for each account shall be as follows:
Line Size Capital Expansion Inspection Total
1 inch $3,000.00 $500.00 $3,500.00
11/2 inch 3,600.00 500.00 4,100.00
2 inch 4,500.00 500.00 5,000.00
3 inch 5,000.00 500.00 5,500.00
4 inch 6,000.00 500.00 6,500.00
6 inch 7,000.00 500.00 7,500.00
Industrial development, the amount for each account shall be as follows:
Line Size Capital Expansion Inspection Total
1 inch $3,500.00 $500.00 $4,000.00
11/2 inch 4,100.00 500.00 4,600.00
2 inch 5,000.00 500.00 5,500.00
3 inch 5,500.00 500.00 6,000.00
4 inch 6,500.00 500.00 7,000.00
6 inch 7,500.00 500.00 8,000.00
(Ord. 1249, 9-10-2003)
8-1-4: INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE:
Upon the director of water and sewer and the water committee approving an application for water service and connection, the necessary installation of
systems to provide service shall be as follows: (Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977; amd. Ord. 1249, 9-10-2003)
A. Residents: The fee paid by a resident user for water service and connection shall entitle him to connect to the existing distribution system a water line
of whatever size the committee deems necessary. The resident user shall install said line, at his own expense, from whatever point on the existing
distribution system the committee directs, to the property being serviced. The resident user shall also, at his own expense, make necessary
connections to the existing distribution system and install necessary curb boxes and cocks to complete the connection. The committee shall have the
authority to establish where such water lines will be installed from the existing distribution system to the resident user's property being serviced.
(Ord. 536, 11-11-1981)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 193/348
B. Nonresidents: The fee paid by a nonresident user for water service and connection shall entitle him to connect to the existing distribution system a
water line of whatever size the committee deems necessary. The nonresident user shall install said line, at his own expense, from whatever point on
the existing distribution system the committee directs, to the property being serviced. The nonresident user shall also, at his own expense, make
necessary connections to the existing distribution system and install necessary curb boxes and cocks to complete the connection. The committee
shall have the authority to establish where such water lines will be installed from the existing distribution systems to the nonresident user's property
line. (Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977)
8-1-5: WATER METERS:
A. Installation And Maintenance:
1. Furnishing Of Meters; Village Or User Expense: The village shall furnish, install, and seal all necessary water meters of a size five-eighths inch
(5/8") or less at village's expense. Any necessary water meters in size in excess of five-eighths inch (5/8") shall be furnished by the user, at user's
expense, but shall be installed and sealed by the village.
2. Meters Property Of Village: All water meters shall become and remain the property of the village thereafter.
3. Village Determine Size And Location: The committee shall have the authority to establish the location of all meters on the user's property and the
size of meter required to service the property.
4. Maintenance By Property Owner: The property owner and users shall exercise care so that water meters will not be damaged by freezing or other
causes and in the event that such meters are damaged by freezing or otherwise, the property owner and users shall reimburse the village for the
cost of repair or cost of installing a new meter, if necessary. (Ord. 536, 11-11-1981)
5. Water Service Connection: The water committee shall determine as to whether a single or multiple service water connection will be required to be
installed in each facility being constructed or remodeled within the village. Each water service connection shall be tapped into the water main and
extended into the facility it serves. Each facility service connection shall have its own separate meter setting. The proposed service size, type of
construction, location and connection charge shall be approved by the director of the water department. Any such work done without the approval
of the director of the water department shall be illegal and a stop work order may be issued.
In the event it is determined that the domestic water usage exceeds the maximum flow of a service size, the director of the water department may
require a larger service size to be installed at the owner's sole expense. (Ord. 1337, 1-12-2005)
6. Damage Or Destroy Water Seal: It shall be prohibited for the property owners or users to damage, alter, modify or destroy the water seal located
on the property in any manner without the permission of the water department supervisor. Violators shall be subject to a fine of not less than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per incident. (Ord. 1367, 8-10-2005)
B. Inspection And Reading:
1. Time For Reading: It shall be the duty of the village to have all water meters read and inspected by authorized village employees bimonthly and at
such other times as may be necessary for the proper submitting of bills for water service. All readings of water meters are to be submitted to an
appropriate individual for billing as directed by the board of trustees, said billing to be as provided hereinafter. (Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977;
amd. Ord. 525, 11-12-1980; 1999 Code)
2. Right To Turn Off Water: The committee on water or the board of trustees of the village shall have the right, through their authorized employees, to
turn on or off all water service whenever necessary for repair of the systems or safety of the village residents or property and also in the event of
nonpayment of water bills or other violation of this chapter as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977)
3. Right Of Access To Property: The following provisions shall apply to the reading of meters:
a. Duty Of Occupant To Allow Access: The occupants of any premises where water services are provided by the village, and where the water
meter is located within the residence or building being serviced, shall allow the duly authorized village meter reader access into the residence or
building for the purpose of reading the meter at all reasonable times. The said meter reader shall furnish identification if requested. In the event
the meter reader is unable to read the meter at the regularly scheduled bimonthly periods, the village may estimate the water usage for the
particular meter in question, based upon the prior usage. In the alternative, the village may leave a notice at the residential building requesting
the occupants to notify the village of a convenient time for the reading of the meter. (Ord. 601, 5-14-1986; amd. 1999 Code)
b. Failure To Respond To Village Notices; Fee: In the event the meter reader has left notices to the occupants of any premises for which water is
furnished by the village on two (2) separate consecutive occasions, and the occupant has failed to arrange with the village for the reading of the
meter in question, the village may continue to estimate the water usage for the subject premises and assess a service charge of five dollars
($5.00) for each subsequent bimonthly billing during which the meter reader is unable to read the said meter. Said service charge shall be
added to the estimated billing during the subsequent bimonthly readings until the meter can be read. The village shall send a written request
together with the bimonthly billing on which a service charge is assessed, requesting the occupant or individual responsible for payment of the
bill, to contact the village to arrange the reading of said meter. Failure to comply with said request will result in sanctions and penalties as
provided in subsection B3c of this section. In the event it is determined that any water service is discontinued, the water user, or customer, shall
have no claim, cause of action, lawsuit or demand against the Village and its officers that may arise as a result of said disconnection. (Ord.
1242, 8-27-2003)
c. Authority To Discontinue Water Service; Notice; Hearing: In the event the Village has caused the notices as provided in subsection B3b of this
section to be left or served upon the occupants of the premises and the Village is unable to read the said meter for two (2) successive bimonthly
readings, the Committee on Water shall have the authority to direct a discontinuance of water services to the subject premises. Prior to directing
a discontinuance of such water services, the Committee on Water shall send notice to the owner, occupant or user and hold a hearing on a date
certain regarding the discontinuance of the water services, as provided in the case of nonpayment for water services under subsection 8-1-8D of
this chapter. At the conclusion of the hearing as provided in said subsection, the Committee on Water shall have the authority to continue water
services to the subject premises, for a period of time to be determined by the committee, so as to allow a reading of the meter, subject to
discontinuance of service in the event the meter is unable to be read. If the owner, occupant or user fails to appear at the hearing, no further
notice shall be required prior to discontinuance of service. (Ord. 601, 5-14-1986; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 194/348
C. Permit Fees For Deduct Meters: The water deduct meter permit fees shall be assessed as follows:
Meter (3/4" or 1") $170.00
Meter couplings 30.00
Dual port MXU 152.00
Permit fee (inspection) 50.00
Total 402.00
(Ord. 1750, 6-8-2016)
8-1-6: WATER RATES AND CHARGES:
The rates and charges for the use of water and for the water services supplied by the Village, based upon the amount of water consumed as indicated
by the water meters, is hereby established to be as follows: (Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977)
A. Within Corporate Limits: Each user of the waterworks system within the corporate limits of the Village of Monee shall be charged the sum of three
dollars ($3.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used in excess of four thousand (4,000) gallons used per billing period, in addition to the
minimum charge set forth hereafter. Said charges shall be billed every two (2) months (bi-monthly). There shall be a minimum two (2) month charge
for water service in the amount of fourteen dollars fifty five cents ($14.55), irrespective of the amount of water used. Said rates shall be increased by
five percent (5%) on an annual basis at the beginning of each fiscal year. (Ord. 1681, 5-28-2014)
B. Outside Corporate Limits: Each user of the waterworks system whose property is located outside of the corporate limits of the Village shall be
charged the sum of five dollars sixty cents ($5.60) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used in excess of four thousand (4,000) gallons used
per billing period, in addition to the minimum charge set forth hereafter. Said charges shall be billed every two (2) months (bimonthly) beginning July
1, 1993. There shall be a minimum two (2) month charge for water services in the amount of twenty one dollars twenty cents ($21.20) irrespective of
the amount of water used. (Ord. 786, 4-14-1993)
C. Charge For Reading Meter: Each user of the waterworks system, both within and without the corporate limits of the Village, shall be charged the sum
of ninety five cents ($0.95) per billing period, to cover the cost of reading of water meters, said amount to be added to each bimonthly bill. (Ord. 811,
5-11-1994)
D. Charge For Failure To Connect To Water When Available:
1. The owner of any structure within the corporate limits of the Village, where Village water service is presently available or in the future becomes
available to the premises, who declines to connect to the Village water system pursuant to the provisions of subsection 8-1-3A of this chapter, shall
pay a minimum bimonthly service charge in the amount of seven dollars fifty cents ($7.50), to cover the cost of maintaining the water service
available to the subject premises, which the owner has declined to use. Such minimum fee shall be assessed beginning one (1) year from the date
the service is available. (Ord. 565, 7-11-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
2. The owner of any premises subject to the minimum charge provided in subsection D1 of this section shall be liable to pay said minimum charge.
(Ord. 565, 7-11-1984)
E. Emergency Repairs; Onetime Charge: Each user of the waterworks system of the Village shall be charged the sum of thirty one dollars ($31.00) as a
onetime charge to cover the cost of certain emergency and extraordinary repairs to the water system, said amount to be added to each user's bill on
the next billing date for water services. (Ord. 706, 10-10-1990)
F. Request For Temporary Disconnection:
1. Voluntary Disconnection: Any residential, commercial or industrial real estate owner may complete a written request form and file the same with
the Village Clerk seeking the disconnection of water services to their respective property. The written request form shall be furnished by the Village
Clerk's Office.
2. Authority To Disconnect: Subject to the payment of the fees as set forth herein, the Water Superintendent is hereby authorized to disconnect the
water service of a residential, commercial or industrial real estate owner provided that it is determined that the disconnection will not pose any
danger to the public health and safety.
3. Disconnection/Reconnection Fees: The following fees are hereby imposed and must be paid prior to the Village providing said services:
a. Water disconnection fee: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
b. Water turn on fee: Fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1233, 6-25-2003)
Said water disconnection fee and water turn on fee may be waived on a onetime basis per year for residential customers. Any such customer
seeking a waiver shall provide written notice to the Village Clerk as to when the water supply should be disconnected and then reconnected. If a
resident customer is delinquent with any water, sewer or grass cutting bill due the Village, he or she will not be eligible for this waiver. (Ord.
1524, 1-27-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 195/348
4. Release Of Claim: The Village shall not be responsible or liable for any claims, demands, or causes of action which may arise, directly or
indirectly, as a result of disconnecting or turning on the water supply. (Ord. 1233, 6-25-2003)
G. Water Rate Fee; Fire Flow Testing: The charge for water used by metered service from fire hydrants and the estimated water use for fire flow testing
shall be three dollars fifty cents ($3.50) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. (Ord. 1338, 1-12-2005)
8-1-6-1: SECURITY DEPOSITS ON RENTAL PROPERTIES:
A. Purpose Of Security Deposit: The security deposit shall be filed with the Village Clerk to ensure and guarantee prompt payment of the water bill for
water furnished to the leased property. (Ord. 1459, 10-24-2007)
B. Definitions: Whenever used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as described below:
LEASED PROPERTY: Any leased or rented improved property of any kind including residential, industrial or commercial facilities.
LESSEE/TENANT: An individual or other entity who leases or rents a residence, industrial or commercial facility.
C. Security Deposit:
1. Residential Unit: Prior to occupying a residential unit, the lessee or tenant shall be required to deposit the sum of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) with the Village Clerk.
2. Commercial Unit: Prior to occupying a commercial unit, the lessee or tenant shall be required to deposit the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
with the Village Clerk.
3. Industrial Unit: Prior to occupying an industrial unit, the lessee or tenant shall be required to deposit the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
with the Village Clerk. (Ord. 1461, 11-14-2007)
D. Security Deposit Fund: Any and all security deposit monies shall not be commingled with general corporate funds. A separate account shall be
established reflecting receipt of any security deposit monies in accordance with section 8-1-9 of this chapter.
E. Return Of Security Deposit: The Village Clerk shall be authorized to return the security deposit monies to an owner of record of leased property upon
a sale of the same.
F. Penalties: Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. Additionally, the Village shall have the right to terminate water service to a rental property until there is
compliance herein. (Ord. 1459, 10-24-2007)
See section 8-1-6-3 of this chapter regarding unpaid charges when ownership of property changes. (Ord. 1658, 9-11-2013)
8-1-6-2: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
An administrative fee of fifty cents ($0.50) per billing cycle shall be hereby assessed for utility services invoices. Said charge shall be increased by five
percent (5%) on an annual basis at the beginning of each fiscal year. (Ord. 1680, 5-28-2014)
8-1-6-3: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF PROPERTY:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the meaning given to them:
PROPERTY: Any residential unit, including mobile homes, industrial, manufacturing, commercial or retail facility located within the Village.
UTILITY SERVICES: Services including the furnishing of water, sewer, grass cutting, and garbage disposal.
B. Liability: Purchasers of property which has accumulated unpaid bills for utility service are liable, as subsequent owners of the property, for the unpaid
charges for the prior service, plus any fees or fines related thereto. Future utility service will be denied if said amounts are not paid upon purchase,
and/or the Village may act to foreclose any utility lien filed against the property. (Ord. 1658, 9-11-2013)
8-1-7: JOINT LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF CHARGES:
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the water service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the water supplied to
each premises and the water service is furnished to the said premises by the Village only upon condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and
user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village. (Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977)
8-1-8: BILLING PROCEDURES AND DELINQUENCIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 196/348
Water rates or charges for water services shall be billed and payable bimonthly in the following manner:
A. Bimonthly Billing: Bills for water services shall be rendered for bimonthly readings ending February 28, April 30, June 30, August 31, October 31, and
December 31 of each year. (Ord. 1173, 1-9-2002)
B. Penalty For Late Payment: The Village Treasurer shall mail billings to each owner, occupant or user between the first and fifteenth days of January,
March, May, July, September and November, for the two (2) month period ending on the last day of the preceding month. A late charge of thirty
dollars ($30.00) shall be added to any bill in which payment is not received within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing. If payment is not received by
the due date, a "second and final bill before shutoff" will be generated, indicating the total amount due, with a due date no later than fifteen (15) days
from date of mailing. The water supply may be suspended if the owner, occupant or user fails to remit timely payment to the Village as so specified in
the "second and final bill" and the outstanding balance exceeds thirty one dollars ($31.00). The water service shall not be reinstated until any and all
past water billings together with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) service charge is remitted to the Village Treasurer. The Village Treasurer shall
indicate on the bill the date after which the late charge will be assessed. Billings for such services may be combined with billing for sewer service
charges or garbage collection charges, if applicable, and payment of combined billing shall be applied first to sewer service charges, then to garbage
collection charges, and finally to water service charges. (Ord. 1646, 6-26-2013)
C. Delinquency; Lien: In the event the charges for services are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing, such charges shall be deemed
and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which service is supplied.
The Village Clerk, upon being directed to do so by the Village Administrator, is hereby authorized and directed to file a notice of such lien in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Will County, as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-139-8. (Ord. 1596, 3-14-2012)
D. Authority To Discontinue Water Service; Notice; Fee: (Rep. by Ord. 1596, 3-14-2012)
E. Request For Meter Test; Fee: In the event any owner, occupant or user of Village water services is of the opinion that the water meter on the
premises being served is not accurate, he may, by depositing fifty dollars ($50.00) with the Village Treasurer, request a test of said meter. If, upon
such test, the meter is found to be accurate, said fee shall be forfeited to the Village as cost of such test, but if the meter is found to be inaccurate,
said fee shall be returned to the property owner and the meter properly adjusted to register accurately.
F. Inaccurate Meter Reading; Billing Averaged: Whenever it is found that a meter has been registering inaccurately or has not registered since the last
reading, the individual authorized to issue billings as provided in section 8-1-5 of this chapter, with the consent of the committee, shall render a billing
based on the average for previous periods or based on water consumption of a similar water user. (Ord. 1173, 1-9-2002)
8-1-9: BILLING AND COLLECTION FOR SERVICES:
A. Rendition Of Bills: The Village Treasurer or an appropriate individual directed by the Board of Trustees shall render bills for water services and to
collect all monies due thereon. (Ord. 525, 11-25-1980; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Water Fund: All revenues and monies collected or derived from the operation of the water system shall be turned over to the village treasurer and
held by the treasurer in a separate fund designated as the "village of Monee water fund" and said treasurer shall administer such fund in every
respect in the manner provided by the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
C. System Of Accounts; Annual Audit: The village treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and
accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water system, and at regular annual intervals, shall
cause an audit of said accounts to be made by an independent auditing concern to show the receipts and disbursements of the water system. (Ord.
525, 11-12-1980)
8-1-10: GOVERNMENT OF CONSUMERS:
The following rules and regulations shall govern all connections with the village water mains for the purpose of conveying water to any building or
premises and all uses of village water and maintenance of all water systems: (Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977)
A. Fire Hydrants: No person, except a legally authorized person of the village, shall take water from any public or private hydrant, plug, hose or pipe,
except for fire purposes and for the use of the fire protection district, nor shall in any way use or take water for private use, excepting through a meter
and he shall pay the village treasurer for water used through said meter at the rates then in effect. (Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977; amd. 1999
Code)
B. Excavations; Permission Required: No person shall make any excavation in any street, alley or public grounds for the purpose of laying water pipe or
connect to any water or service pipe already laid without written permission from the committee on water, and only such person authorized to
perform such work shall do so.
C. Service Pipes:
1. Service pipes will not be permitted to go from one lot to another along streets wherein water mains are laid, but water must be obtained directly
from the mains in front of the premises adjacent thereto; provided, that one service pipe may be used to supply all parties occupying the same
building. All service pipes must be laid at least three and one-half feet (31/2') below the surface of the ground.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 197/348
2. All water pipes and fittings used in replacements of now existing water lines and on any new installations shall be of copper, cast iron or other
approved noncorrosive material, and the use of steel or common iron pipe or fittings is hereby forbidden. In the case of an emergency, application
must be made to the committee on water for use of steel or common iron pipe or fittings, and said committee may issue permission for their use if
in their opinion an emergency exists.
D. Nonliability Of Village: No claim shall be made against the village by reason of the breakage of any main, pipe, service pipe or cock, or for any
interruption of the water supply by reason of the breaking of the waterworks machinery or stoppage for necessary repairs.
E. Maintenance By Water User: Persons using water must keep their service pipe, curb boxes and all fixtures connected thereto, in good condition and
protected from frost at their own expense. They must also prevent all unnecessary waste under penalty of having water supply shut off.
F. Injuring Property Of Waterworks: No person shall wilfully break, injure, mar, deface, interfere with or disturb any building, machinery, apparatus,
attachments or appurtenances of the municipal waterworks, or any public or private hydrant or stopcock, service plug, water or service pipe or any
part thereof; nor shall any person injure or deposit anything in any service box, or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of
any of the above mentioned things, without the permission of the committee on water or village board; excepting in cases herein provided.
G. Temporary Vacancy; Water Turn Off: Whenever any premises becomes vacant and remains vacant for a period of thirty (30) days or more, upon
affidavit served on the owner or duly authorized agent of the premises, verified by an inspection made by a member of the committee, or at the
written request of the owner of such premises, the water supply of such building or premises may be shut off, and if the owner or authorized agent
shall at future times make a formal request to the committee that the water be turned on, it shall be done free of charge, and the said committee shall
cause same to be done.
H. Authority To Turn On Water: Water will not be turned on into any house or private service pipe, except upon order of the committee or village board,
nor until all previous water fees or charges against the premises for which the supply is intended shall have been paid. Plumbers are strictly
prohibited from turning water on into any service pipe, except upon an order or upon permission from the committee or village board; provided,
however, that this rule is not to be construed to prevent any plumber from admitting water to test pipes and for that purpose only. (Ord. 468, 6-8-
1977, eff. 7-1-1977)
I. Illegal Use Of Water; Fine: Consumers of water from the waterworks who shall permit others, not members of his family, to use water from his
hydrants, faucets or other devices without first being assured by the committee that the proper rate has been paid for the use of the same, and
anyone who shall thus obtain water without a permit from the committee shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord.
468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977; amd. 1999 Code)
J. Stop And Waste Cock Required: There shall be a stop and waste cock attached to every service pipe at the point where it enters the building.
K. Owner Responsible For Water Line Repairs:
1. The owner of the premises being provided water service shall be responsible for all repairs to water lines servicing the subject premises, including
damage or blockage due to freezing, from the apparatus commonly known as "buffalo box" to the subject premises.
2. In the event the village should make such repairs to provide continuous water service, the amount of the costs of such repairs or thawing shall be
added to the water bill for the next billing period. (Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977)
L. Private Wells:
1. The owners of any premises which have been connected to the village water service who still have operable private wells may continue to use
said wells for usages outside the structure, such as lawn watering, car washing and the like.
2. Under no circumstances shall said private well be connected to the water lines or water system inside the structure and no dual water systems
shall be allowed within the village for service inside structures.
3. Any commingling of private well water systems and the village water service is expressly prohibited.
4. The village may inspect the water systems of any resident user who has an operating private well, to determine that there is no violation of this
section. (Ord. 565, 7-11-1984)
8-1-11: VILLAGE NOT COMPELLED TO FURNISH WATER:
No provision in this chapter shall be construed to the effect that the village is compelled to furnish water service to any resident or nonresident of the
village when, in the best judgment of the village board, such extension of water services is not convenient, reasonable, or is excessively costly to the
village. (Ord. 468, 6-8-1977, eff. 7-1-1977)
8-1-12: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
To provide an effective means for protecting the public water supply system of the village from contamination due to backflow of contaminants through
the customer water service connection into the public water system, all plumbing installed within the village shall comply with the following provisions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 198/348
A. Superintendent Of Water: Wherever hereafter reference is made to the "superintendent of water", such reference shall be deemed to mean the
officially appointed plumbing inspector of the village, unless the board of trustees appoints another individual to be the superintendent of water for
the village.
B. Compliance With State Regulations; Notice To Install Backflow Prevention Device: All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890. If in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of
the superintendent of water, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the
superintendent of water will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own
expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, Illinois environmental
protection agency and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved device upon installation and as
required by the Illinois plumbing code, Illinois environmental protection agency and local regulations.
C. Private Water System; Approval Required: No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any
connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the village may enter the supply or
distribution system of the village unless such private auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall
have been approved by the superintendent of water and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
D. Surveys And Investigations Required: It shall be the duty of the superintendent of water to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial
and other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such
surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the
superintendent of water shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5)
years.
E. Right Of Entry For Inspection; Request For Information: The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying the
presence or absence of cross connections, and the water superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time
any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying information submitted
by the customer regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served
shall furnish to the superintendent of water any information which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or water upon such
property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the superintendent of water, be deemed evidence of the
presence of improper connections as provided in this section.
F. Discontinuance Of Water Service For Violation; Notice; Fee:
1. Authority Of Water Superintendent: The superintendent of water is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the
occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this section is known to exist, and to
take such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply
distribution mains.
2. Remedial Action Required; Payment Of Fee: Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or
corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section, and until a reconnection fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) is paid to the village.
3. Immediate Disconnection; Danger Of Harmful Contamination: Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
superintendent of water is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be
followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party, can be effected to prevent
actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply; provided, that, in the reasonable opinion of the superintendent of water
or the Illinois environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water
supply.
4. Nonliability Of Village: Neither the public water supply, the superintendent of water, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any
injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this section,
whether or not said termination was with or without notice.
G. Consumer Responsible For Cleanup Cost: The consumer responsible for back siphoned or back pressured material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
H. Regulations Adopted By Reference: The village regulations on cross connection control, attached to ordinance 783 as exhibit A, on file in the office of
the village clerk, are hereby approved and adopted by reference as regulations on cross connection control for the village. Said regulations may be
changed or amended as approved by the board of trustees from time to time. (Ord. 783, 3-10-1993)
8-1-13: RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF VILLAGE WATER:
A. (Rep. by Ord. 1460, 10-24-2007)
B. (Rep. by Ord. 1460, 10-24-2007)
C. Whenever it is deemed essential for the public health and safety that the consumption of water from the village water system be temporarily limited,
the village president or the superintendent of water may impose temporary restrictions on the use, including, but not limited to, partial or total bans on
lawn and plant watering, car washing, swimming pool filling, and other outside uses of hoses to dispense water. The village president and board of
trustees may impose such other water use restrictions as they deem necessary to preserve the public water supply.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 199/348
D. Notice of such water use restriction shall be disseminated through reasonable communication media throughout the village, including, but not limited
to, posting notice of the same at various public buildings within the village, including the village hall. Such notice shall include a description of the
restriction provisions in effect.
E. Violators of any water use restrictions shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each observed violation. In addition, the superintendent of public works shall have the authority to enforce this section by discontinuance of water
service in the event of any violation of this section.
F. Every police officer of the village shall diligently enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1084, 4-12-2000)
Chapter 2
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
CLARIFICATION OF WORD USAGE: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
Administrator: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency.
Federal Act: The federal clean water act (33 USC 466 et seq.), as amended (Pub. L. 95-217).
Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by title II, grants for
construction of treatment works of the act and implementing regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Chapter: This chapter.
Village: The village of Monee.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator, or, where appropriated by the director, after
enactment of the federal clean water act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the federal act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm, surface and ground water drainage.
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the village of Monee. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village
boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village sanitary (or combined) sewer system, even though those
sewers may not have been constructed with village funds.
Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage.
Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 200/348
STATE GOVERNMENT:
Director: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
State Act: The Illinois anti-pollution bond act of 19701.
State Grant: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois anti-pollution
bond act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the state of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works.
Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used
as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system.
Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or reconstruct the sewage treatment works.
Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding.
Local Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs other than the operation, maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital
improvement costs.
Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and
maintenance" includes "replacement".
Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of the sewerage system.
Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are
greater in strength than the concentration values established in section 8-2A-1 of this chapter.
Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or treatment works will be operated.
User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement.
Wastewater Service Charge: The charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be
computed as outlined in section 8-2A-1 of this chapter and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge, the local capital cost and a surcharge,
if applicable.
USER TYPES:
Commercial User: Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services.
Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior
drop. The purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the village representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
Industrial Users: Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or
substance into products.
Institutional/Governmental User: Includes schools, churches, penal institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local governments.
Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings.
User Class: The type of user "residential, institutional/governmental, commercial", or "industrial" as defined herein.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
Effluent Criteria: Defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 201/348
food.
Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial
or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that: a) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more
per average work day; or b) has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or c) has in
its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the federal act; or d) is found by the permit
issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that
treatment works.
Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is one-thousandth gram (0.001 g) of the constituent in one
thousand milliliters (1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent,
in reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
Of Laboratories Manual Of Laboratory Methods.
Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent
is one hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing seventeen-hundredths (0.17) pound of BOD and twenty-hundredths (0.20) pound of
suspended solids.
Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2")
(1.27 cm) in any dimension.
Sewage: Is used interchangeably with "wastewater".
Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
Suspended Solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth
in the IEPA Division Of Laboratories Manual Of Laboratory Methods.
Unpolluted Water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
Water Quality Standards: Defined in the water pollution regulations of Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
transport effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
8-2-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Waste Deposits On Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable
waste.
B. Treatment Of Sewage Required: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
village, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter.
C. Privies And Cesspools: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. Connection To Public Sewer Required: The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purposes situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be
located any public sanitary sewer of the village, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 202/348
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do
so; provided, that said public sewer is within one hundred feet (100') of the property line. (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987)
E. Time Extension For Connection:
1. Conditions For Extension; Payment Of Charges: The owners/users existing in the village boundaries as of November 30, 1985, required to
connect to the public sanitary sewer of the village shall complete such connections on or before June 1, 1989, and the time for such connection is
hereby extended to that date, subject to the following conditions:
a. The owner/user shall obtain a permit to connect to the system on or before May 1, 1989.
b. Such owners/users who have not connected to the said sewer system prior to April 1, 1989, being the parties to whom the above extension
applies, shall be billed and be required to pay the debt service charge of five dollars eighty cents ($5.80) per user month provided for in
subsections 8-2A-1C1 and C3 of this chapter, and the basic user rate charges provided for in subsection 8-2A-1D of this chapter, as if said users
were connected to the sewer system.
2. Failure To Connect; Additional Charges: Any owner/user of a property existing in the village boundaries as of November 30, 1985, required to
connect to the public sewer system of the village, who has not connected to said system by June 1, 1989, shall pay a village permit fee for
connecting to the sewer system in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to connect to said system thereafter, rather than the thirty
dollar ($30.00) permit fee charged pursuant to subsection 8-2-4C of this chapter, and further shall be liable for any other general penalties
provided in section 8-2-8 of this chapter for failure to comply with the terms of this chapter.
3. Application Of Provisions: The above provisions shall apply only to owners/users of property within the village boundaries as of November 30,
1985, who are required to connect to the sewer system of the village pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 664, 4-12-1989)
8-2-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. Connection Allowed: Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of subsection 8-2-2D of this chapter, the building sewer shall
be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987)
B. Permit Required; Payment Of Fees: Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written
permit signed by the Will County health department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Will County health
department (on file in the office of the village clerk), which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as
deemed necessary by the Will County health department. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the Will County health department at the time
the application is filed.
C. Inspection: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Will
County health department. The county health department shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the Will County health department when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within seventy two (72) hours of the receipt of written notice by the Will County health
department. (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
D. Specifications: The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state
private sewage disposal licensing act and code2 and with the state environmental protection agency. No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
E. Connection To Public System Required; Private System To Be Cleaned:
1. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection 8-2-2D of
this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
2. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage
disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt.
F. Operation In Sanitary Manner: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no
expense to the village.
G. Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the village. (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987)
8-2-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the village.
B. Discharges; Compliance With Federal Standards: All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in
compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the federal act and more stringent state and local standards. (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 203/348
C. Classes Of Building Sewers; Permits; Fees:
1. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: a) for residential wastewater service; and b) for commercial, institutional/governmental or
industrial wastewater service. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by village (on file in the
office of the village clerk). (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
2. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the village.
A permit and inspection fee for all building sewer permits shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed, as follows:
a. Users existing in the village boundaries as of November 30, 1985, per inspection, thirty dollars ($30.00)3.
b. Other users:
Consumers Illinois water company plant contribution fee (presently $600.00) As authorized by Illinois commerce commission
Village permit fee $250.00
Total $250.00 + plant contribution fee
User Rate Computation
Debt service charge (plant contribution fee)
$600.00/customer times 328 customers = $196,800.00
To retire debt use 20 year 10 percent fund
Monthly debt service = $1,899.16
or based upon 328 customers = $5.80 per month
D. Reserve Capacity: A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage facilities, including sewer pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately
and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987)
E. Owner Responsibility: All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
Subsequent to the initial installation of the building sewer, the owner shall maintain same in good operating condition and shall be responsible for all
costs and expenses incident to the maintenance and repair of said building sewer, including all necessary street repairs required thereby. The owner
shall also be responsible for maintenance and repair of any portion of building sewer installed at village expense at the time of initial installation of
the sewer system. The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of
the building sewer, or the repair and maintenance thereof. (Ord. 632, 1-13-1988)
F. Separate Sewer For Each Building: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley,
court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
G. Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
village, to meet all requirements of this chapter. The primary assumption made is that a new sewer is required and the burden of proof of adequacy
rests with the owner.
H. Construction Standards: The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing
of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes4 or other applicable
rules and regulations of the village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society Of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois shall apply.
I. Elevation: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation lower than five feet (5') below grade. In all buildings
in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a
means which is approved in accordance with subsection B of this section, and discharged to the building sewer. In buildings with lower levels,
overhead sewers shall be constructed.
J. Roof Downspouts; Surface Runoff: No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources
of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 204/348
K. Conformance With Building And Plumbing Codes And State Standards: The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the building and plumbing codes, or other applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society Of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the village before installation.
L. Notify Village For Inspection: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the village when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the village or its representative.
M. Excavations: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
village. (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987)
8-2-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS; PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
A. Stormwater: No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Storm Sewers: Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to
a natural outlet approved by the village. Industrial cooling waters or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the village to a
storm sewer or natural outlet.
C. Certain Waters And Wastes Prohibited: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
D. Harmful Wastes Prohibited: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances materials, waters, or wastes if it
appears likely in the opinion of the village that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse
effect on the receiving streams or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the village will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in
the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) and one
hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0°C and 65°C).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
(3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the village.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the village for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Will County health department as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state,
federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance with applicable
county, state or federal regulations.
8. Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
9. Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligrams per liter as Hg at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance
with applicable county, state and federal regulations.
10. Any cyanide at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable county, state and federal regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 205/348
11. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye waters and vegetable tanning solutions).
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined in section 8-2-1 of this chapter.
12. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
E. Village Options Regarding Hazardous Wastes:
1. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this section, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40
circular federal regulation 403, June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the village may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the village may:
a. Reject the wastes;
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
d. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the
provisions of subsection K of this section.
2. If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the village, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
F. Grease Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the village, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the village,
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
G. Satisfactory Operation Of Treatment Facilities: Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
H. Control Manhole Required: Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the village, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the village. The manhole shall be installed by the
owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
I. Tests And Analyses:
1. The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.
2. The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once
per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal,
state, county and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such
times and in such a manner prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by
the village. At such times as deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside
laboratory service.
J. Determination Of Characteristics: All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in
this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division Of Laboratories Manual Of Laboratory Methods, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer
is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab
samples.
K. Special Agreements: No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the
village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 206/348
to payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided such payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system.
(Ord. 626, 9-9-1987)
8-2-6: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
A. Right Of Entry For Inspection And Testing:
1. The village and duly authorized employees of the Will County health department, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S.
environmental protection agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. The village or its representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste
treatment.
B. Observe Safety Rules: While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection A of this section, the village or authorized
employees of the Will County health department, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
employees of the village, and the village shall indemnify the company against liability of claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain conditions as required in subsection 8-2-5I of this chapter.
C. Easement: The village and other authorized employees of the Will County health department bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved. (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987)
8-2-7: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 626, 9-
9-1987)
8-2-8: PENALTIES:
A. Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except section 8-2-7 of this chapter, shall be served by the village
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of
any violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. Penalty Imposed: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense.
C. Liability: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the village by reasons of such violation. (Ord. 626, 9-9-1987;
amd. 1999 Code)
ARTICLE A. SEWER USE CHARGES
8-2A-1: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
A. Basis For Wastewater Service Charges:
1. Applicable Charges: The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the Village shall consist
of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a local capital cost charge composed of a capital improvement charge
and a user charge, a charge for inflow and infiltration, and applicable surcharges. See section 8-1-6-2 of this title regarding administrative fees.
(Ord. 974, 4-23-1997, eff. 5-1-1997; amd. Ord. 1680, 5-28-2014)
2. Basic User Charge:
a. Domestic Concentrations: The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes
having the following normal domestic concentrations:
(1) A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical oxygen demand (BOD of 200 mg/l).
(2) A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred twenty milligrams per liter (220 mg/l).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 207/348
b. Operation And Maintenance: The basic usage charge shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall be
computed as follows:
(1) Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be treated.
(2) Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities including a Replacement Fund for the year,
for all work categories.
(3) Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and replacement (OM&R) costs to each user class by volume, suspended solids and BOD.
(4) Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and replacement (OM&R) costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended
solids and BOD.
(5) Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage strength.
(6) Compute surcharge costs per pound per one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
3. Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal domestic concentrations of BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (220 mg/l).
The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes, which exceed the two hundred
milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and two hundred twenty milligrams per liter (220 mg/l) concentration for BOD and SS respectively. Subsection E of
this section specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
4. Annual Review:
a. The adequacy of the wastewater service charges shall be reviewed not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for the Village in
their annual audit report. The wastewater service charges shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or a change in
operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs.
b. The users of wastewater treatment services will be notified annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to the wastewater treatment operation, maintenance and replacement. (Ord. 627, 9-9-1987)
B. Measurements Of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing user charges and surcharges shall be metered water consumption read to the lowest
even increments of one thousand (1,000) gallons.
1. If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall, if directed by the Superintendent of Public Works, install and
maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the Superintendent of Public Works for the purpose of determining the volume of
water obtained from these sources.
2. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the Superintendent of Public Works if these volumes cannot otherwise
be determined from the metered water consumption records.
3. A deduct water meter is for measuring the amount of water not discharging into the sanitary sewer system. This would include water used for lawn
irrigation systems or outside hose connections. There shall be no permanent or temporary water piping system that transfers water from the
deduct water meter to any interior water outlet. The measurement of the deduct water meter shall be deducted from the consumer's sewer usage
based upon the reading of the primary water meter.
a. A deduct water meter application must be submitted and paid for by all applicants. It is the responsibility of the applicant to purchase, maintain
and arrange for the installation of the deduct water meter by a plumber licensed by the State of Illinois. All such plumbers must also be
registered as a contractor in the Village of Monee.
b. Deduct water meters must be installed similar to regular water meters complete with pull wire between the meter and the outside readout. The
deduct water meter pull wire may run in the same conduit as the regular water meter wherever feasible.
c. The deduct water meter must be installed after the main water meter. All hose connections must be protected by a vacuum breaker. Both water
meters should be located in the same area. Homes with underground sprinkling systems must have backflow prevention.
d. Once the deduct water meter is installed, the applicant must contact the Water Department to schedule the sealing of the deduct water meter
and the installation of the outside readout. An installation inspection fee as set by the Village will be charged. The deduct water meter will then
be in service. All deduct water meters will be inspected at least annually at a fee as set by the Village.
e. Following installation and approval of a deduct meter, such deduct water meter may not be removed, unless service is canceled, without the
consent of the Superintendent of Public Works.
f. The Village retains the right to inspect and test any deduct water meter at anytime, as needed to verify compliance with all applicable
regulations. Violations of any water and sewer ordinance may result in nullification of the deduct meter readings, removal of the deduct water
meter and a maximum five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine. (Ord. 1108, 10-25-2000)
C. Local Capital Cost Charge:
1. Capital Improvement Charge: A capital improvement charge of one dollar sixty cents ($1.60) per month will be levied on all users to provide funds
for extension, improvement and reconstruction of the sewage treatment works.
2. Maintenance And Repair Charge: A maintenance and repair charge of five dollars ($5.00) per month will be levied on all users to provide funds for
maintenance and repair of the sewage treatment works. (Ord. 1073, 11-10-1999, eff. 12-1-1999)
The aforesaid rates will be increased by five percent (5%) every year commencing on May 1, 2015, and shall continue thereafter. (Ord. 1682, 5-
28-2014)
D. Basic User Rates:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 208/348
1. There is hereby established a minimum charge and a basic user rate for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the
Village.
A minimum charge of $28.06 per month shall be applied to all users whose water consumption does not exceed 2,000 gallons per month.
A basic user rate of $6.39 per 1,000 gallons shall be applied to all users for water consumption in excess of 2,000 gallons per month.
A flat fee of $54.52 shall be charged to all nonmetered residential users based on an average of 7,500 gallons per month at $6.39 per 1,000
gallons plus $5.80 for debt service plus $0.80 for capital improvements.
These rates shall become effective on March 1, 2018. (Ord. 1841, 4-26-2018)
2. The Village may require such flat rate user to install metering devices at the user's cost on the water supply to measure the amount of service
supplied. All private wells will be metered at user's expense. (Ord. 963, 2-26-1997, eff. 3-1-1997)
The aforesaid rates will be increased by five percent (5%) every year commencing on May 1, 2015, and shall continue thereafter. (Ord. 1683, 5-
28-2014)
E. Surcharge Rate: The rates of surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as determined by the Consumers Illinois Water Company and approved by the
Illinois Commerce Commission. (Ord. 627, 9-9-1987)
F. Inflow And Infiltration: The volume of flow used for computing inflow and infiltration charges shall be the difference between the total of the metered
water consumption of all water users and the total volume of wastewater as measured by the sanitary sewer flow meters located at the termination
points of the collection system, divided equally between all users of the sanitary sewer collection system.
G. Computation Of Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following formula:
CW = CC + CD + CM + ((Vu-X) * CU) + (II * CU) + CS
Where CW = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period
CD = Debt service charge (subsection D1 of this section)
CC = Capital improvement charge (subsection C1 of this section)
CM = Minimum charge of operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection D of this section)
Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period (subsection B of this section)
X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (subsection D of this section)
CU = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection D of this section)
II = Inflow and infiltration (subsection F of this section)
CS = Amount of surcharge (subsection E of this section)
(Ord. 974, 4-23-1997, eff. 5-1-1997)
8-2A-2: BILLING AND DELINQUENCY PROCEDURES; REVENUE AND ACCOUNTS:
A. Rendition Of Bills; Liability For Payment; Late Charge:
1. Bimonthly Billings: The Village Treasurer shall mail billings for said rates or charges for services between the first and fifteenth days of January,
March, May, July, September and November, for the two (2) month period ending on the last day of the preceding month.
2. Combined Billing; Sewer, Garbage And Water1: Billings for such services may be combined with billing for water service charges or garbage
collection charges, if applicable, and payment of combined billing shall be applied first to sewer service charges, then to garbage collection
charges, and finally to water service charges.
3. Joint Liability For Payment: The owner of the premises, the occupants thereof, and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to
pay for the services to such premises and the services are furnished to the premises by the Village only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village.
4. Late Payment Charge: A late charge equal to twenty percent (20%) of the service charge shall be added to any bill paid after thirty (30) days after
the date of mailing. The Village Treasurer shall indicate on the bill the date after which the late charge shall be assessed. (Ord. 801, 3-9-1994, eff.
5-1-1994)
5. Transfer Of Property Ownership: See section 8-1-6-3 of this title regarding unpaid charges when ownership of property changes. (Ord. 1658, 9-11-
2013)
B. Delinquent Bills:
1. Time Limit For Payment: In the event charges for sewer service are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing, such charges shall be
deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 209/348
2. Discontinue Water Service For Nonpayment: In the event of a delinquency, the Village may discontinue water service to the subject property using
the same procedures as in the case of a delinquent water bill as provided in subsection 8-1-8D of this title. (Ord. 801, 3-9-1994, eff. 5-1-1994)
C. Lien; Notice Of Delinquency:
1. Statement Of Lien Claim Filed With County: Whenever a bill for sewer services is delinquent as above provided, the Village Clerk shall file with the
County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim, as provided by Illinois Compiled Statutes. This statement shall contain the legal description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the Village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent
to the period covered by the bill.
2. Notice To User And Owner: If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the Village Clerk has notice of this, notice shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises if his address be known to the Clerk, whenever such bill becomes delinquent as above provided.
3. Right To Foreclose: The failure of the Village Clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall
not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in subsection D of this section.
D. Foreclosure Of Lien:
1. Sale Of Property Authorized: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale
shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens.
2. Bill In Equity: Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the Village.
3. Legal Proceedings: The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the Village in any court
having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill is delinquent as above provided.
E. Disposition Of Revenues:
1. All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewage system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. All
such revenues and monies shall be held by the Village Treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other
funds of the Village, and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than ten (10) days
after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the President and Board of Trustees.
2. The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such
system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the Sewerage Fund of the Village of
Monee.
3. Said Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute in the Illinois Municipal Code2.
F. Accounts:
1. Establish System Of Accounts: The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and
accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals,
he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage
system.
2. Audit Report Information: In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating
expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system
and capital amounts required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations. In this regard, the
financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:
a. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year.
b. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
c. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
d. Number of users connected to the system.
e. Number of nonmetered users.
f. A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and volume of waste discharged.
G. State Access To Records To Ensure Compliance: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to
any books, documents, papers and records of the Village which are applicable to the Village system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for
the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general
conditions to any State grant. (Ord. 627, 9-9-1987)
H. Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 627, 9-9-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
8-2A-3: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES:
The rates and service charges established for user charges in subsections 8-2A-1C through F of this article shall be effective as of September 1, 1987.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 210/348
Charges shall commence for users upon the date of actual connection to the sewer system. (Ord. 627, 9-9-1987)
8-2A-4: RATE COMPUTATION REQUESTS:
The method of computation of rates and service charges established for user charges in subsections 8-2A-1C through F of this article shall be made
available to a user within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a written request for such. (Ord. 627, 9-9-1987)
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
9-1-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE:
The printed document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building
Code (IBC) 2015, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), Inc. (herein sometimes referred to as "Building Code") is hereby adopted as the
Building Code of the Village; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said International Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with
the additions, insertions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 9-1-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1341, 2-23-2005; amd. Ord. 1848, 5-9-2018)
9-1-2: DELETIONS AND CHANGES:
The following deletions and/or changes are hereby made to the International Building Code.
Section 101.1 Village of Monee
Section 202 Delete Definition for "Area, Building" and insert: Area, Building. The area included within surrounding exterior walls of a building exclusive
of vent shafts and courts. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the building area if such areas are included
within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.
Section 202 Add to the Definition of "Dwelling" and "Dwelling Unit": Any Building that contains occupied space is considered a Dwelling.
Section 202 Delete Definition for "Fire Area" and Insert: Fire Area. The aggregate floor area enclosed and bounded by exterior walls of a building. Areas
of the building not provided with surrounded walls shall be included in the fire area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof
or floor next above.
Section 202 Delete Definition for "High Rise Building" and insert: High-Rise Building. A building with an occupied floor located more than three (3)
stories or more than forty (40) feet, above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
Insert new Section 402.9 Mall fire command center. A fire command center for fire department operations shall be provided in a location approved by
the fire department. The fire command center shall meet the requirements of IFC Section 508.1.1 through 508.1.6.
Section 403.1 Exception: Delete exceptions.
Section 406.5.12 Insert new section Automatic sprinkler system. An open parking garage shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.2.10.
Section 901.5 delete and insert the following: Acceptance Tests. Fire protection systems shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of this
code and the International Fire Code. When required, the tests shall be conducted in the presence of the building official. All new fire protection systems
shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official. The installing fire protection contractor shall notify the fire code official a minimum of forty-eight
(48) hour ahead of any required testing. Tests required by this code, the International Fire Code and the standards listed in this code shall be conducted
at the expense of the owner or owner's authorized agent. It shall be unlawful to occupy portions of a structure until the required fire protection systems
within that portion of the structure have been tested and approved.
Delete Section 903.2.1 and insert: Group A An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in the locations described below:
Delete Section 903.2.1.1 and insert 903.2.1.1 Group A1 thru A4:
1. In all Group A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 occupancies where the occupant load 50 or more.
2. Throughout all levels above and below a Group A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 occupancy where the occupant load 50 or more.
3. An automatic fire detection system shall be installed and maintained in buildings with less than 5000 square feet total area, in building or areas of
buildings not protected by a fire suppression system.
Delete Section 903.2.1.2, 903.2.1.3, 903.2.1.4, and 903.2.1.6 and renumber Section 903.2.1.5 to read 903.2.1.2.
Delete Section 903.2.3 and insert: Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in all Group E occupancies.
Delete Section 903.2.4 and insert: 903.2.4 Group F-1 and F-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in all Group F-1 and F-2 occupancies
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 211/348
having a fire area of 5,000 square feet or more.
Delete Section 903.2.7 and insert: 903.2.7 Group M and B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in all Group M and B occupancies having a
fire area of 5,000 square feet or more.
Delete Section 903.2.8 and insert: 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided
throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area. Where sprinkler protection is permitted to be omitted from a combustible attic area by sprinkler
installation standards, an automatic fire detection system shall be installed in the attic which is designed and installed in accordance by NFPA 72 with
the detection devices supervised by the building's fire alarm system.
Delete Section 903.2.9 and insert: 903.2.9 Group S-1 and S-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in all Group S-1 and S-2 occupancies
having a fire area of 5,000 square feet or more. An S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeding 2,500 square
feet shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
Delete Sections 903.2.9.1 and 903.2.9.2
Delete Section 903.2.10 and insert: 903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings classified as parking garages in accordance with Section 406.6 where either of the following conditions exists:
1. Where the fire area of parking garage exceeds 5,000 square feet.
2. Where the parking garage is located beneath other groups.
Exception: Enclosed parking garages located beneath Group R-3 occupancies.
Delete Section 903.2.11.3 and insert: 903.2.11.3 Buildings more than three (3) stories or 40 feet in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed throughout buildings that are more than three (3) stories or forty (40) feet in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access
measured to the finished floor.
Insert Section 903.3.5.3: 903.3.5.3 Separation of water services. Fire protection water supplies shall be separated from domestic supplies outside the
building. Where the water supply separates outside of the building a separate control valve for the domestic water supply shall be provided to allow the
domestic water to be shut-off without affecting the sprinkler system water supply.
Insert Section 903.3.9: 903.3.9 Sprinkler and standpipe system design criteria. Hydraulically designed sprinkler and standpipe system designs shall
maintain a minimum 10% safety margin between the seasonal low water supply and the total sprinkler demand. The total sprinkler demand shall include
the sprinkler demand, hose stream demand, and/or standpipe demand. Flow test data used to determine sprinkler system design shall be less than one
(1) year old.
Insert Section 903.4.2.1: 903.4.2.1 Occupant notification. Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided within a building, notification appliances
shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5.
Delete Section 903.4.3 and insert: 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves, Waterflow devices and test/drain
devices shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor of multiple floor buildings. Bird-cage type fire sprinkler systems are not
permitted.
Insert Section 903.5.1: Sprinkler system test valves. Sprinkler system test valves shall be mounted not less than five (5) feet nor more than six (6) feet
above the finished floor. Where multiple test valves serve a building, each test valve shall be marked in an appropriate method to indicate what system it
serves.
Insert Section 903.6: 903.6 Floor plans. An approved diagram shall be provided at each automatic sprinkler riser showing the locations of all control
valves on the system and the area in which the riser serves.
Delete Section 905.3.1 including exceptions 1 and 4, and insert: 905.3.1 Height. "Class 1 standpipe system shall be installed throughout buildings two
(2) or more stories in height, or where the flood level of the lowest story is located two (2) or more stories below the highest level of fire department
vehicle access. An automatic, wet standpipe system shall be provided unless an exception is permitted.
Insert new Section 905.3.9: 905.3.9 Storage occupancies. In F and S use groups where warehousing or storage exceeds twelve (12) feet in height, a
standpipe system shall be provided. A 21/2 inch x 11/2 inch connection to the standpipe shall be located immediately inside each exterior door in the
vicinity of the warehousing or storage. Additional connections shall be provided that no portion of the warehousing or storage is more than 120 feet
(travel distance) from a standpipe connection. The standpipe system shall be designed as follows:
1. A separate piping system from the overhead sprinklers.
2. Hydraulically calculated for a minimum of 250 gpm at 65 psi to the most hydraulically remote connection.
3. Where system pressure exceeds 100 psi at a connection, approved pressure reducing valves shall be provided.
Insert new Section 905.3.10: 905.3.10 Building area. In all groups, where any portion of the interior of the building is located more than 150 feet (travel
distance) from an exterior door, a standpipe system shall be provided. A 21/2 inch x 11/2 inch connection to the standpipe shall be located immediately
inside each exterior door. Additional connections shall be provided that no portion of the building is more than 150 feet (travel distance) from a standpipe
connection. The standpipe system shall be designed as follows:
1. A separate piping system from the overhead sprinklers.
2. Hydraulically calculated for a minimum of 250 gpm at 65 psi to the most hydraulically remote connection.
3. Where system pressure exceeds 100 psi at a connection, approved pressure reducing valves shall be provided.
Insert new Section 905.3.11: 905.3.11 Pressure reducing valves. Where system outlet pressures exceed 100 psi, approved pressure reducing valves
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 212/348
shall be provided. All valves shall be 21/2 inch and shall be field adjustable.
Delete Exceptions to Section 907.2 and insert to the end of Section 907.2: An approved manual fire alarm system shall be installed in all new buildings
and tenant spaces of all use groups; and, in all use groups when a change of occupancy occurs.
Delete any exceptions to required manual fire alarm systems in Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23.
Insert in each Section 907.2.1 thru 907.2.23: An automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all new buildings and tenant spaces as indicated in
Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 and in the following occupancies:
1. In common areas of all R-1 and R-2 use groups with interior corridors.
2. In all use groups with a total building area of less than 5,000 square feet unless a supervised automatic sprinkler system is provided in the building.
3. In all use groups when a change of occupancy occurs unless a supervised automatic sprinkler system is provided within the building or tenant space.
Insert to the end of Section 907.2.11.2.4. A heat detector shall be installed in all attached garages of single family homes, duplex homes and
townhouses. The heat detector shall be interconnected with the interior smoke alarms(s) and shall cause the interior smoke alarms to sound when
activated.
Insert new Section 913.6: 913.6 Test header. Where a test header is required it shall be located on the outside of the building. A ball-drip shall be
provided between the control valve for the test header and the outside test header.
Section 1008.3.3 Rooms and Spaces. Change number 5 to: Public restrooms with an area greater than 50 square feet.
Section 1612.3. Insert [NAME OF JURISDICTION] Need FEMA Map numbers???
Section 1612.3 Insert [DATE OF ISSUANCE] Need FEMA Map numbers???
(Ord. 1848, 5-9-2018)
9-1-3: LIBRARY CONTRIBUTIONS; NEW RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION:
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for new residential construction in any development platted either prior to or after adoption of this section,
each owner, developer, builder, or subdivider shall contribute cash for library purposes, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of such
lot or development, in accordance with the following formula:
A. Library Contributions: Contributions to the Peotone Public Library District shall be made at the rate of fifty five dollars ($55.00) per residential unit,
prior to the time any building permit is issued for the same.
B. Time And Manner Of Payment: Said contribution shall be made by cash, a check or other draft, payable to the Peotone Public Library District, of Will
County, Illinois. Said payment shall be made prior to the time any building permit is issued, whenever required. The contribution shall be made in all
cases directly to said library district and evidence of said payment shall be made at the time of application for any building permit. The building permit
will not be issued by the Village without receipt for such contribution.
C. Indemnity Of Village: As a condition precedent to the receipt of any funds by the Peotone Public Library District, said library district shall execute and
deliver to the Village an indemnification agreement which states:
1. That the library district covenants and agrees to reimburse the Village in the event the Village shall be required to refund any funds collected by
this section.
2. That the library district covenants and agrees to pay all legal expenses incurred by the Village in the event the legality of this section is litigated.
(Ord. 897, 2-28-1996)
9-1-4: SAVING CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. (Ord. 988, 9-10-1997)
9-1-5: DONATIONS CONTRIBUTED FOR FIRE PROTECTION PURPOSES:
A. Criteria For Requiring A Contribution Of Land Or Cash In Lieu Thereof: As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of a
planned unit development, each subdivider or developer shall be required to make a contribution of land for fire station sites to serve the immediate
needs of the residents of the development. Said contribution shall be in accordance with subsection A3 of this section. Those properties that have
already been annexed into the village in the past eighteen (18) months, but are vacant will also be required to make a similar contribution as set forth
in subsection A3 of this section prior to being granted a building permit by the village.
When the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate for a fire station site, the
village, with the concurrence of the district, shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication in
accordance with subsection A3 of this section. The cash contribution in lieu of fire protection district land dedication shall be held in trust by the
village and shall be used by the district solely for the acquisition of fire station sites, or, if necessary, for new apparatus, which will be available to
serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the improvement of other existing local fire stations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 213/348
that already serve such needs or for any other purpose agreed to by the subdivider or developer at the time of platting. The cash contributions in lieu
of fire station sites shall be held in trust by the village and shall be used solely for the acquisition of land for fire station sites, or, if necessary, for new
fire apparatus, to serve the immediate or future needs of the subdivision or development or for the improvement to any existing fire station site that
already serves such needs.
1. Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the "fair market value" of the acres of land in the area that otherwise
would have been dedicated as a fire station site. The fair market value, on a per acre basis, shall assume, unless determined otherwise pursuant
to subsection A6 of this section, that the land is zoned single-family detached residential for approximately ten thousand (10,000) square foot lots,
subdivided with appropriate frontage on a dedicated road, stubbed with village sewer and water, has all appropriate utilities available, is improved
as set forth in subsection A5 of this section, and is otherwise property capable of being used for residential development. For purposes of this
section, it is assumed that the present "fair market value" of such improved land in and surrounding the village is, as of the effective date of this
section, one hundred twenty five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) per acre. This figure shall be adjusted by the village board from time to time with
appropriate study and documentation. The "fair market value" as defined above shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land contribution
herein unless timely objected to as provided in subsection A6 of this section. Objections to the fair market value as defined above shall be made in
accordance with subsection A6 of this section to the plan commission. Failure to timely object to the "fair market value" as defined above in
accordance with subsection A6 of this section shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection at a later time.
2. Criteria For Requiring Dedication And A Fee: There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of land
dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will arise when: a) only a portion of the land to be developed is
proposed as the location for a fire station (that portion of the land within the subdivision falling within the location shall be dedicated as a site as
stated above, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated); or b)
a major part of the local fire station site has already been acquired by the particular district and only a small portion of land is needed from the
development to complete the site (the remaining portion shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution [as determined in subsection A3
of this section] in lieu thereof for the rest of the required land shall be required). (Ord. 1072, 11-10-1999)
3. Fees For Cash In Lieu Of Land: In the event that land is unsuitable for dedications, additional land is not needed, or the subdivider or developer
elects to pay cash in lieu of land, the following fees schedule set forth below shall prevail: (Ord. 1297, 5-12-2004)
a. For residential buildings, the cash donation shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00) per dwelling unit; and (Ord. 1426, 2-28-2007)
b. For commercial or industrial buildings, the sum of one and two-thirds cents ($0.0167) per square foot of industrial or commercial development;
and
c. Consistent with subsection A7 of this section, the district shall retain the right to negotiate agreements with the developers which do not exceed
the formula contained herein.
d. Any negotiated fee must be presented to the village board on or before the time when the final plat is submitted for approval, and in no event
shall the negotiation of an impact fee pursuant to this section hold up or delay a plat that is otherwise set for final approval. If no fee has been
negotiated at the time of final plat approval, the fee as determined by this section shall apply.
These fees are based upon current data and may be changed at any time. (Ord. 1297, 5-12-2004)
4. Topography And Grading: The slope, topography, and geology of the dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purpose. Wetlands and floodplains may be accepted for village ownership and maintenance, but shall not serve as a credit toward the fire station
site contribution. Stormwater detention areas shall not be accepted for village ownership and maintenance, and the portion of a detention area
designed to function primarily as a component of the stormwater control system shall not serve as a credit toward the required site contribution.
Retention areas shall not be accepted for village ownership and maintenance and shall not serve as a credit toward the required fire station site
contribution. A fire station site shall not be less than four (4) acres in area and a headquarters fire station requires five (5) acres. Wetlands,
floodplains, detention areas, retention areas, and areas of steep slope shall not be accepted as fire station sites and shall not serve as a credit
toward the required fire station site cash in lieu of land contribution.
5. Improved Sites: All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical, gas, telephone and other utility lines, water, sewer, and
streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter), as applicable to the location of the site, and shall otherwise comply with village code
requirements. In addition, all sites shall be suitable for constructing a fire station facility and shall be free of any environmental contamination. The
landscaping normally included within the definition of "improved" sites under this code may be deleted due to the delay time between dedication of
any such fire station site and the construction of fire facilities thereon.
6. Objections: All objections relating to acreage requirements, presumptions as to fair market value or any other application of this section to a
particular subdivision or planned development, shall first be referred to the plan commission for hearing. An objection must be made, if at all, prior
to the approval by the village of the final plat. A failure to object by such time shall constitute a waiver of the right to object to the provisions of this
section.
a. Duties Of The Plan Commission: The plan commission shall serve in an advisory capacity and shall have the following duties:
(1) Advise and assist the village in resolving objections regarding the fair market value of the land used to calculate the cash contribution in
subsection A1 of this section, or any other application of this section to a particular subdivision or planned development.
(2) The village may adopt procedural rules to be used by the plan commission in carrying out the duties imposed by this section.
b. Professional Reports: The village and district shall make available to the plan commission all professional reports relating to the fair market
value of land used in calculating these fees or any other issue which may arise under this section. The plan commission may also retain the
services of professionals (attorneys, appraisers, statisticians, etc.) to assist them in their review of issues raised by any objection.
7. Condition To Annexation: The dedications of land or cash contribution in lieu thereof required by this section shall also be required as a condition
to the annexation of any land to the village, and provisions therefor shall at a minimum be incorporated in any annexation or preannexation
agreement governing such land. However, the district reserves the right to negotiate dedications of land or cash in lieu of land or a combination
thereof not to exceed the fee set forth herein.
8. Indemnification: As a precondition to the village distributing fire station dedications and/or fees in lieu thereof, the district shall execute an
intergovernmental indemnification agreement in the form set forth in exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein, available for inspection in
the office of the village clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 214/348
9. Distribution: Unless otherwise specified, the cash in lieu of land contribution imposed by this section shall be collected and held by the village to
be distributed in accordance with the standards in this section to the appropriate unit of local government and to be used for the purposes set forth
in this section. In the event the district and the developer reach an agreement under subsection A3 of this section, the village recognizes that a
private contract has been formed and no distribution will flow through the village.
10. Land And Capital Facilities Acquisition Plan:
a. The district agrees to provide the Village with its plan regarding the purchase of land and capital facilities. The plan will include the following
items:
(1) A description of the nature and location of existing fire stations and capital facilities within the district.
(2) An identification of the capacity of each building or fire station site within the particular district and the number of residents served by the
district.
(3) A projection of the character and location of new development that is expected to occur within the district during the succeeding ten (10) year
period. The district may obtain the information necessary to make this projection from sources such as, but not limited to: municipalities, other
units of government, agencies and consultants.
(4) An identification of the amount of land that will be necessary within the district in order to accommodate the demands of such projected new
development, and an estimate of the public grounds acquisition costs that will be incurred or have been incurred by the district in acquiring
such lands.
(5) A general description of each classification of fire station facilities (including construction, expansion or enhancement of any public facilities
and the land improvement, design, engineering and professional costs related thereto) that will be necessary within the district in order to
provide emergency medical services and fire protection capacity for the projected new development, and an estimate of the capital facilities
costs that will be incurred by each district in constructing such capital facilities.
(6) A schedule for the acquisition of such lands and facilities to meet the projected need (which schedule may be contingent upon the availability
of financing).
b. The district must provide the Village with an annual report within sixty (60) days of the end of the district's fiscal year of the use of any impact
fees collected by the Village, remitted to the district and spent on appropriate land or capital needs.
11. Time Of Payment: All dedications and fees imposed by this section shall be due and payable upon final plat approval.
12. Miscellaneous: In calculating any cash in lieu of land contribution payable at time of issuance of building permit as provided in subsection A3 of
this section, the Village shall use the fair market value as set forth in subsection A1 of this section, one hundred twenty five thousand dollars
($125,000.00) or any amendment thereto and in effect at the time of the contribution and building permit issuance. (Ord. 1072, 11-10-1999)
9-1-6: FEE SCHEDULE:
The following fees are hereby assessed and shall be paid at the time of the application filing.
FEE SCHEDULE
A. New residential structures:
1. New construction - includes electric, plumbing and HVAC:
a. Residential - single family $2,000.00
b. Townhouse - each dwelling unit 2,000.00
c. Apartments:
Each dwelling unit 550.00
Each floor common area 330.00
d. Condominiums:
Each dwelling unit 550.00
Each floor common area 330.00
e. Foundation only 400.00
f. Clubhouse/shared accessory structures 550.00
B. Commercial - industrial, storage, business, institutional, public and multi-family - does not include electric, plumbing and HVAC:
Square Footage
Cost Per
Square Foot
Up to 150,000 $0.72
150,001 to 250,000 0.66
250,001 to 350,000 0.61
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 215/348
350,001 to 450,000 0.55
450,001 to 550,000 0.50
550,001 to 650,000 0.44
650,001 to 750,000 0.39
Over 750,001 0.33
C. Agriculture buildings:
1. New construction - additions-accessory $0.33 psf for all areas, but not less than $75.00
D. Alterations and remodeling or use change applicable only to residential dwellings:
1. Roofing:
a. Overlay $ 55.00
b. Tear off 83.00
c. Commercial 330.00
2. Replace driveway 100.00
3. Change of window or door no structure change 60.00
4. Replace siding 60.00
5. Decks 180.00
6. Concrete walk or patio 110.00
7. Paver patio 75.00
8. Handicap ramp:
a. Residential No fee
b. Commercial $216.00
9. Detached garage $363.00 + $50.00 = $413.00
10. Above ground pool $170.00
11. In ground pool $430.00 + $50.00 PR = $480.00
12. Shed without electric:
a. No concrete pad $ 88.00
b. With concrete pad 143.00
13. Fence 120.00
14. Additions/remodels $143.00 + $50.00 PR = $193.00
15. Lawn sprinklers - RPZ required $96.00
16. Three season room $253.00 + $50.00 PR = $303.00
E. Electrical:
1. Residential:
a. Upgrade service $102.00
b. Remodel/addition $143.00 + $50.00 PR = $193.00
2. Commercial - does not include plan review:
a. New construction $360.00
b. Remodel 360.00
3. Generators 150.00
F. Plumbing:
1. Residential:
a. Installation of clean out 75.00
b. Remodel/addition $143.00 + $50.00 PR = $193.00
2. Commercial - does not include plan review:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 216/348
a. New construction $360.00
b. Remodel 360.00
3. Water heater 75.00
4. Water softener system 75.00
G. Heating and air conditioning:
1. Residential:
a. Replacement 75.00
b. Remodel/addition $143.00 + $50.00 PR = $193.00
2. Commercial - does not include plan review:
a. New construction $360.00
b. Remodel 360.00
H. Raising, shoring, sealing or underpinning of structure or foundation repairs:
1. Residential $120.00
2. Commercial 240.00
I. Demolition - foundation/footing removed 340.00
J. Signs:
1. Change of face only 60.00
2. New structure $120.00 + $50.00 PR = $170.00
K. Reinspection/extra inspections $100.00
L. Plan review - does not include engineering fees:
1. Residential:
a. Single family 700.00
b. Townhouse - per structure 700.00
c. Apartment building:
Per floor 700.00
Plus per unit 70.00
d. Addition/stories 105.00
e. Garages 70.00
f. Miscellaneous 42.00
2. Commercial $0.24 psf minimum $600.00 + engineering review costs
M. Building Code Appeal Application fee:
1. Residential:
a. Special use $190.00
b. Variance 500.00
2. Commercial:
a. Special use 550.00
b. Variance 600.00
N. Occupancy resale inspection:
1. Residential 50.00
2. Commercial 130.00
O. Dumpster 25.00
(Ord. 1844, 5-9-2018)
Chapter 2
ELECTRICAL CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 217/348
9-2-1: ADOPTION OF NFPA 70 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
The printed document entitled the NFPA 70 National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., three
(3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Village Clerk is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the Village; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, and from the effective date hereof, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the Village. (Ord. 1489, 9-24-2008;
amd. Ord. 1851, 5-23-2018)
9-2-2: DELETIONS AND CHANGES:
The following deletions and/or changes are hereby made to the NFPA 70 National Electrical Code 2014 edition.
Section 90.4 Insert: Village of Monee as authority having jurisdiction.
Section 90.4 Insert: The Fee Schedule as set forth in the building code of the Village established in Table 1 entitled Schedule of Permit Fees shall apply
to all electrical work.
Section 110.5 Delete: Where other materials are used, the size shall be changed accordingly. Insert: Conductors other than copper are not allowed.
Exemption: service conductors owned by utility company.
Section 210.4 (B) Insert: All switches for fire alarms, burglar alarms, exit signs, and emergency lighting shall be equipped with mechanical lockouts to
prevent an accidental turnoff of the circuits.
Section 220.1 Insert: Provide a diagram showing service and feeders wire sizes, type of conductors, calculated loads, the area in the square feet being
supplied, and demand factors shall be submitted. Required panel schedules shall show connected loads, total connected loads per phase.
Section 300.4 Insert: Except where encased in concrete, all above ground conductors shall be installed in rigid metal conduit or Electrical metallic tubing
(EMT).
Section 300.5 Add (L): All conductors underground, encased in concrete, or under buildings shall be installed in PVC conduit. PVC conduit must be
listed for any applicable specific locations as required in section 352.12.
Section 408.20 Location of Switchboards and Switchgear add: Anything over 800 Amps shall have two (2) means of egress with Panic Hardware.
Section 408.20.1 For all Services 800 amps or greater, sprinklers shall not be installed in electrical rooms. Additionally for all services 800 amp or more,
an Electrical Room that meets all of the following, must be provided: 1). The room is dedicated to electrical equipment only, 2). Only Dry-type electrical
equipment is used, 3). Equipment is installed in a 2-hour fire-rated enclosure including protection for penetrations, 4). No combustible Storage is
permitted to be stored in the room.
Section 410.10 (A) add: Wall mounted exterior Fixtures shall be caulked on the top and all sides.
Section 700.16 Insert: All emergency egress lighting, illuminated exit signs, and other emergency lighting shall be of LED type.
Section 700.21 Insert: All switches for fire alarm, burglar alarm, exit and emergency lighting circuits shall be equipped with mechanical lockouts to
prevent an accidental turn off of the circuits.
(Ord. 1851, 5-23-2018)
Chapter 3
PLUMBING CODE
9-3-1: ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE:
The printed document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the Illinois Plumbing Code,
2014 edition, as published by the Illinois Department of Public Health (herein sometimes referred to as "Plumbing Code"), is hereby adopted as the
Plumbing Code of the Village as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions and changes, if any, prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 861, 5-
10-1995; amd. Ord. 1853, 5-23-2018)
9-3-2: DELETIONS AND CHANGES:
The following deletions and/or changes are hereby made to the Illinois State Plumbing Code.
Section 890.110 insert paragraph (e): The Fee Schedule as set forth in the building code of the Village of Monee established in Table 1 entitled
Schedule of Permit Fees, shall apply to all electrical work.
Section 891.1200, Paragraph (a) entitled "Water Service Sizing" is hereby deleted and in lieu thereof is substituted the following:
a) Water Service Pipe Sizing: The water service pipe from the street main (including the tap) to the water distribution system for the building shall be
sized in accordance with Appendix A, Tables M, N, O, P and Q. Water service pipe and fittings shall be at least 1" in diameter. If flushometers or other
devices requiring a high rate of water flow are used, the water service pipe shall be designed and installed to provide this additional flow.
6) A full size Cleanout shall be located on the exterior of the building within 5' of the Foundation on all Building Drains. Exception this exterior Cleanout
is not required for a building Drain that is only used for a RO system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 218/348
Section 890. Appendix A Plumbing Materials, Equipment, Use Restrictions and Applicable Standards as follows:
Under the section entitled "Approved Material for Water Service Pipe" Delete sections 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 12 and 15.
Under the section entitled "Approved Material for Water Distribution Pipe" Delete sections 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12.
Under the section entitled "Approved Material for Building Sewer" Delete section 10.
(Ord. 1853, 5-23-2018)
Chapter 4
MECHANICAL AND FUEL GAS CODES
9-4-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE AND FUEL GAS CODE:
The printed document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International
Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC) (herein sometimes referred to as "Mechanical Code"), and the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council (herein sometimes referred to as "Fuel Gas Code") is hereby
adopted as the Mechanical Code and Fuel Gas Code of the Village, for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Mechanical Code and Fuel Gas Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions and changes, if any, prescribed in sections 9-4-2 and 9-4-3 of this
chapter. (Ord. 1352, 4-13-2005; amd. Ord. 1843, 5-9-2018; Ord. 1845, 5-9-2018)
9-4-2: MECHANICAL CODE DELETIONS AND CHANGES:
The following deletions and/or changes are hereby made to the International Mechanical Code.
Section 101.1 Village of Monee
Section 106.5.2 Insert: The Fee Schedule as set forth in the building code of the Village established in Table 1 entitled Schedule of Permit Fees, shall
apply to all mechanical work.
Section 106.5.3 Insert: 50%, 0%
Section 108.4 Insert: Misdemeanor, $750.00
Section 108.5 Insert: $50.00, $750.00
Section 109.2 Membership of the Board: the Board of Appeals shall consist of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Monee, Will
County, Illinois, acting from time to time.
(Ord. 1843, 5-9-2018)
9-4-3: FUEL GAS CODE DELETIONS AND CHANGES:
The following deletions and/or changes are hereby made to the International Fuel Gas Code.
Section 101.1 Village of Monee
Section 106.6.2 The Fee Schedule as set forth in the building code of the Village established in Table 1 entitled Schedule of Permit Fees, shall apply to
all mechanical work.
Section 106.6.3 50%, 0%
Section 108.4 Misdemeanor, $750.00
Section 108.5 $50.00, $750.00
Section 109.2 Membership of the Board: the Board of Appeals shall consist of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Monee, Will
County, Illinois acting from time to time.
(Ord. 1845, 5-9-2018)
Chapter 5
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
9-5-1: ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS ENERGY EFFICIENT BUILDING ACT:
The Illinois Energy Efficient Building Act and the amendment thereto are hereby adopted in its entirety. (Ord. 1755, 7-27-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 219/348
Chapter 6
FIRE CODE
9-6-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
The printed document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire
Code, 2015, as published by the International Code Council (ICC) (herein sometimes referred to as "Fire Code") is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of
the Village; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said International Fire Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions
and changes, if any, prescribed in section 9-6-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1047, 4-28-1999; amd. Ord. 1854, 5-23-2018)
9-6-2: DELETIONS AND CHANGES:
The following deletions and/or changes are hereby made to the International Fire Code.
Section 101.1 Insert: Village of Monee
Section 109.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $750.00, 30
Section 111.4. Insert: $50.00, $750.00
Section 202 delete definition for "Area, Building" and insert: Area, Building. The area included within surrounding exterior walls of a building exclusive
of vent shafts and courts. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the building area if such areas are included
within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.
Section 202 delete definition for "Fire Area" and insert: Fire Area. The aggregate floor area enclosed and bounded by exterior walls of a building. Areas
of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the fire area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof
or floor next above.
Section 503.1 Revise the text Where required. "...in accordance with Section 503.1.1 through 503.1.5".
Insert new Section 503.1.4: Additional Access Requirement. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for buildings and structures three or more
floors above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. Access shall be provided along at least 75% of each exterior elevation of a building or
structure.
Insert new Section 503.1.5: Parking and enforcement. Parking, standing or stopping shall be prohibited on any fire apparatus access road by any nonemergency
vehicle without the approval of the fire code official. Signage identifying fire apparatus roads shall be provided in accordance with state or
local motor vehicle laws. Written permission shall be provided to the Law Enforcement agency having jurisdiction.
Section 503.2 Revised Text: Specifications. "...in accordance with Section 503.2.1 through 503.2.9".
Section 503.2.3 Revised Text: 503.2.3 Surface. "Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support a minimum imposed loads of
72,000 pounds and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities."
Section 503.2.4 Revised Text: 503.2.4 turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall include an inside turning radius of
not less than 45 feet.
Section 503.2.5 Revised Text: 503.2.5 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with an area
for turning around apparatus. Fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum inside turning radius of 45 feet and shall have a paved surface of not
less than to 27 feet.
Insert new Section 503.2.9: 503.2.9 Placement of fire department access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall be placed 25 feet from the building,
measured from the building's edge to the nearest edge of the access road. Where fire apparatus access roads are in public or private parking areas, the
measurement from the building shall be to the rear of the parking stall(s) closest to the drive aisle. Drive aisles shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width.
505.1 Address identification. Revise the text as follows: "...Shall be not less than 6 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch. Interior tenant
spaces shall be identified with characters of not less than 4 inches high. Where required by the fire official..."
Add new Section 506.3 Key box tamper switch. A key box required by this section shall be provided with a tamper switch that is supervised by the
building fire alarm system. Activation of the tamper switch shall result in a trouble signal being sent to the communications center.
Add new Section 506.3.1 Knox electronic cut-off switch. A Knox Model (KS-2P) preemptive cut-off switch is required in all buildings of all use groups
with multiple electrical panel rooms or locations, or in buildings with a service of 800 or more amps. The cut-off switch shall be located as follows:
(1) At the entrance to the building as identified by the fire district.
(2) Mounted not less than five (5) feet nor more than six (6) feet above the adjoining grade.
Section 507.5 Fire hydrant systems. Revise the text as follows: "...shall comply with Sections 507.5.1 through 507.5.13."
Section 507.5.1 Where required. Revise the text as follows: "...is more than 300 feet from a hydrant..."
Section 507.5.1 Delete exceptions 1 and 2.
Add new Section 507.5.7 Hydrants along street. Fire hydrants shall be located at street intersections and along public streets at intervals not to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 220/348
exceed 300 feet.
Add new Section 507.5.8 parking restricted. Parking shall not be permitted within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant measured along the roadway surface
in front of the fire hydrant.
Add new Section 507.5.9 Multiple fire hydrants required. Not less than two (2) fire hydrants shall be located within 300 feet of a building's exterior.
Add new Section 507.5.10 Fire hydrants at H-use group occupancies. Where a building is classified as an "H" use group, the fire chief is authorized
to require additional fire hydrants based on anticipated tactical fireground needs.
Add new Section 507.5.11 Water main control valves. Not more than two fire hydrants located on private property may be taken out of service for the
repair of private water main.
Add new Section 507.5.12 Distance to roadways, buildings, and grade. Fire hydrants shall be located not closer than five (5) feet, nor more than
fifteen (15) feet from road surfaces. Fire hydrants shall be closer than forty (40) feet to a building. The main pumper connection (steamer port) shall face
the roadway. The center of the main pumper connection shall be located not less than eighteen (18) inches nor more than 24 inches above adjoining
grade.
Add new Section 507.5.13 Fire hydrant type. Fire hydrants shall comply with AWWA Standard C-502. Fire hydrants shall include a minimum six (6)
inch distributor water main supply and a six (6) inch barrel. The main pumper connection shall be a four (4) inch outlet with two (2), two and 1/2 (2.5)
inch side outlets. Outlet threads shall be NST.
Add new Section 511.0 Plan submittals. Plans shall be provided to the fire department prior to any new building construction or any additions to
buildings which indicate the locations of fire hydrants and sprinkler and/or standpipe connections on either public or private property. The location of the
fire hydrants and sprinkler and/or standpipe connections shall be approved by the fire code official.
Section 901.5 revise the text: Installation acceptance testing. "...The fire code official shall be notified before any required acceptance testing. All new
fire protection systems shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official. The installing fire protection contractor shall notify the fire code official a
minimum of forty-eight (48) hours ahead of any required testing."
Section 903.4.1 revise the text: Monitoring. "...shall be automatically transmitted to the fire district's communications center or by an approved method
in accordance with NFPA 72".
Section 906.3 revise the text: Size and distribution. "...shall be in accordance with Sections 906.3.1 through 906.3.4. Fire extinguishers shall be
located within 5 feet of each exit door and as required by Section 906.3."
Section 907.6.6 revise the text: Monitoring. "...shall be monitored by the fire district's communications center or by an approved method in accordance
with NFPA 72."
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited):
Prohibited in Residential Districts.
Section 5706.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited): Prohibited in Residential
Districts.
Section 5806.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): Prohibited in Residential
Districts.
Section 6104.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested
areas): Prohibited in Residential Districts.
(Ord. 1854, 5-23-2018)
Chapter 7
LIFE SAFETY CODE
9-7-1: ADOPTION OF LIFE SAFETY CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village, by reference, the life safety code, current edition, formerly known as code for safety to life from fire in buildings
and structures or the building exit code published by the National Fire Protection Association. This code deals with the life safety from fire and like
emergencies. It covers construction, protection and occupancy features to minimize danger to life from fire, smoke, fumes or panic before buildings are
vacated. It specifies the number, size and arrangement of exit facilities sufficient to permit prompt escape of occupants from buildings or structures in
case of fire or other conditions dangerous to life. Three (3) copies have been and are now on file in the office of the village clerk, and the same are
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date when this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall
be controlling within the limits of the village. (Ord. 810, 5-11-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
9-7-2: ADDITIONAL LIFE SAFETY REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The following additional provisions of the life safety code, published by the National Fire Protection Association, are hereby adopted by reference:
A. NFPA 14, Standpipe And Hose Systems, 1993 edition.
B. NFPA 20, Installation Of Centrifugal Fire Pumps, 1993 edition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 221/348
C. NFPA 25, Inspection, Testing And Maintenance Of Water Based Fire Protection System, 1993 edition.
D. NFPA 96, Installation Of Equipment For Removal Of Smoke And Grease Laden Vapors For Commercial Cooking Equipment, 1991 edition.
E. NFPA 231, General Storage, 1995 edition.
F. NFPA 231D, Storage Of Rubber Tires, 1994 edition.
G. NFPA 30B, Manufacturer And Storage Of Aerosol Products, 1994 edition.
H. All appendices of all NFPA standards are to be considered as a material part of each such standard and the language contained in each such
appendix shall be considered as mandatory and not advisory. (Ord. 903, 5-22-1996)
Chapter 8
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
9-8-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
The printed document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the 2015 International
Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), as published by the International Code Council, Inc. (herein sometimes referred to as "Property Maintenance
Code") is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Village, for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said IPMC are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out
in this chapter, with the additions, insertions and changes prescribed in section 9-8-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1322, 10-27-2004; amd. Ord. 1842, 5-9-2018)
9-8-2: DELETIONS AND CHANGES:
The following deletions and/or changes are hereby made to the International Property Maintenance Code.
Section 101.1 Village of Monee
Section 103.5 The Fee Schedule as set forth in the building code of the Village established in Table 1 entitled Schedule of Permit Fees, shall apply to all
mechanical work.
Section 103.6 Any owner or duly authorized agent of any premises shall apply for an occupancy inspection of said premises upon the following
conditions herein. This inspection shall be conducted annually upon notification from the building official, conveyance of premises, sale of premises, or
upon tenant change, whichever occurs first, to determine overall compliance with all the provisions of the property maintenance code. At time of
inspection, the unit, common areas, and exteriors will be inspected. The owner or duly authorized agent must be present during the inspection. The
inspection must be applied for within two weeks of notification by the building official. Prior to inspection the owner, seller, or agent shall provide the
building official with proof that the sewer, water, and garbage bills are current and no arrearages are due. If such inspection establishes that the rental
unit complies with all the provisions, a certificate of occupancy for the premises shall be issued. In all cases, it shall be unlawful for a new purchaser or
lessee to occupy any portion of the premises until said certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Village in accordance with this code.
Section 112.4 $100.00, $750.00
Section 301.2 Add to End: For the purpose of this code, all building occupancy use types are subject to the restrictions laid out for dwelling units,
including commercial and industrial uses.
Section 302.3 Add to End: these areas shall be paved
Section 302.4 six inches (6")
Section 304.14 April 1st, December 1st
Section 602.3 October 1st, May 1st
Section 602.4 October 1st, May 1st
(Ord. 1842, 5-9-2018)
Chapter 9
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
9-9-1: HOUSE NUMBERING REQUIRED:
A. Numbering System; County Plan: All lots, buildings and structures in the village shall be numbered in accordance with the Will County address
system plan as adopted May 20, 1976, by the Will County board, as amended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 222/348
1. As provided in said address system plan, Will Center Road is identified as 4800 West, with the numbering increasing westward therefrom and
decreasing eastward therefrom.
2. Manhattan-Monee Road is identified as 25500 South, with the numbering increasing southward thereof and decreasing northward thereof.
3. Each mile shall be divided into eight (8) blocks of approximately six hundred sixty feet (660') per block.
4. Each block shall be divided into one hundred (100) numbers, with odd numbers on the south and east sides of streets, as applicable, and even
numbers on north and west sides of streets, as applicable.
5. Numbers in each block will be allocated according to the location of the lot or building within each block.
B. Village Assignment Of Numbers: The village shall assign street numbers as necessary and shall advise the property owners thereof prior to same
being utilized by police, fire and postal authorities. (Ord. 698, 8-8-1990)
9-9-2: NUMBERS ON BUILDINGS REQUIRED:
A. Placement Of Numbers: It shall be the duty of owners and occupants of every building in the village to have placed thereon, in a place visible from
the street, figures at least three inches (3") high showing the street number of the building.
B. Penalty: Any person failing to so number any building or other structure occupied by or owned by him, or if after receiving notice to do so from the
village clerk shall continue to fail to display the number of such building, shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each day during or
on which the failure to so number said building continues. (Ord. 698, 8-8-1990; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 10
RESIDENTIAL CODE
9-10-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file at the Office of the Village Clerk and the Village of Monee, Will County, Illinois, being marked
and designated as the 2015 International Residential Code, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of
the Village of Monee for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of building, mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems in the Village of Monee and providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such 2015 International Residential
Code, published by the International Code Council, on file in the Office of the Village of Monee are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 1294, 4-14-2004; amd. Ord. 1849, 5-9-2018)
9-10-2: DELETIONS AND CHANGES:
The following deletions and/or changes are hereby made to the International Residential Code.
Section R101.1 Village of Monee
Section R103.5 The Fee Schedule as set forth in the building code of the Village established in Table 1 entitled Schedule of Permit Fees, shall apply to
all mechanical work.
Section R105.2 Building. Delete Exception 1, 2, 5, 7, 10
Section R202 Definition of "Dwelling" and "Dwelling Unit": Any Building that contains occupied space is considered a Dwelling.
Table R301.2(1) Insert design criteria: Ground Snow Load: 25psf; Wind Design, Speed: 90mph; Wind Design, Topographic effects: No; Wind Design,
Special Wind Region: No; Wind Design, Wind-borne debris zone: No; Seismic Design Category: A; Subject to Damage from Weathering: Severe;
Subject to Damage from Frost Line Depth: 42 inches; Subject to Damage from Termite: Negligible; Winter Design Temperature: minus 3 degrees
Fahrenheit; Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: Yes; Flood Hazard: 11/6/2000 FIRM; Air Freezing Index: 2000; Mean Annual Temp: 49.3 degrees
Fahrenheit.
Section R313.2 Add additional Exceptions not requiring an automatic fire sprinkler system
A. Mixed-use developments, or any phase thereof, that includes single family units with a density of less than 10 units per acre
B. Single family homes located more than 15 feet from a principal building
C. Single family homes with a density of less than (4) units per acre
D. Individual single family homes located on a lot of more than 8,000 square feet in area.
Section R314.8 Add: a heat detector shall be installed in all attached garages of single family homes, duplex homes and townhouses. The heat detector
shall be interconnected with the interior smoke alarms and shall cause the interior smoke alarms to sound when activated.
Chapter 11: The Village adopted international energy conservation code shall have priority over this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 223/348
Chapter 12-23: The Village adopted international Mechanical code shall have priority over these chapters.
Chapter 24: The Village adopted international Fuel Gas code shall have priority over this chapter.
Chapter 25-33: The Village adopted Illinois plumbing code shall have priority over these chapters.
Chapter 34-43: The Village adopted national electrical code shall have priority over these chapters.
Section P2603.5.1 Insert: 42 inches, 42 inches
(Ord. 1849, 5-9-2018)
Chapter 11
ON-SITE MOBILE STORAGE CONTAINERS
9-11-1: TERMS, CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. On-site mobile storage containers shall be permitted only under the following terms, conditions, restrictions, and regulations, in all zoning districts:
1. On-site mobile storage containers shall be utilized only for the storage, loading, and unloading of household or business items.
2. On properties whose primary structure is identified as a single-family detached or two-family dwelling structure, on site mobile storage containers
may be placed only upon a residential driveway or other hard surface approved by the Village.
3. On properties whose primary structure is identified as anything other than a single-family detached, or two-family dwelling structure, on site mobile
storage containers may be placed upon a parking lot constructed of a hard surface approved by the Village, provided that the placement of the on
site mobile storage container does not impede the flow of traffic, occupy off street parking spaces, and the proposed locations are approved by the
Village.
4. On site mobile storage containers may not be placed in any unimproved yards, publicly owned rights-of-way, sidewalks, or other locations not
specifically identified as acceptable within the provisions of this chapter.
5. Only one (1) on site mobile storage container may be located on a property at a time.
6. On site mobile storage containers shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in length.
7. An on-site mobile storage container shall not be placed on a property for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days, except for projects involving the
construction of a facility at which time the container may be placed at the site until the expiration of the construction permit or upon the issuance of
an occupancy permit, whichever comes first. No person shall place an on-site mobile storage container upon their property for more than two (2)
such 15-day periods per calendar year.
8. On site mobile storage containers shall be used to temporarily store personal property of a nontoxic and nonflammable nature.
9. On site mobile storage containers shall not be utilized for the purpose of conducting business or selling merchandise. (Ord. 1746, 3-23-2016)
9-11-2: SITE PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful to use, have, or cause an on-site mobile storage container to be delivered to any property within the Village without having first
secured a site permit from the Village. A site permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be submitted with the completed application, which shall
cover the fifteen (15) day period the on-site mobile storage container is authorized to be on site. (Ord. 1746, 3-23-2016)
9-11-3: CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
No person shall engage in the business of delivering or removing an on-site mobile storage container to or from any premises within the Village without
first securing a contractor's license for such activities. (Ord. 1746, 3-23-2016)
9-11-4: PENALTY:
A person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine pursuant to section 1-14-11 of this Code per day as the violation exists.
(Ord. 1746, 3-23-2016)
Chapter 12
ROLL-OFF DUMPSTERS
9-12-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this section a roll-off dumpster or roll-off container shall be defined as a container used on a temporary basis for the disposal of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 224/348
waste or refuse (hereinafter referred to as "debris") generated by the construction, reconstruction and/or rehabilitation of a structure within the Village.
(Ord. 1732, 10-14-2015)
9-12-2: REQUIREMENTS:
A. The debris to be placed in a roll-off dumpster or container shall be only the waste or refuse generated by construction, reconstruction and/or
rehabilitation of structure(s) at the property site for which the application is submitted and approved.
B. Roll-off dumpsters or containers may be placed on private property only for the purpose of disposal of building construction, reconstruction and/or
rehabilitation debris from structures located on said private property.
C. Except for the construction of a commercial/industrial facility, a roll-off dumpster or roll-off container shall not be placed on a property for more than
fifteen (15) consecutive days. No person shall place a roll-off dumpster or roll-off container upon their property for more than two (2) such 15-day
periods per calendar year.
D. No roll-off dumpster or container shall be overfilled with debris whereby the contents exceed the top of the container. Any full container shall be
removed within two (2) business days of becoming full, unless for the purpose of the health, safety, and welfare of the community an earlier removal
is warranted as determined by the Village.
E. No roll-off dumpster or container shall be placed upon a public highway or right-of-way or public property without written approval by the Village to do
so.
F. To warn the operators of vehicles of the presence of a traffic hazard requiring the exercise of unusual care, any roll-off dumpster or roll-off container
parked on or along any public highway or right-of-way or public property, with written approval by the Village, shall be equipped with and display
markers consisting of all-yellow reflective diamond-shaped panels having a minimum size of eighteen inches (18") by eighteen inches (18"). These
panels shall be mounted to the edge of the dumpster or container at both ends nearest the path of oncoming traffic. These markers shall have a
minimum mounting height of three feet (3') from the bottom of the panels to the surface of the roadway. (Ord. 1732, 10-14-2015)
9-12-3: SITE PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful to use, have, or cause a roll-off dumpster or roll-off container to be delivered to any property within the Village without having first
secured a site permit from the Village. A site permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be submitted with the completed application, which shall
cover the fifteen (15) day period the roll-off dumpster or roll-off container is authorized to be on site. (Ord. 1732, 10-14-2015)
9-12-4: CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
No person shall engage in the business of delivering or removing a roll-off dumpster or container to or from any premises within the Village without first
securing a contractor's license for such activities. (Ord. 1732, 10-14-2015)
9-12-5: PENALTY:
A person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine pursuant to section 1-14-11 of this Code per day as the violation exists.
(Ord. 1732, 10-14-2015)
Chapter 13
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
9-13-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
The International Existing Building Code 2015 edition is hereby adopted in full with the additions, insertions and changes as set forth in section 9-13-2 of
this chapter. (Ord. 1846, 5-9-2018)
9-13-2: DELETIONS AND CHANGES:
The following deletions and/or changes are hereby made to the International Existing Building Code.
Section 101.1 Village of Monee
Section 108.2 The Fee Schedule as set forth in the building code of the Village established in Table 1 entitled Schedule of Permit Fees, shall apply to all
work.
Section 1401.2 30 days from and after the date of the final passage and adoption of this ordinance.
(Ord. 1846, 5-9-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 225/348
Chapter 14
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
9-14-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE:
The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 edition, is hereby adopted in full with the additions, insertions, and changes as set forth in
section 9-14-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1847, 5-9-2018)
9-14-2: DELETIONS AND CHANGES:
The following deletion and/or changes are hereby made to the International Swimming Code.
Section 101.1 Village of Monee
Section 105.6.2 The Fee Schedule as set forth in the building code of the Village established in Table 1 entitled Schedule of Permit Fees shall apply to
all mechanical work.
Section 105.6.3 50%, 0%
Section 107.4 Misdemeanor, $750.00, 1 Days
Section 107.5 $50.00, $75.00
Section 305.1 Delete Exceptions 1 and 2
(Ord. 1847, 5-9-2018)
Chapter 15
ACCESSIBILITY CODE
9-15-1: ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Village Clerk of Village of Monee, being marked and designated as the
Illinois Accessibility Code, current edition, as published by the Illinois Capital Development Board, be and is hereby adopted as the Accessibility Code of
the Village of Monee, in the State of Illinois regulating and governing all spaces and elements of all applicable buildings and facilities designed,
constructed, and/or altered to assure the safety and welfare of all members of society and to be readily accessible to, and usable by, environmentally
limited persons as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Accessibility Code on file in the Office of the Village Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part hereof,
as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 9-15-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1850, 5-
23-2018)
9-15-2: REVISIONS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 400.180. Insert: The Fee Schedule as set forth in the building code of the Village established in Table 1 entitled Schedule of Permit Fees, shall
apply to all work.
Section 400.210 Code Terms: Administrative Authority as used in this code means the Building Official of the Village of Monee.
Section 400.310.c.7 Signage: Delete $100 and insert 250
(Ord. 1850, 5-23-2018)
Title 10
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND MAP
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND MAP ORDINANCE. (Ord. 461, 4-13-1977)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 226/348
It is the purpose of this chapter:
A. To adopt and designate an official map.
B. To adopt and designate other standards governing future development and redevelopment of the village.
C. To adopt, establish and help implement an official comprehensive plan.
D. To provide for the filing of copies of such maps and standards in the office of the village clerk and recorder of deeds of Will County for the information
of the public. (Ord. 461, 4-13-1977)
10-1-3: MAPS AND STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Future maps and standards adopted by reference as amendments to this chapter shall be attached to ordinance 461, on file in the office of the village
clerk, incorporated herein by reference, and identified by the following statement marked or stamped thereon:
Adopted by reference as a part of the Official Comprehensive Plan and Map Ordinance passed on April 13, 1977 by the President and Board of
Trustees of the Village of Monee, Illinois.
(Ord. 461, 4-13-1977)
10-1-4: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter, the official comprehensive plan and all maps and standards adopted herein shall be applicable to land situated within the corporate limits
and contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality. (Ord. 461, 4-13-
1977)
10-1-5: ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND OFFICIAL MAP:
A. Plan: The plan attached to ordinance 461, on file in the office of the village clerk, entitled general development plan, is hereby adopted and
designated as the official comprehensive plan of the village of Monee, Illinois. (Ord. 461, 4-13-1977; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Map: The official map of the corporate area of the village and contiguous unincorporated area, attached to ordinance 461, on file in the office of the
village clerk, is hereby adopted and designated as the official map of the village of Monee.
C. Contents Of Map: Such map may show existing and proposed: 1) thoroughfares and other public ways; 2) natural watercourses; 3) stormwater
drainage, sanitary sewerage and water supply systems and related appurtenances; 4) sites of parks, schools and other public grounds; 5) future
annexations, and recommended zoning; and 6) building setbacks along streets and watercourses. No proposed capital improvement shall be
depicted on the official map unless the public agency having jurisdiction has committed itself by official action to its intended acquisition of the
designated sites, as to their approximate location and area. (Ord. 461, 4-13-1977)
10-1-6: ADOPTION OF STANDARDS:
Standards for the following items as set out in the subdivision regulations and zoning regulations of the village are hereby incorporated by reference and
by reference thereto specifically made a part of this official comprehensive plan and shall be known as the official standards of the village:
A. Streets and sidewalks.
B. Sanitary sewerage.
C. Stormwater drainage.
D. Water supply.
E. Gas, electric and telephone utilities.
F. Street lighting.
G. Land uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 227/348
H. Public ways, parks, playgrounds, school sites and other public grounds. (Ord. 461, 4-13-1977)
10-1-7: USE IN OTHER ORDINANCES:
The map and standards adopted under sections 10-1-4, 10-1-5, and 10-1-6 of this chapter are hereby adopted by reference to their titles in other
ordinances which regulate the development of the village without further filing or publication, except where the statutes require otherwise. (Ord. 461, 4-
13-1977)
10-1-8: AMENDMENTS:
A. Initiation Of Proposed Amendments: Either the plan commission or the village board of trustees may initiate proposed amendments to this chapter,
including such previously printed maps and standards this chapter has adopted by reference.
B. Refer To Plan Commission: A proposed amendment initiated by the village board of trustees shall be referred to the plan commission for
consideration and recommendation thereon. The village board of trustees may require the plan commission to return its recommendation within
ninety (90) days of the date of submission. If not so returned, the village board of trustees may proceed with arrangements for holding a public
hearing on the proposed amendment and its adoption in the same manner as if the plan commission had made its recommendation.
C. Public Hearing; Notice: The village board of trustees, upon receipt of a proposed amendment or a recommendation from the plan commission, shall
schedule a public hearing thereon before either the village board of trustees or the plan commission. Not less than fifteen (15) days' notice of the
time and place of the hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the village and in the county in which the
incorporated or unincorporated land affected by the proposed amending ordinance is located. At least three (3) copies of the proposed ordinance
and any maps or standards it would adopt by reference shall be placed on file in the office of the village clerk at least fifteen (15) days before the
hearing. The notice shall state the hours during which the filed copies will be available for examination by interested persons.
D. Conduct Of Hearing: The hearing shall be informal. Proponents and opponents of the proposed amendment shall be given an opportunity to be
heard. Their statements may be made orally, be submitted in writing, or both. The hearing, if not concluded, may be recessed to a time and place
announced at the hearing or stated later in a notice published in the same newspaper that carried the original notice no less than five (5) days before
the recessed date.
E. Action By Village Board Of Trustees: The village board of trustees shall consider the views expressed and information derived from the hearing along
with the recommendations of the plan commission, and, within ninety (90) days after the conclusion of the hearing, shall either adopt the amending
ordinance in whole or in part, or reject it. If within ninety (90) days no formal action is taken by the village board of trustees on the amendment, it may
not thereafter act on the amendment without again complying with the requirements of notice and hearing specified in subsections C and D of this
section. (Ord. 461, 4-13-1977; amd. 1999 Code)
10-1-9: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
Provisions of this chapter, including such maps and standards this chapter adopted by reference, which are incorporated by reference in other
regulatory ordinances, shall be administered and enforced by the officers designated in such regulatory ordinances. Those provisions of this chapter not
incorporated in other ordinances shall be enforced by the building inspector. (Ord. 461, 4-13-1977)
10-1-10: AVAILABILITY OF COPIES:
The village clerk shall keep in his office at least three (3) copies of this chapter, including such maps and standards as are incorporated herein by
reference, and any amendment thereof, for inspection by interested persons. The foregoing copies of this chapter shall be in addition to the original
copy which the statutes require the village clerk to keep as a part of his official record of enacted ordinances. The village clerk shall also make available
copies of this chapter as a part of the subdivision regulations for purchase. (Ord. 461, 4-13-1977)
10-1-11: PENALTY:
A violator of any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day a violation is committed or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 461, 4-13-1977; amd. 1999 Code)
10-1-12: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This official comprehensive plan and map chapter, and such maps and standards this chapter may adopt by reference, and any amendment thereof,
shall become effective following:
A. Compliance with the procedural steps and requirements for adopting amendments set forth in section 10-1-8 of this chapter;
B. Passage, approval and publication of ordinance 461, codified in this chapter, as provided by law;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 228/348
C. Filing of a notice of such adoption with the county recorder of deeds; and
D. Expiration of ten (10) days following such filing. (Ord. 461, 4-13-1977)
Chapter 2
AMENDMENTS TO OFFICIAL PLAN AND MAP
10-2-1: AMENDMENT TO OFFICIAL PLAN AND MAPS WITH AND WITHOUT AIRPORT SCENARIO:
A. Preambles Incorporated: The preambles set forth in ordinance 981 on file in the office of the village clerk are incorporated herein as if set forth in full.
B. Amended Plan And Maps Adopted: The proposed amended comprehensive plan and maps with and without airport scenario, attached to ordinance
981 on file in the office of the village clerk, of the corporate area of the village of Monee and contiguous unincorporated area, entitled "future land use
map without airport scenario" and "future land use map with airport scenario", is hereby adopted and designated as the official amended
comprehensive plan and maps of the village of Monee, pursuant to authority granted by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-6 et seq.
C. Declaration Of Amendment: The official comprehensive plan and maps of the village heretofore adopted, and any amendments thereto, are hereby
declared to be amended hereby.
D. Original Ordinance Amended1: Ordinance 461 entitled "an ordinance adopting an official comprehensive plan, official map and standards governing
the development of the village of Monee" is hereby amended by the adoption of the new official comprehensive plan and maps, with and without
airport scenario, as set forth on exhibit A attached to ordinance 981 on file in the office of the village clerk, and made a part hereof. All other
provisions of said ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
E. Separability: Any provisions of this ordinance held invalid shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions.
F. Recording, Effective Date: The village clerk is directed to record a certified copy of this section with the recorder of deeds of Will County, upon its
adoption, and this section shall become effective upon the expiration of ten (10) days after the date of said recording. (Ord. 981, 7-23-1997)
10-2-2: WEST SECTOR GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A. Amendment To The Village Of Monee Comprehensive Plan: The west sector growth management plan dated October 30, 2009, prepared by Teska
Associates, Inc., is hereby adopted in its entirety and identified by the following stamp:
Adopted by reference as part of the Comprehensive Plan and Map Ordinance of the Village of Monee, Will County, Illinois.
The west sector growth management plan is attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part of this section.
B. Availability Of Copies: The west sector growth management plan shall be available for inspection by interested persons. (Ord. 1521, 12-9-2009)
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-1-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the people;
B. To divide the village into zones or districts restricting and creating therein the locations, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of
building structures and land for residential, commercial, industrial and other specified uses;
C. To protect the character and the stability of the residential, commercial and industrial areas within the village and to promote the orderly and
beneficial development of such areas;
D. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 229/348
E. To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light and
air, and to protect the public health;
F. To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for residential, commercial, industrial or other uses within such areas;
G. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein;
H. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
I. To prevent additions to, or alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations
imposed hereunder;
J. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off street parking of
motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
K. To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards, in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
L. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use
and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them;
M. To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the village;
N. To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of
desirable development in each district;
O. To define and limit powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein;
P. To ensure and facilitate the preservation of sites, areas and structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff.
2-22-1997)
11-1-2: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
The following rules shall be observed and applied in the interpretation of this title, except when the text clearly indicates otherwise.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense;
B. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and, the plural shall include the singular;
C. The masculine gender shall include the feminine gender and neuter;
D. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and are not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive;
E. The word "lot" shall include plot and parcel;
F. The words "buildings and/or structures" shall include all nonliving improvements upon the land;
G. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and/or "occupied for or by";
H. The phrase "including, but not limited to, and following" and/or "shall include, but not be limited to, the following", shall define examples selected to
illustrate the interpretation and/or requirements of this title; such examples are not mutually exclusive and the final interpretation shall be reserved for
the village board of trustees;
I. The word "person" shall include the words "association", "corporation", "estate", "governmental agency", "individual", "joint venture", "partnership",
"venture", and/or any other legal entity;
J. All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot; if a fraction is one-half foot (1/2') or less, the integral foot next below shall be taken;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 230/348
K. Any words not defined as follows may be construed in their generally accepted meanings as defined in the most recent publication of Webster's
Dictionary; and
L. The words and terms set forth herein under section 11-1-3, "Definitions", of this chapter wherever they occur in this title, shall be interpreted as herein
defined. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms when used in this title shall have the meanings set forth below, except where otherwise specifically indicated:
ABANDONMENT: To cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume, but excluding temporary or short term interruptions to a use or
activity during periods of remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility, or during normal periods of vacation or seasonal
closure. Abandonment of property and/or the use thereof shall be determined by, but not limited to, the following: nonpayment of property taxes, lack of
general maintenance and/or lack of required utilities.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building located on the same zoning lot as the principal building used for activities designated as a
permitted accessory use under the provisions of this title, which are customarily incidental and/or subordinate to the principal use established,
conducted, and/or maintained on said lot.
ACCESSORY USE: A building or use which:
A. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use.
B. Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use served.
C. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served.
D. Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or potential use served with the single exception of such accessory off street parking
facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the building or use served.
E. Is under the same ownership and control as the principal structure or use.
ADJACENT: Lying near or in the immediate vicinity.
ADJOINING: Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near.
ADULT BOOKSTORE AND/OR VIDEO STORE: An establishment having as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter, and/or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, tapes, records or other forms of visual or audio
representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BUSINESS: Any establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade or business activity in a use such as, but not
limited to, the following: adults only bookstores, adults only motion picture theaters, adult entertainment centers, rap parlors, adults only nightclubs or
adults only saunas, where explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
ADULT CARD, GIFT, OR NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade items such as cards,
games, articles of clothing and novelties which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: Synonymous with "adult business", as defined herein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER: An enclosed building or part of an enclosed building, which contains one or more coin operated mechanisms
which when activated permit a customer to view a live nude person or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view the human male or female
genitalia; pubic hair; buttocks; perineum; anal or pubic regions; or, female breast, at or below the areola thereof. In addition, the viewing of a live person,
in the above described manner, after paying of any admission or fee for the viewing of the same activity.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building or any portion or portions thereof having a capacity from six (6) to fifty (50) persons,
where, for any form of consideration (including a coin or token inserted into a coin or token operated projector, video screen, or other image producing
device), patrons may view films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic electronic reproductions in which a significant or
substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of materials that are distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: a) offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration,
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other electronic or photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible
from the public right of way which advertises the availability of such transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions; or b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than eight (8) hours; or c) allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping
room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than eight (8) hours. "Rent" and "subrent", when used in reference to an adult motel, shall
mean the act of permitting a sleeping room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE: An establishment in which electronic, electrical or mechanical still or slide projectors, motion picture projectors,
video screens, closed circuit television transmissions or other image producing devices operable by insertion of a coin or token or for other consideration
are maintained for presentation of images to five (5) or fewer persons at a single time per such device and where the images presented are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 231/348
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons where, for any form of consideration, patrons
may view closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar electronic or photographic reproductions in
which a significant or substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of materials that are distinguished by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER: A public or private establishment which: a) features topless dancers, strippers, "go-go" dancers, male or female impersonators,
lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows; b) not infrequently features entertainers who display "specified anatomical areas"; or c) features entertainers who
by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron or features
entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in, explicit simulation of "specified sexual activities".
ADULTS ONLY: Any items or activities emphasizing, depicting, describing or relating to nudity, explicit sexual conduct (whether autoerotic, heterosexual,
homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity.
ADULTS ONLY BOOKSTORE: Any adults only establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films
for sale or viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or other coin operated means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their principal emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to nudity, explicit sexual conduct (whether autoerotic, heterosexual,
homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity. Any establishment, having adults only items as a substantial or significant portion of its
stock, that sells or displays adults only items for sale to patrons therein.
ADULTS ONLY MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building used regularly and routinely for presenting adults only material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to nudity, explicit sexual conduct (whether autoerotic, heterosexual,
homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity, for observation by patron therein.
ADULTS ONLY NIGHTCLUB: An establishment or place either occasionally or primarily in the business of featuring topless dancers, go-go dancers,
exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers, where explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is
explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
ADULTS ONLY SAUNA: An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing a steam bath and/or massage services, where explicit sexual
conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
ADVERTISING: See definition of Sign.
AERIAL OR ANTENNA: Any structure erected for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio and television signals or to support equipment designed
for such purposes.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure existing or erected on land used principally for agricultural purposes, with the
exception of dwelling units.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and
animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of
any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activity. Included are truck farming, poultry farming, beekeeping, raising of
fruit and berries, and the selling of agricultural products, but shall not include mechanized industrial animal farms. "Agriculture" shall not include the
commercial feeding of garbage to swine or other animals.
ALLEY: A public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property.
Frontage on the alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this title related to frontage on a dedicated street.
ALTERATION: Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a building or structure, and/or any movement of a structure from one location
or position to another.
AMENDMENT: Any revision and/or addition to the provisions of this title including the village's official zoning map, as officially adopted by the village
board of trustees.
AMENDMENT MAP: Commonly referred to as "rezoning". This type of amendment shall include all proposals for additions, alterations, deletions, and/or
other substantive changes to the delineation of zoning districts on the village's official zoning map.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation, or treatment of domestic animals.
ANIMALS, DOMESTIC: Any animals domesticated by people to live in a tame condition such as dogs, cats, birds (excluding poultry), and the like.
ANIMALS, EXOTIC: Animals other than domestic animals that normally live in a state of nature (the wild), and are not ordinarily tame or domesticated,
and are maintained and housed in accordance with all local, state and federal laws and regulations.
ANTENNA: Equipment that transmits or receives broadcast signals including, but not limited to, whip antennas, panel antennas and microwave dishes,
but not including supporting structures, satellite dishes or antennas used solely for purposes such as ham radio, citizens band radio or municipal service
communication.
APARTMENT: See definition of Dwelling Unit.
APARTMENT BUILDING: See definition of Dwelling, Multiple-Family.
ARTERIAL STREET: See definition of Road Classifications.
AUDITORIUM: A room, hall or building made a part of a church, theater, school, recreation building, or building assigned to the gathering of people as
an audience to hear lectures, plays and other presentations.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing more than two (2) automobiles, providing space, water,
equipment or soap for the washing of automobiles by the operator or customer. Production line methods using mechanical devices are permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 232/348
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: The general repair, engine rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service; such as body, frame and
fender straightening and repair and painting of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor service, to automobiles but excluding any operation specified under
"automobile repair, major".
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail to the public, of automobile fuels
stored only in underground tanks and located wholly within the lot lines; lubricating oil or grease for the operation of automobiles; and the sale and
installation of tires, batteries, other minor accessories, and minor auto repair, but not including a bulk plant, conduct of major auto repairs, automobile
wrecking, automobile sales or automobile laundries; provided, however, that the washing of individual's automobiles where no chain conveyor is
employed may be included.
AWNING: A rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building or overhangs the public way.
BANQUET HALL: A building, or portion thereof, primarily intended to accommodate large groups of diners on special occasions.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below lot grade.
BASEMENT, SUBGRADE: That portion of a building which is partly underground but has at least one-half (1/2) of its average height above lot grade.
BILLBOARD: See definition of Sign, Advertising (Billboard).
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, shorelines of waterways,
municipal boundary lines, township lines, or county lines.
BOOTH: Any enclosure that is specifically offered to patrons of an adult business for the private viewing of any adults only item or movie. Said definition
does not include enclosures that are used as private offices by any operator, employee or agent for attending to the tasks of their employment and are
not offered for use by the public.
BUILDABLE AREA: The area of a lot remaining after the minimum open space and/or yard requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure built, used, designed, or intended for the support, shelter, protection, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of
any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. When a building is divided into separate parts by unpierced fire or party walls extending
continuously from the ground through all stories to and above the roof, each part shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING, ATTACHED: A building sharing a common wall and/or roof, floor and/or structural component with an adjacent building.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by an open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the sidewalk level, or its equivalent established grade opposite the center from the front of a building to
the highest point of the underside of the ceiling beams, in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, and to the mean level of the
underside of the rafters between the eaves and the middle of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. Where no sidewalk level has been established, the height of
a building may be measured from the mean elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the building inspector for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which a principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: Any building that is used exclusively for permitted residential uses.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The minimum distance between a street right of way and the nearest supporting member of any structure on the lot.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located on a zoning lot or located on a lot where it is intended to be temporarily
placed or affixed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or lots and their location with respect to one another and includes:
A. Height and area of buildings.
B. Location of exterior wells in relation to lot line, streets, or other buildings.
C. Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area ratio).
D. All open space allocated to buildings.
E. Amount of lot area and lot width provided per dwelling unit.
F. Lot coverage.
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time, attention, labor, and materials; or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold,
or where services are offered.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 233/348
BUSINESS STREET: See definition of Road Classifications.
CAMP: All property and/or improvements of a design and character suitable to, and used primarily for, seasonal, leisure, sporting and/or recreational
activity, commonly known as a summer or a day camp.
CANOPY: A rooflike structure projecting from a wall and supported in whole or in part by vertical supports to the ground, and erected primarily to provide
shelter from the weather.
CARPORT: An open sided, roofed automobile shelter, usually formed by extension of the roof from the side of a building.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below the curb level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not
be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories,
mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT: See definition of Guarantee Of Improvements.
CHILDCARE CENTER: Daycare centers which receive preschool or school age children, or both, for short term or extended hours of care, or out of
school hours, and which provide essential personal care, protection, supervision, training, and programs to meet the needs of the children served.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: An organization of specializing physicians or dentists or both, who have their offices in a common building. A clinic
shall not include inpatient care.
CLUB: Buildings or facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, or persons for social, educational, or recreational purposes, but not
operated for profit, excluding religious institutions.
CLUB, GUN: A facility operated primarily for recreational shooting, including trap and/or skeet shooting, by its members, guests and/or the general
public.
COLLECTOR STREET: See definition of Road Classifications.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: Land unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights of way and automobile parking lots and designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents of a planned development. Common open space may contain structures for recreational use. No area within thirty feet
(30') of any building or structure except a structure used for recreational use shall be included as common open space.
COMMUNICATION TOWER: A structure, including, but not limited to, steel towers, and equipment sheds or cabinets, the principal use of which is for
public or private wireless communication purposes, including, but not limited to, mobile domestic cellular telephone services and personal
communication services. Not included are structures used solely for purposes including, but not limited to, ham radios and citizens' band radios or
municipal services communications. The terms "communication towers" and "towers" shall be treated as synonymous.
CONDOMINIUM: A form of cooperative ownership which permits individual ownership of a specific part of a building, with common ownership of all
spaces beyond the specific apartments. Each apartment can be owned in fee simple, with no restrictions on the sale, rental, or transfer of same, other
than restrictions on all real estate. Condominiums must meet requirements of the Illinois law.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR CONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which:
A. Complies with all the regulations of this title or of any amendment hereto governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is
located; or
B. Is designed or intended for a conforming use.
CONFORMING USE: The principal and/or accessory use of property and/or improvements located on a zoning lot, which complies with the minimum
requirements, is established herein, for said zoning district in which such zoning lot is located.
CONVALESCENT HOME: See definitions of Nursing Home, Home For The Aged, Home For Ill Or Physically Infirm Persons - related definitions,
Hospital Or Sanatorium, Intermediate Care Facility, Sheltered Care Facility, and Sheltered Care Home.
CORNER LOT: See definition of Lot, Corner.
COURT: An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a building, which is totally or partially enclosed by building or buildings and is
completely open to the sky.
CUBICLE: Synonymous with "booth", as defined herein.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one
street, the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been established,
the level of the center line of the street shall be considered the "curb level".
CURB LINE: Established curb alignment or where not so established, the edge of the vehicularway shoulder.
DAY NURSERIES: Daycare centers which receive preschool age children for short term or extended hours of care, and which provide essential
personal care, protection, supervision, training and programs to meet the needs of the individual children served.
DAYCARE CENTER: Any child daycare facility receiving more than eight (8) children for daytime care during all or part of the day. The term "daycare
center" includes facilities called "childcare centers", "day nurseries", "nursery schools", "kindergartens", "play groups", and "centers or workshops for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 234/348
mentally or physically handicapped" with or without a stated educational purpose. The term does not include:
A. Kindergartens or nursery schools or other daytime programs operated by public or private elementary school systems or secondary level school
units or institutions of higher learning;
B. Facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or service, or other similar facility, where transient children are cared for temporarily while
parents or custodians of the children are occupied on the premises, or are in the immediate vicinity and readily available;
C. Any type of daycare center that is conducted on federal government premises; or
D. Special activities programs, including athletics, crafts instruction, and similar activities conducted on an organized and periodic basis by civic,
charitable, and governmental organizations.
DECK: A structure abutting a dwelling with no roof or walls except for visual partitions and railings which is constructed on piers or a foundation above
grade for use as an outdoor living area.
DEDICATED STREET: See definition of Road Classifications.
DENSITY: The relationship between the number of dwelling units and the area of a zoning lot.
DENSITY, GROSS: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total dwelling units in a development by the gross area of the tract of land upon which
the dwelling units are located.
DENSITY, NET: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total dwelling units in a development by the net area of the residential tract and permanent
open space. Streets, alleys, utilities and other nonresidential uses shall not be included.
DISTRICT: A geographical area to which a uniform set of regulations applies.
DISTRICT, HISTORIC: A geographically defined area possessing a significant concentration or continuity of landmarks, improvements, or landscape
features united by historic events or by physical development, and which area has been designated as a historic landmark district.
DISTRICT, ZONING: A portion of the territory of the village, exclusive of streets, alleys, and other public rights of way, within which certain uses of land,
premises and buildings or structures are permitted, and within which certain yards and open spaces are required and certain height and bulk limits, and
the like, are established.
DOOR: Full, complete, nontransparent closure device that obscures the view or activity taking place within the enclosure.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which is designed to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobiles
parked upon the premises.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multiple-family dwelling units, but not including hotels, boarding or lodging houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units and joined to other dwellings by party wall or walls, originally constructed
for said purposes.
DWELLING, CONVERTED: Any building which was originally designed and constructed as a one-, two- or three-family dwelling, but which has been
changed or altered by the construction of additional dwelling units to provide for more families than the original building.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling unit which is surrounded on all sides by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units, originally constructed for said purpose, and not including
converted dwellings.
DWELLING, SEMI-ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling by a garage, carport, recreation structures, or other nonresidential facility.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing accommodations for and occupied only by one family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED: A building whose principal use is residential containing one dwelling unit, sharing a wall with an adjoining
principal building, whose principal use is residential, commonly referred to as a townhouse.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED: A building whose principal use is residential, containing one dwelling unit, sharing no walls or structural
members with any other principal building.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling or apartment hotel designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having its own
permanently installed cooking and sanitary facilities.
EASEMENT: A grant by the owners of record of property and/or improvements, for the use of a portion of a zoning lot by another party for a specified
purpose, such as access, ingress, egress, and/or public utilities.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: A public, parochial, charitable or nonprofit junior college, college or university, other than trade or business schools,
including instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plant, and other incidental facilities for
students, teachers and employees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 235/348
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closet or dining alcove directly off the
principal room.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: Public, quasi-public and/or privatized contract services, dedicated to the preservation of the public safety, including, but not
limited to, police, fire, rescue and/or ambulance services, which perform a traditional public service.
ESCORT: A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers
to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Services provided by public and private utilities necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal
structure. These services include underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, stormwater drainage and
communications systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water
storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations, hydrants, etc., but not including buildings that do
not need to be in the immediate area of the uses they service.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
EXISTING USE: The use of a zoning lot or building, as defined by the corporate authorities, as of the effective date hereof.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than five (5) persons (excluding
servants), not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, but not including sororities,
fraternities or other similar organizations.
FARM: Land being used for agricultural purposes.
FARM HOMESTEAD: The building located on a farm that is the residence of the farm owner or tenant operator.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: See definition of Restaurant, Fast Food.
FENCE: Any construction of wood, metal, wire mesh, masonry or other material erected for the purpose of assuring privacy, protection or restraining
animals.
FENCE, DECORATIVE: A fence intended primarily for aesthetic purposes. Such fence shall, at fifty percent (50%) of the overall dimensions, open
affording a direct view through those portions of the fence.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence having a pattern that is greater than eighty percent (80%) permeable.
FENCE, PERIMETER: A fence which is located on or within six inches (6") of the lot line.
FENCE, SEMI-OPEN: A fence having a pattern which is between thirty percent (30%) and eighty percent (80%) permeable, commonly referred to as an
opaque fence.
FENCE, SOLID: A fence having a pattern that is less than thirty percent (30%) permeable, commonly referred to as a privacy fence.
FLOOD BASE ELEVATION: That elevation of the highest flood of record, determined by the village engineer's record of the elevations of the highest
flood at locations as indicated on the floodplain map of the village on file in the office of the village clerk. Flood base elevations at intermediate locations
shall be interpolated along the watercourse between the two (2) nearest flood base elevations, one for each, upstream and downstream. The controlling
flood base elevation for any building site shall be the same as the flood base elevation at the nearest point of the watercourse.
FLOODPLAIN: That area of land adjoining a watercourse or other body of water which has been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater.
FLOODPLAIN MAP: Any accepted engineering standards or mapping used to delineate the minimum flood base elevations for the village, and may
include the following:
A. Hydrologic Investigations Atlas, Series HA, as amended from time to time;
B. Geologic maps prepared by the Illinois state geologic survey;
C. Mapping and/or source information from the United States department of agriculture, soil conservation service;
D. Mapping and/or source information from the Will South Cook soil and water conservation district; and
E. Maps of groundwater conditions prepared by the state water survey.
FLOODPROOFING: A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, intended primarily
for the reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY: The channel of the stream or body of water and those portions of the adjoining floodplains designated by the village as necessary to carry
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 236/348
and discharge the floodwater flow of any such river, stream, or other body of water.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Floor Area Ratio): The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two (2) buildings. The "floor area of a building" shall include the basement floor area
when more than one-half (1/2) of the basement height is above the established curb level, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor space used for
mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof), penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet ten inches
(7'10") or more, interior balconies, mezzanines, enclosed porches and floor area devoted to accessory uses.
The "floor area" of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials, including, but not limited to, grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks, shall be
determined on the basis of the height of such structures in feet; ten feet (10') in height shall be deemed to be equal to one floor. If a structure measures
more than five feet (5') over such floor equivalent, it shall be construed to have an additional floor.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements): The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the
building, or portion thereof, devoted to such use, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working space such as counters, racks or
closets and any floor area devoted to detailing activities to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
However, "floor area" for the purposes of measurement for off street parking spaces shall not include: floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes
(except as otherwise noted herein), floor area devoted to off street parking or loading facilities including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space; or
mechanical or storage floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, to the production of goods, or to business or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The
floor area ratio as designated for each district when multiplied by the lot area in square feet shall determine the maximum permissible floor area of the
building or buildings on the lot.
FREEWAY: See definition of Road Classifications.
FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot or parcel directly abutting a dedicated street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building which is intended and used to store not more than four (4)
private motor vehicles, owned by members of the family or families residing upon the premises, provided that not more than one-half (1/2) of the space
may be rented for the storage of private motor vehicles of persons not residing on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of one or two (2)
car capacity may be so rented. Such a garage may be used for the storage of not more than one commercial truck having a load capacity of threefourths
(3/4) of a ton or less.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building other than a private or a storage garage where motor vehicles are equipped, repaired, serviced, hired, sold or stored.
GARAGE, STORAGE: Any building used for the storage only of motor vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements and not to transients, and where no
equipment, parts, fuel, grease or oil is sold and vehicles are not equipped, serviced, repaired, hired, or sold. No commercial motor vehicle exceeding
two (2) tons' capacity shall be stored in any storage garage.
GOLF COURSE: A public, semipublic, and/or private property and/or improvements, on which the game of golf may be played, utilizing natural hazards
and/or obstructions and including accessory buildings and/or uses thereto.
GOLF COURSE, DRIVING RANGE: A commercial establishment, designed exclusively for use by golfers wishing to practice various aspects of the
game of golf.
GOLF COURSE, MINIATURE: A commercial establishment where the game of golf is played, utilizing manmade obstructions, excluding fairways, sand
traps and other natural obstructions and/or hazards commonly found on a standard golf course.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure.
GRADE, STREET: This term shall have the same meaning as the term "curb level".
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GROUP HOME: A single dwelling unit occupied on a permanent basis by a group of unrelated staff provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with
the residents on a twenty four (24) hour basis, or available in accordance with the particular needs of the residents; is state licensed; complies with all
applicable state and village codes, regulations and ordinances, and with the zoning regulations for the R-1 or R-2 district. Group home does not include
a residence which services persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for placement is
substance or alcohol abuse, or persons whose primary reason for placement is treatment of a communicable disease.
GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS: A guarantee to the village that the requirements of this title will be met in full by a specified date. Such guarantee
can be in the form of a certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, performance bond or other form that will enable the village to obtain the use of
funds provided by the permittee to complete the required improvements in the event the permittee fails to do so.
HANDICAP: A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, impairs their ability to live
independently or a record of having such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current use
of, or addiction to, a controlled substance or treatment for the use or addiction to alcohol.
HARDSHIP: A condition that would result from the strict application of the terms of this title, provided the following criteria are met:
A. The condition is unique to the property and is not applicable generally to other property within the district;
B. The situation was not created by anyone having an interest in the property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 237/348
C. The request for a hardship variation is not based exclusively on a desire to make more money out of the property;
D. The hardship exists due to the particular physical characteristics of the property in question.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance to the highest point on the roof, as measured from finished grade level.
HOME FOR ILL OR PHYSICALLY INFIRM PERSONS: A home providing meals, shelter, assistance with personal functions, general supervision and
professional nursing assistance for persons who, because of age or physical or mental disability, are incapable of maintaining their own residence and
caring for their own needs.
HOME FOR THE AGED: Any home operated not for profit under the auspices of a religious, fraternal, charitable, or other nonprofit organization, or by a
county pursuant to an act in relation to homes for the aged, approved July 21, 19591, as heretofore, or hereafter amended, or operated not for profit
under an endowment, which through its ownership or management, and as its principal objective, provides maintenance, personal care, nursing, or
sheltered care to aged persons, and in the conduct of which provides such service or services to three (3) or more persons over sixty (60) years of age.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation or profession, practiced by a member of the family residing on the premises in connection with which there is no
indication from the exterior that the building is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. No commodity is sold upon the
premises and no commodity intended for sale or use elsewhere is stored on the premises; no more than one person is employed other than members of
the family residing on the premises; and no mechanical or electrical equipment is used except such as is permissible for purely domestic or household
purposes. A professional person may use his residence for consultation, emergency treatment or performance of religious rites. No accessory building
or garage shall be used for such home occupation. Home occupations, further, shall not utilize more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total floor
area of any one story. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood, and any need for parking of automobiles generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off street and other than in a
required front yard.
HOSPITAL OR SANATORIUM: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care for not
less than twenty four (24) hours in any week of three (3) or more nonrelated individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other
abnormal physical conditions.
HOTEL: An establishment which is open to transient guests in contradistinction to a boarding, rooming or lodging house, and is commonly known as a
hotel in the community in which it is located; and which provides customary hotel services such as maid service, the furnishing and laundering of linen,
telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture, and bellboy service.
INDUSTRIAL STREET: See definition of Road Classifications.
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY: Basic nursing care and other restorative services under periodic medical direction. Many of these services may
require skills in administration. Such facilities are for patients who have long term illness or disabilities which may have reached a relatively stable
plateau.
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT: See definition of Guarantee Of Improvements.
KINDERGARTENS: Daycare centers which receive children between the ages of four (4) and six (6) years, and which are established and
professionally operated primarily to conduct educational programs for early childhood development.
LABORATORY: See definition of Research Laboratory.
LAND USE PLAN MAP: The map adopted by the board of trustees detailing the planned usage for the village and its one and one-half (11/2) mile
jurisdiction.
LANDSCAPING: Any combination of trees, shrubs, flowers, grass or other horticultural elements, all of which are designed to enhance the visual
amenity of a property and/or to provide a screen to mitigate any objectionable aspects that may detrimentally affect adjacent land; it may include
reshaping the land by moving the earth, as well as preserving the original vegetation or adding vegetation.
LIVABLE FLOOR AREA: All internal floor area of a dwelling unit excluding basements, garages and utility rooms.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE OR BERTH, OFF STREET: An open, hard surfaced area of land other than a street or a public way, the principal
use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue interference with public streets and alleys.
Such space shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width, fifty feet (50') in length, and fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of access aisles and
maneuvering space.
LOT: A parcel of land which is either a lot of record or a zoning lot.
LOT AREA, GROSS: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a
duly recorded lake or river.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
LOT COVERAGE: That area or portion of a zoning lot covered by all buildings, structures and paved, impervious surfaces, related to the principal land
access.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT, FLAG: A zoning lot which does not front on, or otherwise abut, a public street and/or right of way.
LOT FRONTAGE: The linear measurement of a lot line, abutting a street commonly referred as frontage.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot (see illustration referred to in section 11-13-2 of this title, and attached to ordinance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 238/348
961, on file in the office of the village clerk).
LOT LINE: See definition of Property Line.
LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE: The boundary of a corner lot that abuts a dedicated street other than the front lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line abutting a dedicated street. In the case of a corner lot, the lot line abutting the street having the least length shall be the
front lot line. In the case of a through lot, the zoning administrator shall establish the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is more distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to, the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds or a parcel of
land.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH (DOUBLE FRONTAGE): A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel public streets, and which is not a
corner lot.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at the narrowest width within the first thirty feet (30') of lot depth
immediately in back of the front yard setback line.
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land location within a single block, which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot or lots" may or may not
coincide with a lot of record.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: See definition of Road Classifications.
MANUFACTURED HOME: There are basically three (3) types of manufactured homes:
Assembled Type: Assembled homes are constructed on site, utilizing various sections such as walls, roofs, etc., which have been constructed off
site. Assembled homes are always placed on a permanent foundation.
Mobile Type: Mobile homes are constructed off site with features permitting them to be transported. Mobility is inherent in their construction
regardless of whether or not they are subsequently placed on a permanent foundation. The construction of the mobile type of single-family
residence is regulated by the federal department of housing and urban development (HUD) and must comply with the national manufactured home
construction and safety standards. Mobile type homes may be used with or without a permanent foundation. These standards apply uniformly
across the country and it is illegal for a state or local unit of government to impose additional construction requirements. Mobile type homes will
have a red metal label permanently affixed to the rear of each towable unit.
Modular Type: Modular homes are constructed off site, in large blocks, with no built in features permitting them to be transported. They are
transported in sections by a flatbed truck for construction on site. Modular homes are always on a permanent foundation. The construction of
modular type dwelling units is regulated by the Illinois department of public health. Unlike the mobile type homes, the local unit of government may
require additional items other than the minimum state requirements to be incorporated into the construction of modular homes. Modular type
homes shall be placed on a permanent foundation. An Illinois approved modular dwelling will have a yellow seal on the electrical panel box of the
home. Modular type units manufactured at a factory in Indiana will not bear an Illinois seal, but rather will contain the seal of approval from the
state of Indiana. Modular type units are treated as a single-family detached dwelling.
MARQUEE: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building and overhangs the public way.
MASSAGE PARLORS: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with "specified sexual activities" or
where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas" or massages the
"specified anatomical areas" of the customer unless prescribed by a physician or registered physical and massage therapist. The definition of "sexually
oriented business" shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital nor by a licensed hospital nor by a licensed physician, surgeon,
chiropractor or osteopathy, nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor
by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate story between the floor and ceiling of a main story and extending over only part of the main floor.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or tract of land developed with facilities for locating three (3) or more mobile homes, provided each mobile home
contains a kitchen, flush toilet and shower or bath and that such mobile home park shall be for use only by nontransient dwellers remaining continuously
for more than one month, whether or not a charge is made. It shall not include a sales lot in which motor vehicles or unoccupied trailers are parked for
the purpose of inspection or sale.
MORATORIUM: A temporary halt and/or restriction on specified development activity and/or an application process involving such activity.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on
a single zoning lot and designed for use by transient automobile tourists. A motel furnishes customary hotel services such as maid service, and
laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture. In a motel less than fifty percent (50%) of the living
and sleeping accommodations are occupied or designed for occupancy by persons other than transient persons.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor trailer, truck trailer, trailer or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR AND MINOR: See definition of Automobile Repair, Major and Automobile Repair, Minor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 239/348
NIGHTCLUB: An establishment serving food and/or liquor and providing music and space for dancing by patrons only. A nightclub shall not include an
"adult business".
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure or portion thereof lawfully existing on January 1, 1991, or at the time of
adoption of any amendment thereto, which:
A. Was designed, erected or structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. Does not comply with the bulk and other requirements of this title in the zoning district in which the building or structure is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land on January 1, 1991, or at the time of adoption of any amendment thereto,
and which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING VACANT LOTS OF RECORD: Vacant lots of record which do not meet the required lot size requirements of the district in which
they are located.
NOXIOUS MATERIAL AND/OR ODOR: A material and/or odor, which is capable of causing injury and/or irritation to living organisms, by chemical
reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical and/or economic well being of individuals.
NUDE, SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity is provided for money or any
form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
NUDITY: The display of the human male or female genitalia; pubic hair; buttocks; perineum; anal or pubic regions; female breast, at or below the areola
thereof, with no covering or with a less than fully opaque covering; or, male genitalia, in a discernible turgid state, with or without covering.
NURSERY SCHOOLS: Daycare centers which receive children between the ages of two (2) and six (6) years and which are established and
professionally operated primarily for educational purposes to meet the development needs of the children served.
NURSING HOME: A private home, institution, building, residence, or other place whether operated for profit or not, or a county home for the infirm and
chronically ill operated pursuant to the county home act2, as now or hereafter amended, or any similar institution operated by a political subdivision of
the state which provides, through its ownership or management, maintenance, personal care, or nursing for three (3) or more persons, not related to the
applicant or owners by blood or marriage, or any similar facility in which maintenance is provided to three (3) or more persons who by reason of illness
or physical infirmity require personal care or nursing.
OBSCENE: Any material or performance is obscene if:
A. The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and
B. The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or
lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
C. Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value3.
OFF STREET LOADING: See definition of Loading And Unloading Space Or Berth, Off Street.
OPEN SALES LOT: A lot or parcel of land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, or trading of all goods and commodities and including the
storage of same prior to sale or exchange.
OPEN SPACE: Any land developed as yards, parks, recreational areas including community centers, and landscaped green areas and exclusive of
areas developed for off street parking.
OPERATOR: For purposes of an "adult business", as defined herein, any person (whether said persons be an individual, partner, corporation, joint stock
company, fiduciary, officer, director, stockholder, employee, or manager), which conducts, maintains or owns any adult business.
OWNER: Any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity having possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession in land, buildings or
possessions.
PARCEL: Contiguous land in one ownership.
PARK: Land used for active or passive recreation, owned or controlled by a local park district, school district, county forest preserve district,
homeowners' association, the village or another governmental entity or nonprofit organization.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a public way or street, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of
private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street or public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger
automobiles and commercial vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity, and available to the public, whether for compensation, free, or as an
accommodation to clients or customers.
PARKING LOT: Public or private land intended for the use as a facility for parking motor vehicles. Parking may be with or without fee.
PARKING, OFF STREET: A permitted accessory use, subject to the provisions of chapter 11 of this title. Off street accessory parking shall include those
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 240/348
areas set aside for the temporary placement and/or storage of motor vehicles, in conjunction with permitted principal and accessory uses, and
conditional uses, located on a zoning lot.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a public or private parking area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, nine feet by
twenty feet (9' x 20') exclusive of access drives for the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons'
capacity.
PARTY WALL: A common wall which extends from its footing below grade to the underside of the floor and divides buildings.
PATRON: For purposes of an "adult business", as defined herein, any customer, patron or visitor to an adult business who is not employed by any
operator of said establishment.
PERFORMANCE BOND: See definition of Guarantee Of Improvements.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion established to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or
glare or heat generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. The more frequently used performance criteria include the following:
Active To Intense Burning: The rate of combustion described by material that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.
Examples include sawdust, powdered magnesium and pyroxylin.
Closed Cup Flashpoint: The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid, under prescribed conditions, will give off a flammable vapor which
will burn momentarily.
Decibel: A unit which describes the sound pressure level or intensity of sound. A sound meter is calibrated in decibels.
Detonable Material: A material which decomposes by detonation. Such material includes explosives, unstable compounds and fissionable matter.
Earthborne Vibration: The periodic displacement, measured in inches of earth.
Fireproof Container: An enclosure of steel or concrete but not lead or other low melting metals or alloys, unless the lead or low melting metal or
alloys are completely encased in steel.
Flashpoint: The lowest temperature at which a flammable liquid will momentarily burn under prescribed conditions. The tag flashpoint testers shall
be authoritative.
Foot-Candle: A unit of illumination; technically, the illumination at all points one foot (1') distance from a uniform power source of one candlepower.
Free Burning: Implies a rate of combustion described by a material which burns actively, and easily supports combustion.
Frequency: Signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
Impact Noise: A short duration sound such as those from a foregoing hammer or punch press.
Impulsive Noise: A sound which is no longer than two (2) seconds in duration, followed by no less than a two (2) second rest.
Intense Burning: A rate of combustion described by a material that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.
Microcurie: One-millionth of a curie, which is a standard unit of radioactivity.
Moderate Burning: Implies a rate of combustion described by a material which supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.
Noxious Matter: A material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects
upon the physical or economic well being of individuals.
Octave Band: A prescribed interval of sound frequencies which classifies sound according to its pitch.
Odor Threshold: The lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that will produce an olfactory response in a human being.
Odorous Matter: Any matter or material that yields an odor which is offensive in any way.
Particulate Matter: Material, other than water, which is suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid.
Preferred Frequency Octave Band: A standardized series of octave bands prescribed by the USASI in S.I.6-1967, preferred frequencies for
acoustical measurements.
Ringelmann Chart: A chart on which is described in the U.S. bureau of mines information circular 6888 or its successor, and on which are
illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke.
Ringelmann Number: The shade of smoke as it appears on the standard Ringelmann chart published by the U.S. bureau of mines information
circular no. 8333 (1967).
SCF (Standard Cubic Feet): The measure of the volume of a gas, at any other conditions, reduced to one thousand four hundred seventy three
(1,473) pounds per square inch absolute and sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F).
Slow Burning Or Incombustible: Implies materials which do not in themselves constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material
which will not ignite, nor actively support combustion during an exposure for five (5) minutes to a temperature of one thousand two hundred
degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F), shall be designated "incombustible".
Smoke: Small gas borne particles, other than water, that form a visible plume in the air.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 241/348
Sound Level Meter: An electronic instrument which includes a microphone, an amplifier and an output meter which measures noise and sound
pressure levels in a specified manner. It may be used with the octave band analyzer that permits measuring the sound pressure level in discrete
octave bands.
Sound Level Of An Operation Or Use: The intensity of sound, measured in decibels, produced by such operation or use.
Sound Pressure Level: The intensity of a sound measured in decibels mathematically described as twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base-10
of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbar.
Threshold Limit Value: The maximum allowable airborne concentration of toxic material, as established by the American Conference Of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
Toxic Matter: Material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts.
United States Of American Standards Institute (USASI): A national organization promulgating authoritative standards in any technical field.
Formerly American Standards Association.
Vibration: The period displacement or oscillation of the earth.
PERMANENT OPEN SPACE: A contiguous land area that is designed for educational, religious, recreational or institutional purposes, or such land
which is recommended for such designation by the village at or before the time of approval of a subdivision or planned development.
PERMITTED USE: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations,
and standards of such district.
PERMITTEE: The person who receives the zoning certificate.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of a size sufficient to create its own environment, controlled by a single
landowner or by a group of landowners in common agreement as to control, to be developed as a single entity, the environment of which is compatible
with adjacent parcels, and the intent of the zoning district or districts in which it is located; the developer may be granted relief from specific land use
regulations and design standards and may be awarded certain premiums in return for assurances of an overall quality of development, including any
specific features which will be of exceptional benefit to the community as a whole and which would not otherwise be required by this title. See chapter 3,
"Planned Unit Developments", of this title.
PLAT: A site plan, map plan, and/or layout, showing the legal boundaries of a subdivision, as well as the legal boundaries of each zoning lot proposed
for the development, and which fully complies with the minimum requirements specified by the village of Monee subdivision regulations4, as amended,
and the Illinois plat act5.
PORCH: A roofed over structure projecting out from the walls of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. A principal use may be "permitted" or
"special".
PRIVATE ROAD: See definition of Road Classifications.
PROPERTY LINE: An imaginary line at the edge or boundary of a zoning lot or line at the boundary of a lot of record.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: A publicly owned area; including, but not limited to the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, waterways, parkways
and streets.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm or corporation duly authorized to furnish under regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph,
transportation, water or sewerage systems.
PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public thoroughfare.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including freight depots, or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
RAP PARLOR: An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing nonprofessional conversation or similar services for adults, where
explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: An institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings, and other such activities,
including, but not limited to, accessory uses such as schools, child daycare centers, bingo parlors and halls. The term "church" shall not carry a secular
connotation and shall include buildings in which religious services of any denomination are held.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESERVOIR PARKING: Off street parking spaces or lot areas allocated to temporary standing motor vehicles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.
RESIDENTIAL STREET: See definition of Road Classifications.
RESTAURANT: A business where the dispensing of edible foodstuff and/or beverage on the premises is the principal business operation; including a
cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom and dining room, but not including a drive-in or fast food restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: A restaurant that dispenses foodstuff and/or beverage to persons in parked or stopped motor vehicles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 242/348
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: A restaurant whose principal business is the dispensing of edible foodstuffs and/or beverages in disposable containers to
be eaten on the premises or taken out. This type of restaurant is usually self-service.
RETAIL, RETAIL STORE: Sale to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and not for resale.
RIDING STABLE, PUBLIC: A building where horses are kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
RIGHT OF WAY: Land dedicated for street purposes.
RIGHT OF WAY, PRIVATE: A strip of land, privately owned, and primarily intended to be occupied by a street, alley, sidewalk and/or public utility line.
RIGHT OF WAY, PUBLIC: A strip of land dedicated for public use, and primarily intended to be occupied by a street, alley, sidewalk and/or a public utility
line.
ROAD CLASSIFICATIONS: The status of freeways, arterial streets and secondary arterial streets shall be determined by such designation on the land
use plan map. For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply:
Arterial Street: A trafficway generally providing two (2) lanes going each direction. A median strip may or may not be present. Arterial streets are
characterized by moderate to high speed travel, possible limitation on access to adjoining property owners and generally serve as vehicle
transportation routes within a region.
Business Street: A street within a business district or on the boundary of a business district. A business street may also be an arterial street,
secondary arterial street or collector street or major thoroughfare.
Collector Street: A street which performs the function of linking the various points of vehicular access along its route and delivering such traffic to
an arterial or secondary arterial street.
Dedicated Street: A street where the maintenance responsibility has been accepted by the federal, state, county, township or village governments.
The dedication of land for street purposes does not constitute a dedicated street, such land must be improved with a roadway, that is suitable for
and accepted by a unit of government as a dedicated street.
Freeway Or Expressway: A trafficway providing at least two (2) lanes going each direction with a median strip preventing crossover between the
two (2) lanes. Freeways are characterized by high speed travel, limited access to adjoining property owners and generally serve as vehicle
transportation routes within an urbanized area or between urban areas or states.
Industrial Street: A street developed to serve an industrial district.
Major Thoroughfare: A trafficway with at least two (2) lanes in each direction. A major thoroughfare may or may not be a freeway, arterial street,
secondary arterial street, or collector street.
Private Road: A trafficway not maintained or owned by a governmental entity.
Residential Street: A dedicated street, within a residential zoning district, excluding freeways, arterial streets and secondary arterial streets.
Secondary Arterial Street: A trafficway providing one or two (2) lanes in each direction. A median strip is rarely present. Secondary arterial streets
are characterized by moderate speed travel (higher speeds may be allowed in sparsely populated areas), residential access is discouraged and
the length of such streets is limited.
Street: Any of the following may also be termed a street: freeway, arterial street, secondary arterial street, collector street, dedicated street,
residential street, business street, industrial street.
For the purposes of this title, freeways, arterial streets, secondary arterial streets, collector streets, major thoroughfares, residential streets,
business streets and industrial streets may meet the requirements for dedicated streets.
ROOM: For purposes of section 5-8A-3 herein, synonymous with "booth", as defined herein.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ACTIVITY: Flagellation or torture by or upon a nude person; a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume. In
addition, the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained with the intent to stimulate or arouse sexually the initiator and/or the
recipient.
SCHOOL: A public or private institution which offers instruction in any of the branches of learning and study comparable to that taught in the public
schools under the Illinois school laws, including preschool, kindergarten, elementary school, and junior and senior high schools, but excluding trade,
business or commercial schools, not providing residential accommodations.
SECONDARY ARTERIAL STREET: See definition of Road Classifications.
SELL: Includes to solicit or receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
SETBACK: The distance between any exterior lot lines and either the principal structure or the accessory structures and uses.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Ultimate sex acts (whether autoerotic, heterosexual, homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity. In addition,
physical contact, intended to stimulate or arouse sexually the initiator and/or the recipient, with a person's unclothed genitalia, buttocks, perineum, anal
or pubic regions, or female breast.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT: A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form
of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of "specified sexual activities", when one
or more of the persons is nude or seminude. The definition of "sexually oriented businesses" shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 243/348
therapy.
SHELTERED CARE FACILITY: A facility which provides care and assistance, supervision overnight, and a suitable activities program. Provisions are
made for medical care as necessary. Such facilities are for individuals who do not need nursing care, but do need personal care assistance, supervision,
and/or oversight in meeting their daily personal needs.
SHELTERED CARE HOME: Any county sheltered care home or a sheltered care home operated as part of a county nursing home pursuant to the
county shelter care and detention home act6 or a private boarding home, institution, building, residence, or other place, whether operated for profit or
not which, through its ownership or management, provides sheltered care to three (3) or more persons who are not related to the applicant or owner by
blood or marriage, or any similar facility in which maintenance is provided to three (3) or more persons who by reason of physical infirmity require
personal care.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.
SIGN, ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD): A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN CORRIDOR: The sign corridor will include all property on both sides of I-57, within one thousand feet (1,000') of I-57, zoned either C-1, C-2, M-1
and M-2, within the village of Monee.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any sign independently mounted or mounted on a building and extending more than one foot (1') from the surface of the wall
such sign is mounted on. A single freestanding sign may have separate component signs mounted from a common supporting structure. Temporary or
mobile signs shall not be considered a freestanding sign.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted
occupation therein.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign having its own light source.
SIGN, OFFICIAL: Any sign erected by or at the direction of any governmental body.
SIGN, POLITICAL: A temporary sign supporting a candidate for public office or urging action on an issue.
SIGN SURFACE AREA: The entire area within a perimeter enclosing the outer limits of a sign face(s). A permitted sign may have two (2) faces arranged
back to back or consisting of two (2) sides of a single structure with each of the two (2) such sign faces having the maximum permitted surface areas.
SPECIAL USE: A use, either public or private, which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district or districts. After due consideration, each case, of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the
particular use at the particular location, such use may or may not be granted, subject to the terms of this title.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Are: a) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; b) acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
fellatio or sodomy; c) fondling, kissing or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas; d) flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship; e) masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; f) erotic touching, fondling or other such contact with an
animal by a human being; or g) human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in this definition.
STORAGE, OUTDOOR: The outdoor accumulation of vehicles, equipment or products, or materials for permanent or temporary holding.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding fourteen feet (14') in height shall be considered as an
additional story for each fourteen feet (14') or fraction thereof.
STORY, HALF: That portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls, are not
more than four and one-half feet (41/2') above the finished floor of such story. In the case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiplefamily
dwellings, less than three (3) stories in height, a half story in a sloping roof shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of this title. In the case
of multiple-family dwellings three (3) or more stories in height, a half story shall be counted as a story.
STREET: See definition of Road Classifications.
STREET LINE: The division line between private property and a dedicated street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as
the addition, removal, or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground
including a fence or freestanding wall. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium, detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a structure.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: A movable structure not designed for human occupancy nor for the protection of goods or chattels and not forming an
enclosure. A sign, billboard, or other advertising device detached or projecting shall be construed to be a temporary structure.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the swimming pool, maintained by an individual for the
sole use of his household and guests, without charge for admission, and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 244/348
profit, located on a lot as an accessory use to a residence.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the swimming pool, maintained and operated by a private
party for gain; by municipality or other unit of government for the general public whether or not an admission fee is charged.
TAVERN, LOUNGE, OR BAR: A building or portion thereof where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises but not including restaurants where
the principal business is serving food.
TERRACE: A level, landscaped, and/or surfaced area, also referred to as a patio, directly adjacent to a principal building at or within three feet (3') of the
finished grade and not covered by a permanent roof.
TOWNHOUSE: A type of multi-family dwelling one or two (2) stories in height, typically the living room, dining room and kitchen are on the ground floor
with sleeping rooms on the second floor. Dwelling units typically have a common side wall and are owner occupied.
TRAILER: See definition of Manufactured Home, Mobile Type.
UNDERAGE: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age, the legally minimum age at which one can purchase or view adults only items7.
UNIFIED CONTROL: The combination of two (2) or more tracts of land wherein each owner has agreed that his tract of land shall be developed as part
of a planned development and shall be subject to the control applicable to the planned development.
USE: The purposes for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which is occupied, maintained, let or leased.
USE, ACCESSORY: A use that:
A. Serves a principal structure and/or use;
B. Is customarily found as incidental to such principal structure or use;
C. Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of those occupying, working at or being served by such principal structure or use;
D. Is, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this title, located on the same zoning lot or adjoining lot under single ownership
as such principal structure or use; and
E. Is under the same ownership and control as the principal structure or use.
USE, LAWFUL: The use of any structure or land that conforms with all of the regulations of this title or any amendment hereto and which conforms with
all of the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements, as existing at the time of the enactment of this title or any amendment thereto, for the
structure or land that is being examined.
USE, NONCONFORMING: See definition of Nonconforming Use.
USED CAR LOT: A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers or trucks are displayed for sale or trade outside of buildings.
VALUE: Valuation of a building shall be the assessed valuation, or where no assessed valuation exists, its appraised valuation as converted to assessed
valuation.
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the terms of this title with respect to a specific zoning lot or group of lots where such variation is consistent with the
standards set forth in this title.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers rather than consumers.
YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as
otherwise permitted in this title yard extends along a lot line, and to a depth or width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district in which
such zoning lot is located.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A side yard which adjoins a public street.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line between the side lot lines.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard which is located immediately adjacent to another zoning lot or to an alley separating such side yard from another
zoning lot.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the president and board of trustees as the officer responsible for enforcing and administering all
requirements of this title.
ZONING CERTIFICATE: The certificate issued by the zoning administrator issued prior to the granting of a building permit, business license, or
occupancy permit certifying that all provisions of this title have been met.
ZONING DISTRICT: See definition of District, Zoning.
ZONING LOT: See definition of Lot, Zoning.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 245/348
ZONING MAP: The map, incorporated into this title as part hereof, designating zoning districts. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code;
Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999; Ord. 1086, 4-26-2000; Ord. 1106, 10-25-2000; Ord. 1126, 2-28-2001; Ord. 1370, 9-28-2005; Ord. 1484, 7-9-2008)
11-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
A. Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and application the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion and protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
B. Conflicting Laws: Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title are either more restrictive or less than comparable to conditions
imposed by any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher
standards or requirements shall govern.
C. Existing Agreements: This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations
of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the
requirements of this title shall govern.
D. Existing Violations:
1. No building, structure or use, not lawfully existing on the date when the new ordinance is adopted shall become or be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of this title and to the extent that and in any manner that, the unlawful building, structure or use is in conflict with the
requirements of this title, the building, structure or use remains unlawful hereunder.
2. Any building, structure or use established or altered in violation of the provisions of this title which was in effect at the time of establishment or
alteration of such building, structure or use shall not be validated by the adoption of this title.
E. Uses Not Specifically Permitted: Uses, other than those uses specified as permitted, in the appropriate sections of this title, shall be expressly
prohibited, except when it is determined by the village board, upon recommendation of the village plan commission, that a proposed use is similar in
nature to a use specified as a permitted or conditional use in the appropriate sections of this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-1-5: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
A. Contiguous Parcels: When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimensions to qualify for a permitted use under
the requirements of the use district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership, at the time of construction, such lots
shall be considered a single lot.
B. Existing Building Permits: Any building permit for a building or structure that does not conform with the provisions of this title that was issued prior to
the date of adoption of this title shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. No extension or reissuance of a building permit for
such buildings or structures shall be granted unless the construction has begun and is partially completed or the proposed building or structure or
use is in full compliance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-1-6: SEPARABILITY AND VALIDITY:
If any chapter, section, subsection, clause, sentence and/or other provisions of this title shall be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, said judgment shall not affect, impair, invalidate, and/or nullify the remaining provisions of this title.
The effect of said judgment and/or decree thereof shall be contained to said chapter, section, subsection, clause, sentence and/or provision immediately
involved in the controversy in which said judgment and/or decree shall be rendered. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-1-7: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. Building Construction: No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered
and no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used, occupied or arranged or designed for use or occupancy nor shall any excavating or
grading be commenced in connection with any of the above matters, except as permitted by the regulations herein which are applicable to the
zoning district in which such building, structure or land is located.
B. Alterations Or Relocation Of Buildings: Except as may otherwise be provided, all structural alterations or relocations of existing buildings occurring
hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter, shall be subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to
the zoning district in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
C. Special Uses: Where a structure and use thereof of land lawfully exists on the date when this title is adopted and is classified by this title as a special
use in the district where it is located, such use shall be considered a lawful special use. A special use permit issued in accordance with procedures
herein set forth shall be required for any expansion or major alteration of any such existing special use. If an existing special use ceases for a period
of more than six (6) months, the special use can only be reestablished under the provisions of chapter 2 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 246/348
D. Lots Of Record: Any lot of record existing on date when this title is adopted which is unable to meet the requirements of this title as to lot area, lot
width, and yard requirements shall only be used in accordance with the provisions of section 11-1-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-
1997)
11-1-8: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Public Utility Equipment: As required by statute the type or location of any poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or any other similar
distributing equipment of a public utility is exempt from the requirements of this title.
B. Agricultural District: The provisions of this title shall not be enforced so as to impose regulations or require permits with respect to land within an AG
district used strictly for agricultural purposes or with respect to the erection, maintenance, repair, or extension of buildings or structures used or to be
used entirely for agricultural purposes, except that all such buildings shall conform to the yard requirements, lot size requirements and building bulk
limitations and sign provisions of this title. All nonagricultural uses in the AG district shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this title.
C. Underground Installations: Pipe lines and other underground installations, to the extent that the same are completely buried beneath the surface of
the soil, are exempt from the requirements of this title, provided that any incidental or associated structures, installations or equipment except
markers used in connection with such pipe lines are subject to the provisions of this title.
D. Chimneys, Towers: Chimneys, parapet, walls, skylights, steeples, flag poles, smokestacks, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
monuments, water towers, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, ornamental towers and spires, wireless towers, radio transmission towers,
radar installations, telescopes, military installations of the U.S. government, necessary mechanical appurtenances and television or other antennas
may exceed the height limitations of this title.
E. Planned Developments: The board of trustees may approve a planned development including structures that exceed the height limitations of the
district in which such uses are located.
F. Building Subject To Federal Aviation Regulations: No building or structure including those listed in subsections D and E of this section which are
subject to notice under federal aviation regulations paragraph 77 shall be constructed until approved by the federal aviation administration. (Ord.
961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-2-1: ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES AND OFFICERS:
A. Generally:
1. The primary responsibilities of administering and enforcing the provisions of this title shall be vested in the following four (4) offices of the
government of the village:
Zoning administrator
Zoning board of appeals
Plan commission
Board of trustees
2. In addition to the previously mentioned administrative offices, other officials, appointees or employees of the village will be required to perform
functions as specified in this title.
3. The principal administrative functions of this title are:
Variations
Amendments (text and map)
Special use permits (including planned developments and mobile home parks)
Appeals (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
4. The members of the zoning board of appeals shall also serve as the members of the plan commission. Each body has the specific duties as
outlined in sections 11-2-3 and 11-2-4, respectively, of this chapter. (Ord. 1134, 4-25-2001)
B. Meetings Of Zoning Board And Plan Commission:
1. The plan commission and zoning board of appeals shall meet in regular session for the purpose of conducting the business of the plan
commission and the zoning board of appeals on the third Wednesday of each and every month at a time to be determined by the plan commission
and/or zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 1181, 3-27-2002)
2. In every case where the regular meeting, as scheduled above, falls on a legal holiday, the regular meeting shall be held on the day following such
holiday. (Ord. 876, 10-11-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 247/348
11-2-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator and such deputies or assistants that shall be duly appointed shall enforce the provisions of this title and in addition thereto
shall:
A. Issue all zoning certificates and make and maintain records thereof;
B. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this title;
C. Maintain permanent and current records pertaining to this title including, but not limited to, maps, amendments, special use permits, variations,
appeals and applications therefor;
D. Provide public information on all matters pertaining to this title;
E. Receive and forward to the plan commission all applications for special use permits, planned developments, mobile home parks and amendments;
F. Receive and forward to the zoning board of appeals for appeals, variations, amendments and other matters the zoning board of appeals is required to
act on under this title;
G. Receive and forward to the board of trustees all applications the board is required to act on; (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
H. Attend all meetings of the zoning board of appeals, plan commission, and board of trustees where action pertaining to this title are considered; (Ord.
961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
I. Review at intervals not to exceed one year all provisions of this title and make reports of any recommendations to the board of trustees;
J. Notify all adjacent property owners of proposed action under this title as herein required. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-2-3: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
A zoning board of appeals that existed on the effective date hereof (as established by ordinance 445 amended), pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-13-3 is hereby authorized to continue.
A. Membership:
1. Appointment: The zoning board of appeals shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the president of the village, by and with the consent
of the board of trustees of the village.
2. Term Of Office: The members of said board shall serve respectively for the following terms (or until their respective successors are appointed and
qualified): one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, one for five (5) years, one for six (6) years, and
one for seven (7) years, the successor to each member so appointed to serve for a term of five (5) years.
3. Chairman: One of the members of the said board shall be designated by the president of the village as chairman until his successor is appointed.
Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
4. Removal; Vacancies: The president of the village shall have the power to remove any member of said board for cause and after a public hearing.
Vacancies upon said board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant, in the manner herein provided
for the appointment of such member. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
5. Compensation: Members shall receive compensation in the amount of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each monthly meeting attended. (Ord.
1424, 2-14-2007)
6. Elected Officials Excluded: No elected official of the village shall serve as a member of the board.
B. Meetings1:
1. Calling For Meetings: All meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine.
2. Hearings Open To Public: All hearings conducted by the board shall be open to the public.
3. Secretary; Minutes; Records: The board shall designate a secretary to keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and who shall also keep records of the board's hearings and other official actions.
Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision and determination of the board shall be filed
immediately in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
4. Rules And Regulations: The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this title or with the Illinois statutes in such case made
and provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 248/348
5. Quorum: The presence of four (4) members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum.
6. Absent Members; Voting: Any absent member who certifies he has read the transcript of the proceedings before the board, held in his absence,
may vote upon any question before the board.
C. Powers And Duties: The board shall have the following powers and duties in acting on appeals which come before it:
1. Interpretation: Interpret the provisions of the ordinances in such a way as to carry out the intent and purposes of the plan, as shown upon the
official zoning map of the village.
2. Administrative Review: Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement of this title.
3. Variances: Recommend variances from the requirements of this title in specific cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardship in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of any of the regulations; provided, however, that such variations therefrom are in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this title, the function of this title is observed, the public safety and welfare are secured and substantial justice is done. In the
consideration of the standards of practical difficulties or particular hardship, the board shall require evidence that:
a. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulation of the
district in which it is located;
b. The plight of the owner is due to circumstances that are unique to the property in question; and
c. The variance if granted will not alter the essential character of the locality in which the property in question is located;
and a variation shall be permitted only if the evidence, in the judgment of the board, sustains each of the three (3) conditions enumerated.
4. Conditional Uses: Permit conditional uses as specified in this title.
a. Although the development and execution of this title is based upon the division of the village into districts, within any one of which the use of
land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures as related to the land, are essentially uniform, it is recognized that there
are certain uses which, because of their unique character, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without consideration,
in such case, of the impact of those uses upon the neighboring lands and upon the public need for the particular use at the particular location.
Such uses have been designated in this title as conditional uses.
b. In connection with the granting of a conditional use, the board may:
(1) Permit such deviations from the district regulations as the board deems to be appropriate for the particular site, provided it can be
demonstrated that such deviations are necessary to accommodate the conditional use and the board determines that they will not have undue
adverse effect on adjacent properties, the neighborhood or the community.
(2) Upon the showing of good cause therefor, enter an order permitting the future extension of a use or building or the future erection of a
building on the premises being considered, which order shall not be subject to the one year limitation provided by subsection F of this section,
but the board in that order shall specify the maximum period of time for which such conditional use permit shall remain valid. The board shall
attach to that order a development plan of the lot which shall show the limits on the lot within which future buildings or building extensions will
be permitted and such modifications of the plan of present developments as will be necessary to accommodate the proposed future building
or extension of use or building.
5. Other Referrals:
a. Hear and decide or make recommendations on such other appeals or matters as are specifically designated for board action in this title or
amendments thereto, including nonconforming uses and special permits as provided herein. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
b. In the acting on any appeal, the board shall first determine that granting of the appeal will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or
unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety,
comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the village. The concurring role of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirements, decision or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is
authorized by this title to render a decision.
D. Exercise Of Power:
1. In exercising the above powers, the board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of
the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
2. In the granting of a conditional use or variance, the board may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises involved as may be
considered necessary in the specific case to eliminate or minimize the adverse effects of such use on other property in the vicinity, and to better
carry out the intent and purposes of this title. Failure to comply with all the conditions and restrictions imposed in the granting of the variation or
conditional use shall constitute a violation of this title.
E. Notice; Hearing: The board shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after a public hearing conducted by the board. A notice of
the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the village at least fifteen (15) days previous to
the hearing. Such notice shall contain the address or location of the property for which the variation or other ruling by the board is sought, as well as
a brief description of the nature of the appeal.
F. Miscellaneous: Except as specifically provided in this title:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 249/348
1. No order of the board permitting the erection or alteration of a building shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit for
such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with
the terms of such permit.
2. No order of the board permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless such use is established
within such period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall
continue in form and effect if a building permit or said erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started
and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-2-4: PLAN COMMISSION2:
A plan commission that existed on the date of the adoption of this title as established by ordinance 446, as amended, pursuant to the Illinois municipal
code3 approved May 19, 1965, effective July 1, 1965, and as amended, is hereby authorized to continue. (Ord. 961, 1-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd.
1999 Code)
A. Purpose: In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a comprehensive village plan for the guidance, direction and control of the
growth and development or redevelopment of the village and contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate
limits and not included in any municipality, a plan commission is hereby created under authority of an act of the general assembly of the state of
Illinois entitled "Illinois municipal code" approved May 29, 1961, and effective July 1, 1961, and as amended.
B. Membership: Said plan commission shall consist of seven (7) members, citizens of the village appointed by the president of the board of trustees by
and with the consent of the village board of trustees, on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on said plan commission and subject to the
approval of the village board of trustees. No elected official of the village shall serve as a member of said plan commission.
C. Term Of Office; Compensation:
1. Of the seven (7) members, one shall serve for a period of one year, one for a period of two (2) years, one for a period of three (3) years, one for a
period of four (4) years, one for a period of five (5) years, one for a period of six (6) years, and one for a period of seven (7) years. Thereafter, such
members shall serve for a period of five (5) years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only.
2. All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except that, if the village board of trustees deems it advisable, they may receive
such compensation as may be fixed from time to time by said village board of trustees and provided for in the appropriation ordinance.
D. Procedure: The village president shall appoint a chairman, from the membership of the commission and subject to approval of the board of trustees,
who shall hold office for a term of one year and who may be reappointed. Immediately following their appointment, the members of the plan
commission shall meet, organize, appoint a secretary and vice chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary, and adopt and later
change or alter, rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with village ordinances and state laws. The commission shall keep
written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection. The commission shall also file an annual report with the
president and board of trustees setting forth its transactions and recommendations.
E. Powers And Duties: Said plan commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To prepare and recommend to the village board of trustees a comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the
village and contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of the village and not
included in any other municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when
adopted, shall be the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the village. Such plan shall be advisory except as to such part thereof as has
been implemented by ordinances duly enacted by the village board of trustees. All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with
the county recorder of deeds and filing of said plan and ordinances with the village clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law.
To provide for the health, safety, comfort, and convenience of the inhabitants of the village and contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall
establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to "public improvements" as herein defined and shall establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course, and
surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, park, playgrounds, school
grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage
collections and treatment. The requirements specified herein shall become regulatory only when adopted by ordinance.
2. To designate land suitable for annexation to the municipality and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation.
3. To recommend to the village board of trustees from time to time such changes in the comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, as may be deemed
necessary.
4. To prepare and recommend to the village board of trustees, from time to time, plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in
pursuance of the official comprehensive plan.
5. To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, or parts thereof,
to further the making of such improvements and generally to promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
6. To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
7. To cooperate with the municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to
assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
8. To conduct hearings on amendments to this title and make recommendations to the village president and board of trustees as provided in this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 250/348
9. To review all plats of subdivision or resubdivision submitted to the board of trustees and to grant or reject preliminary approval of same as
provided under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8, as amended.
10. To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under authority of an act of the general assembly of the state of Illinois entitled
"Illinois municipal code", approved May 29, 1961, and as amended4, as may be conferred by the board of trustees of the village.
F. Improvements: The village clerk shall furnish the plan commission, for its consideration, a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public
improvements of any nature. The plan commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of
the board of trustees.
G. Expenditures:
1. The commission may, at the discretion of the board of trustees, employ a paid secretary or staff, or both, whose salaries, wages, and other
necessary expenses shall be provided for by the board of trustees from the public funds.
2. If said plan commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the board of trustees
and appropriations by the board of trustees therefor. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-2-5: BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The board of trustees shall:
A. Receive from the zoning board of appeals recommendations, amendments, and variations to this title and determine final disposition of any such
matter.
B. Receive recommendations from the plan commission relating to special use permits, planned developments, mobile home parks zonings, and
determine the final disposition of any such application.
C. Review all applications for nonlisted uses and determine the final disposition of any such applications.
D. Decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-2-5-1: RESIDENTIAL HOUSING REVIEW COMMITTEE:
A. Committee Created: A committee, including the chairperson, to be known as the residential development housing committee is hereby established.
B. Appointments: The committee shall consist of three (3) village trustees and two (2) members of the zoning board of appeals. All such appointments
shall be made by the village president.
C. Guidelines For Operation: The guidelines for this committee are as follows:
1. All committee meetings are open to the public and subject to compliance with the open meetings act.
2. The committee shall have the authority to establish its own rules of procedures as long as they are not inconsistent with this section.
3. The committee shall not incur any expenses without prior village board approval.
D. Duties: The committee shall have the following duties:
1. To act as a liaison on behalf of the village board and zoning board of appeals with respect to residential developers; and
2. To keep the village board and zoning board of appeals apprised of any concerns or issues that need to be addressed pertaining to new residential
developments; and
3. To review plans, concepts, or drawings which pertain to residential development and report their findings to the village board and zoning board of
appeals; and
4. To issue recommendations to the village board relative to the adoption of ordinances which promote continued residential growth in a manner not
inconsistent with the village's plans; and
5. To formulate policies which help ensure and maintain high level residential construction; and
6. To review and recommend modifications to ordinances relative to architectural review or building code provisions pertaining to new residential
construction; and
7. Any other duties as prescribed by the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. 1373, 10-12-2005)
11-2-6: CERTIFICATION OF ZONING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 251/348
A. Generally: Except as otherwise provided, no permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings, including building permits, business licenses and
occupancy permits shall be issued unless the application for such permit has been examined by the zoning administrator and has affixed to it his
certificate, indicating that the proposed use of land, buildings or structures, complies with all the provisions of this title. Any certification of zoning
issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void.
B. Exceptions: No certification shall be required for maintenance, repair, minor structural alterations determined to be routine and minor by the building
inspector.
C. Plats And Plans: Every application for a certification of zoning with the exception of occupancy permits, or as hereinafter provided, shall be
accompanied by:
1. Two (2) copies of a current plat of the piece or parcel of land, lot, lots, block or blocks or parts or portions thereof, drawn to scale showing the
actual dimensions and monumenting, as certified by a registered Illinois land surveyor, as a true copy of the piece or parcel, lot, lots, block or
blocks or portion thereof, according to registered or recorded plat of such land.
2. Two (2) copies of additional drawings drawn to a scale in such form as may, from time to time, be presented by the zoning administrator showing
the ground area, height and bulk of the building or structure, the building lines in relation to lot lines. The use to be made of the building, structure
or land and such other information as may be required by the zoning administrator for the proper enforcement of this title.
3. Two (2) copies of a plan detailing the number and configuration of parking spaces, points of ingress and egress, areas to be landscaped and
construction specifications.
The zoning administrator may, in those cases where in his judgment the information is not necessary because of existing evidence, waive all or
portions of the requirements of subsections C1, C2 and C3 of this section.
D. Occupancy Permits: Prior to affixing a certification of zoning to any occupancy permit, the zoning administrator shall conduct an on site inspection of
any building, structure, or use where an occupancy permit is required. When the zoning administrator has inspected such locations and determined
that all provisions of this title have been complied with, he will affix a certification of zoning. Any certification of zoning issued in conflict with the
provisions shall be null and void.
E. Issuance And Appeals: Within fifteen (15) days after the receipt of a complete and valid application, the zoning administrator shall take action. If all
provisions of this title have been complied with, the zoning administrator shall issue a certification of zoning. If the provisions of this title have not
been met, the zoning administrator shall not issue a certification of zoning and will notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for refusal. If the
zoning administrator fails to act within fifteen (15) days, the applicant may treat the application as denied and file an appeal to the zoning board of
appeals in the manner prescribed in section 11-2-10 of this chapter.
F. Period Of Validity: If the certification of zoning is affixed to a business license or building permit, the certification shall remain valid for the period of
validity of the business license or building permit. No certification of zoning for an occupancy permit shall be valid for a period longer than one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date of its issuance unless the use or occupancy authorized has been established within such period. (Ord. 961,
2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-2-7: VARIANCES:
A. Authorized: In specific cases where practical difficulties or a particular hardship would be incurred by the strict application of the provisions of this title,
the zoning board of appeals, after conducting a public hearing, may recommend to the board of trustees a variance of the regulations of this title, but
only in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section.
Variances from the regulations of this title shall be recommended by the zoning board of appeals only in accordance with the standards established
and may be recommended in the following instances and in no others:
1. To permit any yard or setback less than a yard or a setback required by the applicable regulations;
2. To permit the use of a lot for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient area of width of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the
respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than seventy five percent (75%) of the required area and width;
3. To permit the same off street parking facilities to qualify as required facilities for two (2) or more uses, provided that substantial use of such facility
by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours of the same days of the week;
4. To reduce the applicable off street parking or loading facilities required by not more than one parking space or loading space, or twenty five
percent (25%) of the required facilities, whichever number is greater;
5. To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%) the maximum distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the
use served;
6. To permit a variance relative to the maximum height above grade, or the minimum elevation (head clearance) above grade of signs; to permit a
variation relative to minimum setback requirements for signs; and to permit a variation relative to maximum projection of signs in all districts;
7. To permit a variance relative to minimum dwelling size within a residential district;
8. To permit a variance of the conditions of use or special requirements of any district;
9. To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building or structure which has been damaged or destroyed by fire, explosions, acts of God or
acts of a public enemy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 252/348
B. Procedures: The procedures for obtaining a variation from the requirements of this title shall be as follows:
1. Application: An application for a variation shall be filed with the zoning administrator, who will forward such applications to the chairman of the
zoning board of appeals. The application shall contain such information that the board of trustees may, by rule require.
2. Hearing; Notice: The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60) days after receiving the application from the zoning
administrator. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not
more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before such hearing.
3. Notice To Nearby Property Owners: Whenever there is a petition for a zoning amendment, a variance, special use permits or any matter requiring
a public hearing, a certified letter with a receipt of mailing shall be sent to all the real estate taxpayers of record within one hundred fifty feet (150')
of the property, and signs placed on the property in question stating the date and time of the proposed hearing for the zoning change. Also the
hearing will not take place unless the petitioner can show proof that the above requirements have been satisfied.
4. Zoning Board Of Appeals, Recommendations: Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall submit their findings
and recommendations to the board of trustees. The zoning board of appeals may recommend approval or denial of any variation authorized.
C. Action By Board Of Trustees:
1. Act On Report From Zoning Board Of Appeals: The board of trustees shall not act upon a proposed variation to this title until it shall have received
a written report and recommendation from the zoning board of appeals on the proposed variation.
2. Protest Against Application: The board of trustees may grant or deny any application for a variation; provided, however, that in case of a written
protest against any proposed variation, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered,
or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) of the frontage, directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the village clerk, the variation shall not be passed, except
by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the board of trustees.
3. Failure To Act Constitutes Denial: If an application for a proposed variation is not acted upon finally by the board of trustees within ninety (90) days
of the date the board of trustees receives the zoning board of appeals' recommendations, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the
board of trustees and petitioner, it shall be deemed to have been denied.
D. Standards For Issuance: The zoning board of appeals shall not make a recommendation to the board of trustees, to vary the regulations of this title
unless in each specific case that:
1. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a practical difficulty or
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried
out;
2. The conditions upon which an application for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought, and are not
applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification;
3. The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase financial gain;
4. The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this title and has not been created by any persons presently having an interest in the property;
5. The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located; and
6. The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of the
public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
The zoning board of appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to
comply with the standards established in this section and the objectives of this title.
E. Term: No ordinance varying the requirement of this title shall be valid for a period longer than one year from the date of such ordinance unless the
permitted variation has been substantially implemented.
F. Effect Of Denial: No application for a variation which has been denied by the board of trustees shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the
date of the order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the board of trustees. (Ord.
961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-2-8: AMENDMENTS:
A. Generally: The regulations and districts established by this title may be amended from time to time by the board of trustees through the enactment of
an amending ordinance. No such amending ordinance shall be adopted prior to zoning board of appeals conducting a public hearing and submitting
a report of its finding and recommendations to the board of trustees. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
B. Initiation: Amendments may be proposed by the board of trustees, zoning board of appeals, plan commission, village administrator, zoning
administrator, and by any other person having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest which
may become a freehold interest, an option to purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land which is
described in the application for an amendment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 253/348
C. Procedures:
1. Application: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the zoning administrator, who shall forward such application to the zoning board of
appeals prior to the next scheduled meeting of the zoning board of appeals. The application shall be in such form and contain such information
and be accompanied by such plans as the board of trustees may by rule require.
2. Notice Of Hearing: The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60) days after receiving the application from the zoning
administrator. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not more
than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before such hearing. Notice shall also be given to all adjacent property owners as provided in
subsection 11-2-7B3 of this chapter.
D. Standards: The zoning board of appeals shall not make a recommendation to the board of trustees to amend the ordinance or map unless:
1. The proposed amendment would not be contrary to the general welfare.
2. There is no administrative procedure available and preferable to rezoning.
3. The original purpose of the zoning regulation for which change is being proposed would not be impeded by the proposed amendment.
4. There are no sites for the proposed use in existing districts permitting such use.
5. The proposed change is not contrary to the established land use pattern and the comprehensive plan.
6. The change would not create an isolated, unrelated district.
7. There have been major land use changes since the zoning regulations applied which support the proposed amendment.
8. The owner of the property cannot realize an economic benefit from uses in accord with existing zoning.
9. The change in existing district boundaries would not be inconsistent with existing uses.
10. The proposed change would not conflict with existing commitments or planned public improvements.
11. The change would not contribute to traffic congestion or dangerous traffic patterns.
12. Change would not alter the population density pattern through creating a harmful increase on use of public facilities, e.g., schools, sewer and
water, parks.
13. The change would not adversely influence living conditions in the vicinity due to any type of pollution.
14. Property value in the vicinity would not be decreased by the proposed amendment. (Ord. 1133, 4-25-2001)
11-2-9: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
A. Generally:
1. Uses Of Land And Buildings: This title is based upon the division of the village into districts, within which the uses of land, and the uses and bulk
of buildings and structures, are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are special uses which, because of their unique
characteristics, can only be properly classified in any particular district upon considerations in each case of the impact of those uses upon
neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location. Such uses fall into three (3) categories:
a. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest.
b. Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give use to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property, public facilities, or the village, as a whole.
c. Uses, either public or private, that because of past or present conditions need special consideration.
2. Conditions Of Permit: A special use permit shall authorize only such uses that are listed on the permit and only under the conditions of this title
and any such other conditions that may be made part of the special use permit. A special use permit shall be null and void unless work thereon is
substantially underway within twelve (12) months of the date of issuance. The board of trustees, based on evidence presented in a written
application may extend the twelve (12) month limit for implementing uses permitted by a special use permit.
B. Authorized: Special use permits may be granted by the board of trustees, but only in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section.
C. Procedures: With the exception of special uses for planned development and for mobile home park applications (such applications shall be
processed in accordance with section 11-2-11 of this chapter and chapter 3 of this title), the process for obtaining a special use permit shall be as
follows: (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
1. Application: An application for a special use permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator, who shall forward such application to the plan
commission prior to the next scheduled meeting of the plan commission. The application shall be in such form and contain such information and
be accompanied by such plans as the board of trustees may by rule require.
2. Notice Of Hearing: The plan commission shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60) days after receiving the application from the zoning
administrator. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not more
than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before such hearing. Notice shall also be given to all adjacent property owners as provided in
subsection 11-2-7B3 of this chapter. (Ord. 1132, 4-25-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 254/348
3. Written Report To Board Of Trustees: The plan commission shall, within sixty (60) days after the hearing, transmit a written report detailing its
findings and recommendations to the board of trustees. The report should contain:
a. The extent to which the proposed special use departs from the zoning and subdivision regulations of the village.
b. The conformance or nonconformance of the proposed special use.
c. The relationship and compatibility of the proposed special use to adjacent properties and neighborhoods.
d. The effect of the proposed special use on the development pattern, tax base and economic well being of the village.
e. Any necessary conditions or guarantees. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. Ord. 1132, 4-25-2001)
D. Action By Board Of Trustees:
1. Protest Against Amendment: After receiving the plan commission report, the board of trustees may, based on the standards contained in
subsection E of this section, grant or deny the application for a special use permit; provided, however, that in the case of a written protest against
proposed amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to
be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the village clerk, the amendment shall not be
passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the board of trustees.
2. Conditions Of Ordinance: The ordinance granting a special use permit shall include all conditions of such special use permit.
3. Failure To Act Constitutes Denial: If an application for a proposed special use is not acted upon finally by the board of trustees within ninety (90)
days of the date the board of trustees receives the plan commission report, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the board of
trustees and the petitioner, it shall be deemed to have been denied.
E. Standards For Issuance: No special use permit shall be granted unless:
1. The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public's health, safety, morals, comfort,
or general welfare.
2. The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor
substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
3. The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
4. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
5. Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
6. The special use shall in all other respects conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may
in each instance be modified by the board of trustees pursuant to the recommendation of the plan commission.
F. Effect Of Denial: No application for a special use permit which has been denied by the board of trustees shall be resubmitted for a period of one year
from the date of the order of denial except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of condition found to be valid by the board of trustees.
(Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-2-10: APPEALS:
A. Generally: An appeal may be taken to the board by any person, firm or corporation, or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the village
aggrieved by a decision of the administrative official of the village charged with the responsibility of enforcing this title, said individual hereinafter
referred to as "zoning administrator". Each appeal shall be taken within sixty (60) days or such lesser time as shall be prescribed by the board by
general rule, by filing with the zoning administrator involved and with the board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning
administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. Hearing:
1. Time, Place And Conditions: The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the
parties and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person
or by duly authorized agent or attorney. The petitioner shall apply and pay for a written transcript of the proceedings held as a result of his petition,
and shall deliver same to the board prior to any decision being made by the board in the case of petitions for variances or conditional use, and in
any other case where required by the board.
2. Payment Of Fee: The filing of an appeal before the board shall be accompanied by a check or money order, made payable to the village, in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the board of trustees. All monies received for filing of appeals shall be credited to the general fund of
the village.
C. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the
board after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order, granted by the board or by a court of
record on application and on notice to the zoning administrator, and on due cause shown.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 255/348
D. Decisions: The zoning board of appeals shall render a written decision on the appeal within a reasonable time, but in no event more than ninety (90)
days after the filing of the notice of appeal, and shall promptly forward a copy of the decision to the parties. The zoning board of appeals may affirm
or may, upon the concurring vote of four (4) members, reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the decision of the zoning administrator, as in its opinion
ought to be done, and to that end shall have the powers of the zoning administrator. All decisions, after hearing the zoning board of appeals from the
administrative order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator shall, in all instances, be final administrative determinations
and shall be subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable law. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
11-2-11: SPECIAL USE PERMITS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS:
A. Request For Permit: A request for a special use permit for a mobile home park shall be subject to the same requirements and procedures as a
planned development as detailed in chapter 3 of this title.
B. Variance To Requirements: The zoning administrator with the consent of the plan commission may vary requirements of chapter 3 of this title if in
their opinion the requirements are clearly not applicable to a mobile home park. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-2-12: GROUP HOME LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate any group home within the village, without first obtaining a
license therefor. Provided, however, if any person has been issued a group home license by the state, he shall not be required to obtain a license
from the village; however, said group home shall comply with all of the requirements of subsection C of this section.
B. Application For License: Application for a license to conduct and operate a group home shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of
the municipal ordinances of Monee relating to applications for licenses5. The application shall be under oath and shall contain:
1. The location of the group home for which a license is sought;
2. The number of persons who will be residing on the premises;
3. The name and address of the applicant if an individual, and if a firm, partnership or association, of every member thereof, and in the case of a
corporation, the principal address of the corporation and name and address of its officers;
4. The name of the person or persons under whose management or supervision the group home will be conducted;
5. Such information relating to the number, experience and training of employees of the group home and of the moral character of the applicant and
employees as the board of trustees may deem necessary.
C. Health And Safety Requirements: No license shall be issued by the village for any group home unless all of the following health and safety
requirements shall be satisfied. To be licensed by the village, all group homes for the handicapped shall meet the following criteria:
1. Applicant must demonstrate that he has obtained or is in the process of obtaining a state license or certificate to operate the proposed group
home.
2. Demonstrate that the occupants meet the criteria for group home living as required by state and local requirements.
3. Provide professional staff as required by the occupants' evaluated needs, and to provide twenty four (24) hour staff where occupants have or are
diagnosed as having impaired ability to live independently.
4. To provide a dwelling unit which meets the following minimum space requirements:
a. Living room, one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
b. Dining room, one hundred (100) square feet.
c. Kitchen, sixty (60) square feet.
d. Bathroom must be contained entirely within the unit and afford privacy to the occupant, and provide the spacing clearance between fixtures as
required by applicable existing village ordinances, and shall contain a water closet, sink, and tub or shower enclosure.
e. Bedrooms, seventy (70) square feet minimum, plus seventy (70) square feet for the first occupant, with fifty (50) square feet per additional
occupant.
5. Each group home may be located no closer than six hundred feet (600') from the next nearest group home.
6. Have received an occupancy certificate issued by the building department after passing an occupancy inspection, meeting the criteria of the
village code, and the requirements of the Monee fire protection district.
D. License Fees; Exemption; Term:
1. License Fee: The annual fee for a license to conduct a group home shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
2. Exemption For No Charge To Residents: Group homes which are operated without a charge being made to the residents shall be exempt from
payment of the license fee. Application for license for such group home shall be accompanied by an affidavit stating that no charge is made to the
residents. After investigation by the Will County health department and upon recommendation of that body, any group home that is not operated
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 256/348
for gain, even where a charge is made to the residents, shall be exempt from payment of the license fee by specific action of the board of trustees.
Such exemption shall continue only for the duration of the license period.
3. Term Of License: Every license issued under this section shall expire on April 30, following the date of its issuance.
E. Display Of License; Transfer: The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place near the main entrance inside the home. A license shall be valid
only in the hands of the person to whom it is issued, and it shall not be subject to sale, assignment or transfer, voluntarily or involuntarily, nor shall a
license be valid for any premises other than those for which originally issued.
F. Investigation; Issuance Of License: The village clerk, upon receipt of an application for license hereunder, shall cause the Will County health
department, the building inspector, the fire inspector and the police department to make a thorough investigation of the premises and facilities
proposed to be licensed. If all provisions prescribed are met, and the applicant is otherwise qualified, the village shall issue a license to the applicant
to conduct a group home at the location specified. The license shall state the maximum number of residents that may be accommodated at any one
time.
G. Inspection: Every group home shall be open at all reasonable times to inspection by the Will County health department, the building inspector, and
the fire inspector as often as is deemed necessary.
H. Penalty:
1. Penalty Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for
each offense, and a separate and distinct offense shall be considered as having been committed for each and every day on which any person
shall be guilty of such violation.
2. Closure Of Home: Whenever an inspection of a group home discloses that the continued operation of such facility would be found to be an
immediate and serious menace to public health and safety, either the Will County health department, the building inspector, or the fire inspector is
hereby authorized to close such group home forthwith. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
11-2-13: FEES:
A. Establish Schedule Of Fees: The board of trustees shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses required for zoning certificates,
certificates of occupancy, business licenses, variations, special use permits, amendments, planned developments, appeals, mobile home parks and
other matters pertaining to this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
B. Reimbursement For Village Expenses: Applicants for zoning map amendments, variations, conditional uses, special permits, and construction plans
of any kind shall be required to reimburse the village for the reasonable expenses incurred by the village for services of the village engineer and
village attorney in connection with such requests, including the services rendered in preparation and review of documents, ordinances, plans,
specifications and the like, as well as attendance at hearings, if required. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. Ord. 1413, 11-8-2006)
No building permit or construction permit shall be issued until satisfactory proof of payment is submitted by the applicant to the village clerk.
Applicant shall execute an acknowledgment, a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 1413, 11-8-2006)
C. Payment Of Fees:
1. Payment Required: Until all such fees have been paid, no application for any of the above shall be deemed to have been filed and no action shall
be taken on such application.
2. Payment To Collector: All fees shall be paid to the office of the village collector. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-2-14: PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any provisions of this title, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof is given by regular
mail by the village to the last known address of such person shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 3
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
11-3-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
Planned developments are intended to allow greater design flexibility than is permitted by the standard district regulations. They are also substantially
different from other special uses so that specific and additional standards and exceptions are necessary to regulate these developments. Therefore, the
regulations contained in this chapter are established to facilitate and encourage the construction of imaginative and coordinated small to large scale
developments and to provide relief from the subdivision and zoning requirements which are designed for conventional developments. These regulations
are further established to provide for developments incorporating a single type or variety of related uses, which are planned and developed as a unit; to
assure adequate open space for recreation and other community purposes; to protect residential areas from undue traffic congestion; to encourage the
most efficient use of land, which will result in more economic networks of utilities, streets, and other facilities; and thus to promote the general welfare of
the community. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 257/348
11-3-2: STANDARDS AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
No planned unit development shall be authorized by the village board of trustees unless the following standards and general requirements are met:
A. The site of the proposed planned unit development is not less than ten (10) acres in area and is under single ownership and/or unified control. Where
the applicant can demonstrate that the characteristics of the land are suitable to be planned and developed as a unit and in a manner consistent with
the purpose and intent of this title and with the comprehensive plan of the village, the plan commission may consider projects with less acreage.
B. The planned development will not substantially injure or damage the use, value and enjoyment of the surrounding property in accordance with the
land use plan of the village.
C. The uses permitted in the development are necessary or desirable and that the need for such uses has been clearly demonstrated by the developer.
D. The proposed development will not impose an undue burden on public facilities and services, such as sewer and water systems, police and fire
protection.
E. The proposed development can be substantially completed within the period of time specified in the schedule of development submitted by the
developer.
F. The street system serving the planned development is adequate to carry the traffic that will be imposed upon the streets by the proposed
development and that the streets and driveways on the site of the planned development will be adequate to serve the residents or occupants of the
proposed development.
G. When a planned unit development proposes the use of private streets, common driveways, private recreation facilities or common open space, the
developer shall provide and submit as part of the application the method and arrangement whereby these private facilities shall be operated and
maintained.
H. The general development plan shall contain such proposed covenants, easement and other provisions relating to the bulk, location and density of
residential buildings, nonresidential uses and structures and public facilities as are necessary for the welfare of the planned development and the
village. All such covenants shall specifically provide for enforcement by the village in addition to the landowners within the development.
I. The developer shall provide and record easements and covenants, and shall make such other arrangements as furnishing a performance bond,
escrow deposit, or other financial guarantees as may be reasonably required to assure performance in accordance with the development plan and to
protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of said plan before completion.
J. Any exceptions or modifications of the zoning, subdivision, or other regulations that would otherwise be applicable to the site are warranted by the
design of the proposed development plan, and the amenities incorporated in it are consistent with the general interest of the public. (Ord. 961, 2-12-
1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-3-3: RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS:
A residential planned development may be proposed for any land located within a residential district, or in an area designated for residential
development in the comprehensive plan, provided that it meets the standards and criteria set forth in the general provisions for planned unit
developments and complies with the provisions set forth hereinafter.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Dwelling units in detached, semidetached, attached, clustered, or multi-storied structures, or combination thereof.
2. Commercial uses, where such uses are scaled primarily to serve the residents of the PUD, such as retail sales, personal service stores,
professional offices and banking facilities.
3. Schools, public and private recreational facilities, institutional uses, and day care centers.
4. Other uses which are recommended by the plan commission and approved by village board as being compatible with other uses proposed in the
PUD.
B. Residential Density And Standards:
1. The density of any residential planned unit development shall not exceed the density allowed in the district in which the PUD is located. In such
instances, however, where the land is not annexed to the village and no zoning classification has been assigned, the plan commission shall
determine what the appropriate zoning and density should be and forward its recommendation to the village board.
The plan commission, in making this determination, shall take into consideration: a) the physical characteristics of the site; b) the location, design
and type of dwelling units proposed; c) the amount, location and proposed use of common open space; and d) the provision of unique design
features, such as golf courses, lakes, swimming pools, underground parking and other similar features which require unusually high development
cost and which achieve an especially attractive and stable development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 258/348
2. When a planned unit development is proposed in a single-family residential zone, seventy percent (70%) of all dwelling units proposed within that
zone shall be intended for single-family occupancy. For the purpose of this title, a townhouse shall be considered to be a single-family dwelling.
3. No minimum lot area is required for individual buildings, except that individual lots for single-family detached dwellings which may be provided
within the overall planned development shall not be less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet in area and for single-family
attached and semiattached dwelling units be not less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of lot area per dwelling.
4. Nonresidential or local business type uses (limited to those permitted in the neighborhood shopping district) may be included as part of a planned
residential development when the plan commission finds that: a) such business uses are beneficial to the overall planned development and will not
be injurious to adjacent or neighboring properties; b) such uses are available within reasonable proximity of the subject area; c) are gauged
primarily for the service and convenience of the residents of the subject area; and d) are designed as a unit of limited size and made an integral
part of the proposed planned unit development.
5. Combination of business and multiple-family residential uses in one structure may be permitted in a structure; provided, that: a) the business uses
are limited to personal services and convenience type uses intended solely for the purpose of serving those residing in the multiple-family
complex; and b) no businesses are permitted on the same floor or above a floor used for residential purposes.
6. Ten percent (10%) of the gross land area of a planned unit development or a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet per dwelling unit,
whichever is greater, shall be developed for recreational open space; except that in multiple-family areas the minimum square feet per dwelling
unit shall be computed on the basis of two hundred (200) square feet for each efficiency and one bedroom unit, three hundred fifty (350) square
feet for each two (2) bedroom unit, and five hundred fifty (550) square feet for each three (3) or more bedroom unit.
When private common open space is provided within a planned development, such open space shall not be computed as part of the required
minimum lot area, or any required yard, of any other structure. Open space proposed for either dedication to the public or common ownership by
the residents of the planned residential development shall be retained as open space for park and recreational use for the life of the planned
development. A variety of open space and recreational areas is encouraged, including children's informal play in close proximity to individual
dwelling units according to the concentration of dwellings, formal parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, areas of formal recreational activities such as
tennis, swimming, golf, etc.
7. All residential planned developments shall provide for underground installation of utilities, including telephone and power in both public and private
rights of way. Provision shall be made for acceptable design and construction of storm sewer facilities, including water retention areas, grading,
gutters, piping and treatment of turf to handle stormwaters, prevent erosion and formation of dust.
C. Site And Structure Requirements:
1. Where feasible, natural features such as streams, rock outcrops, marshlands, topsoil, trees and shrubs shall be preserved and incorporated in the
landscaping of the development.
2. The developer shall provide all necessary water and sewer facilities, storm drainage, and all other on site improvements as may be required,
making reasonable provisions for utility service connections with adjoining properties in other ownership. Such proposed improvements shall
comply with village standards and shall be subject to review and approval by the appropriate authorities.
3. Nonresidential uses within a planned development must be located so as to be amenable to nearby residential uses. Such uses, including parking
and loading areas must be adequately screened and buffered where adjacent to existing residential development.
4. The right of way and pavement widths for internal streets serving multi-family and single-family attached dwellings shall be determined from sound
planning and engineering standards to conform with the estimated needs of the proposed full development and the traffic to be generated thereby.
The streets shall be adequate and sufficient in size, location and designed to accommodate the minimum traffic, parking and loading needs of the
proposed development. The pavement of said streets shall not be less than twenty eight feet (28') wide, except on courts of less than two hundred
fifty feet (250') in length, and providing adequate guest parking, the pavement may be reduced to twenty four feet (24') in width.
5. Access and circulation shall adequately provide for firefighting equipment, furniture moving vans, delivery trucks, refuse collection and snow
removal.
6. At least two (2) off street parking spaces shall be provided for each multiple-family dwelling unit, and not less than two and one-half (21/2) spaces
for each townhouse unit. Such parking shall be provided convenient to all dwelling units in multiple-family areas, the parking shall be not more
than three hundred feet (300') from the dwelling unit that it is intended to serve and in townhouse and cluster developments, not more than one
hundred fifty feet (150'), measured along the most direct pedestrian route.
7. The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be insulated as completely as possible from the street system in order to provide
separation of pedestrian and vehicular movements. This shall include, when deemed necessary by the plan commission, pedestrian underpasses
or overpasses in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, local shopping areas and other neighborhood uses which generate a considerable amount of
pedestrian traffic.
8. Each planned residential development shall provide for the visual and acoustical privacy of each dwelling unit. Fences, walks and landscaping
shall be provided for the protection and aesthetic enhancement of property and the privacy of its occupants, screening of objectionable views or
uses and reduction of noise.
9. All streets within a planned unit development shall be dedicated public streets except as otherwise recommended by the plan commission and
approved by the village board. Said streets shall have a minimum right of way of fifty feet (50'), except when sidewalks are constructed running
parallel with the street, then said right of way shall be not less than sixty feet (60'). The pavement of said streets shall not be less than twenty eight
feet (28') wide, except on courts of less than twenty five feet (25') in length and which provide adequate guest parking, the pavement may be
reduced to twenty four feet (24') in width.
10. Along the exterior boundaries not adjoining a street, there shall be a minimum setback of forty feet (40') plus one foot (1') for each additional foot
that the building increases in height over thirty five feet (35').
11. Not more than six (6) dwelling units shall be permitted in a single-family attached building. "Single-family attached building" is defined as a
building containing two (2) or more single-family dwelling units joined at one or more points by one or more party walls or common facilities, not
including the walls of an enclosed court yard or similar area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 259/348
12. No dwelling unit shall be situated so as to face the rear of another dwelling unit unless adequate landscaping is provided to effectively create a
visual separation.
13. When two (2) or more buildings which contain single-family attached dwellings, or two (2) or more multiple-family dwelling buildings, or
combinations thereof, the distance between the building walls shall be as required in subsection 11-7B-7A2 of this title, unless otherwise
recommended by the plan commission and approved by the village board.
14. A twenty foot (20') wide buffer including, but not limited to, solid fences, masonry walls or plant materials shall be provided so as to constitute the
visual screening of all parking areas and outdoor activity areas from adjacent property and of rights of way at ground level. Where a buffer already
exists on the adjacent property line, or where parking areas or similar activity areas adjoin each other on adjacent properties, the buffer
requirements may be waived by the plan commission.
D. Visual Environment Provisions: In all planned unit developments, the following visual environmental provisions shall apply:
1. In order to ensure an adequate and pleasant visual environment, a sum of money equal to not less than one percent (1%) of the total building
construction costs, as set forth on the approved building permits, shall be budgeted and used by the owners and developers to purchase and
install sculpture, fountains, patios, walks, pools, paintings, murals, special landscaping and other applicable objects of art or beautification upon
the grounds, or on, or in the buildings. Plans for the installation of such objects shall be subject to the review and general approval of the plan
commission.
2. In order to ensure an adequate and pleasant natural environment, a sum of money equal to not less than five percent (5%) of the total building
construction costs, as set forth on the approved building permits, should be budgeted and used by the owners and developers to purchase and
install mature sized trees, shrubbery, grass and other suitable landscaping materials upon the ground. Plans for the installation of such
landscaping should be subject to the review and approval of the plan commission.
3. All yard areas should be landscaped, screened and fenced with mature sized plants and shrubbery and approved fencing material in accordance
with the plans approved by the plan commission.
E. Common Property: Common property in a PUD is a parcel or parcels of land together with improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which
are shared by the owner occupants of the individual building sites. Where such property exists, the landowner shall provide for and establish an
organization for the ownership and maintenance of any common property. Such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any
common property by sale or otherwise.
Individual landowners in the PUD may not use any portion of common property to increase their lot size in order to qualify for uses under this title.
In reviewing the organization for the ownership and maintenance of any common property, the plan commission shall consider the following:
1. Time when organization is to be created.
2. Mandatory or automatic nature of membership in the organization by residents.
3. The permanence of common property safeguards.
4. The liability of the organization for insurance, taxes, and maintenance of all facilities.
5. Provision for pro rata sharing of costs and assessments.
6. The capacity of the organization to administer common facilities. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-3-4: PLANNED COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS:
In addition to the standards and criteria set forth in the general provisions for planned unit developments, planned commercial or planned industrial
developments shall comply with the standards and criteria set forth hereinafter.
A. Commercial Planned Developments: A commercial planned development may be proposed for a single zoning lot or lots falling within any business
district in order to promote the cooperative development of shopping centers and business access points onto thoroughfares, to separate
pedestrians and automobile traffic, to develop shopping centers of size and location compatible with market potential and adjoining land use, and to
encourage harmonious architecture between adjacent commercial structures.
1. Uses permitted in a commercial planned development shall be as prescribed by the plan commission and may include uses not permitted by the
use regulations of the district in which said development is located; however, the plan commission shall find that the uses permitted by such
exception are necessary or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development.
2. Buildings and structures shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the lot area.
3. Retail sales and services, including storage of materials, shall be conducted or stored entirely within a wholly and permanently enclosed building
or buildings which shall be of an architectural design compatible with surrounding uses and structures, unless otherwise recommended by the plan
commission and approved by the village board.
4. Off street parking based upon five (5) car parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area shall be provided in all
planned commercial developments, unless the plan commission recommends and the village board requires additional off street parking. Such
parking shall be paved, adequately lighted, and well drained. Where there are great expanses of blacktop pavement, trees and planted areas shall
be introduced to take away the otherwise barren and unsightly appearance.
5. Where a combination of uses is planned, additional off street parking spaces shall be provided unless the plan commission determines that
individual parking spaces may adequately serve two (2) or more uses by reason of the hours of operation of such uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 260/348
6. At least ten percent (10%) of the total lot area of the planned development shall be provided for landscape and open space purposes.
7. Where a planned commercial development adjoins the boundaries of adjacent residential, public open space, schools, churches or other similar
uses, the development shall be adequately screened by fencing or landscaping or both.
8. Ingress and egress shall be so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
9. All commercial planned developments shall provide for underground installation of utilities.
10. Outside lighting shall be designed and placed so as not to be disturbing to adjacent residential areas.
11. The petitioner shall show sufficient evidence of capability to implement the general type of development proposed. An economic justification or
market analysis of the proposed commercial uses in the development shall be submitted when requested by the plan commission.
B. Industrial Planned Development: An industrial planned development may be proposed for any land located within an industrial district or in an area
designated for industry in the comprehensive plan, in order to promote the establishment of industrial parks that will provide a desirable grouping of
industrial buildings with integrated designs and a coordinated physical plan with sufficient open space to provide a parklike setting.
1. Individual lots may be designated on the plan although this shall not be a requirement. In order to provide as much flexibility as possible and to
adjust to the purchaser's exact requirements, only block sizes, street rights of way, utility and drainage easements, and common open space need
to be shown.
2. Open outdoor storage shall be prohibited unless it is recommended by the plan commission and approved by the village board. If approved, any
outside storage for equipment, raw materials, semifinished and finished products, waste or refuse must be located to the rear of the principal
building and shall be screened from streets and adjoining property by a wall, solid fence or hedge at least eight feet (8') in height.
3. All employee and visitor parking, as well as truck loading, shall be provided entirely on the site (off street) and shall be paved with an all weather
surface. No parking shall be permitted in front yard areas, except that visitor parking may be provided if properly screened or landscaped and only
then when approved by the plan commission.
4. All loading docks must be located at least sixty feet (60') from the front lot line. No trucks, or portion thereof, shall be allowed to park on any street
while loading or unloading.
5. All on site electrical telephone or other utility lines shall be underground and shall not be exposed on the exterior of any building or structure.
6. Building construction and design shall be used to create a structure with four (4) equally attractive sides of high quality, rather than place all
emphasis on the front elevation of the building while neglecting or downgrading the aesthetic appeal of the side and rear elevations of the building.
(Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-3-5: APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
A planned unit development shall be granted as a conditional use in accord with the following procedures and may depart from the normal procedure,
standards, and other requirements of the other sections of this title. Formal application for approval of a planned development shall first be presented in
the form of an exploratory proposal, and shall be filed with the village clerk, who shall transmit same, including all documents relating thereto, to the plan
commission. The filing of an application for a planned unit development shall be accompanied by a certified check, cashier's check or money order
made payable to the village in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the board of trustees. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. Ord.
1135, 4-25-2001)
A. Preapplication Conference: Prior to official submittal of an application for consideration of a planned development, the developer shall meet informally
with the plan commission for a preliminary discussion as to the scope and nature of the proposed development, the types of uses proposed, and the
approximate land allocations contemplated for each of the uses. Thereafter, the developer may submit to the plan commission a tentative sketch
plan and an outline prospectus of the proposed development for future discussion purposes.
B. Exploratory Proposal: Following the preapplication conference with the plan commission, the developer shall submit in writing a request for a
conditional use permit for a planned development. The letter shall be addressed to the chairman of the plan commission requesting that the
proposed development be placed on the agenda of the plan commission for preliminary discussion. The plan commission shall consider the
proposed development at its next regular meeting, or at a special meeting which may be set for the specific purpose of allowing the developer to
make a presentation of his plans. Said meeting may be continued from time to time for the purpose of reviewing and processing the exploratory
application.
C. Submission Requirements: Five (5) copies of the exploratory proposal shall accompany the application. The village clerk shall forward one copy of
the application and three (3) copies of the exploratory plan to the plan commission at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which it is to consider
the matter; one copy to be retained by the village clerk for filing, and one copy to be returned to the owner or developer.
The exploratory proposal for a planned unit development shall be submitted and shall comprise, but not necessarily be limited to the following:
1. A written explanation of the general character of the project and the manner in which it is planned to take advantage of the flexibility of these
regulations.
2. A legal description of the property proposed to be developed.
3. A plan of the proposed planned development sufficient in detail and scope to afford the plan commission and the village board an opportunity to
make a determination as to whether the village is favorably or unfavorably disposed as to the granting of the necessary zoning certificate for a
conditional use for a planned development. The village board, when approving the exploratory proposal, shall not be bound by the location of
anything shown on such a plan if, when placed on a plat of survey there is any conflict or difference. The plan shall indicate:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 261/348
The approximate residential density proposed for the entire project and, if the project is to be comprised of well defined areas of varying types of
residential development, the approximate density for each such area.
The proposed height and bulk of buildings. However, the approval of the exploratory proposal by the village board shall not preclude their right to
pass judgment on the specific location of buildings when the preliminary plan is approved.
The approximate percentage of the project land area to be covered by buildings and streets.
The approximate number of dwelling units proposed for the project including a breakdown of the number of one, two (2), and three (3) or more
bedroom units.
Traffic circulation features within and adjacent to the project.
Areas designated for permanent open space, whether to be dedicated to the public or to be privately maintained.
Amenities to be provided within the proposed project.
Existing zoning of the project site and adjacent properties.
Generalized plan for utilities which will serve the project.
D. Review Procedure For An Exploratory Proposal: Within forty five (45) days of receipt by the plan commission of an exploratory proposal, the plan
commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposition of whether or not a conditional use for a planned development should be granted for
the subject property. This hearing shall be deemed to meet the statutory requirements for a public hearing for granting a conditional use and shall
comply with any notice requirements of local ordinances or state statutes.
At the next regular meeting of the plan commission following the public hearing, the plan commission shall act to recommend to the village board that
it: 1) take action indicating a favorable disposition toward zoning the subject property for a planned development of the nature being proposed,
subject to approval of the preliminary plan for the project; or 2) reject the proposal. In either case, the plan commission shall set forth the reasons for
its recommendations, and may, in the event of a favorable recommendation, specify particular items and conditions which should be incorporated in
subsequent plan submittal.
Upon receipt of the plan commission's recommendation, the village board shall act by resolution to either: 1) reject the proposal; or 2) accept the
proposal. The acceptance may be contingent and, if so, shall specifically state what additions or deletions from the proposed development as
submitted shall be made in the preliminary plan. Any such conditions may include but are not limited to allowable density, bulk of buildings,
provisions for permanent open space and ratios of dwelling unit types to be included in the project. The village board shall approve a preliminary
plan which complies with the proposal as accepted and conforms otherwise to the requirements for a preliminary plan as hereinafter set forth.
The village board approval shall lapse unless within one year from approval of the exploratory proposal, a preliminary plan for the planned
development is filed as required in this section; provided, however, that in the absence of a preliminary plan submittal, such one year period may be
extended for a specified period upon written request from the owner or developer and approval by the village board.
E. Preliminary Plan: Following a favorable resolution relative to the exploratory proposal, a preliminary plan of the proposed planned unit development
shall be submitted to the plan commission for review and approval. The owner or developer shall provide the plan commission with ten (10) copies
for review purposes. ln its review, the plan commission shall submit copies of the plan to the village's planner, engineer, and to the appropriate
school, park and fire districts providing required public facilities and services for review and comment. Comments and recommendations shall be
returned to the plan commission within thirty (30) days unless said period is extended by the commission. If said comments and recommendations
are not received within the designated time period, it will be construed to mean approval.
1. Submission Requirements: The submission for preliminary plan approval shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following information
prepared by a professional land planner, architect, or engineer:
a. An accurate boundary line survey showing bearings and distances, a legal description of the property, satisfactory evidence of ownership and a
location map showing the relationship of the proposed planned development to adjacent properties and to the village.
b. A site plan of the proposed development showing the location and arrangement of all proposed land uses, residential lots, and buildings,
including the height and number of floors of all buildings, both above and below finished grade; the building setbacks from the development
boundaries and adjacent buildings, streets, roads, alleys and other public ways; the proposed traffic circulation pattern including the location and
width of all streets, driveways and entrances to parking areas; all proposed off street parking and loading areas; all proposed open space areas
including common open space, tree locations, screening, bushes and other landscaping, dedicated open space and developed recreational
open space. The preliminary plan may be drawn in a freehand sketch form, provided it accurately depicts the detail and character of the
proposed development.
c. A plan or statement detailing the exact manner of improving developed recreational open space, and all covenants, restrictions and conditions
pertaining to the use, maintenance and operation of common open spaces.
d. A statement in tabular form of the anticipated residential density and the total number of dwelling units, the bedroom breakdown; the percentage
of the tract which is to be occupied by structures and other impervious surfaces, and in the case of commercial uses, the total gross leasable
floor area of all commercial uses and the off street parking and loading.
e. Topographic data including existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2'); and locations of watercourses, floodplains,
marshes, wooded areas and isolated trees having a diameter of one foot (1') or more.
f. Subsurface soil conditions.
g. Existing streets adjoining subject property.
h. Utilities on and adjacent to subject property, including location and size of existing water mains, sewers, culverts, drain pipes, and public utility
easements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 262/348
i. The names of adjoining subdivisions or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.
j. Name of the proposed development (if available), of the owner(s) and developer, and the designer of the preliminary site plan.
k. A preliminary outline of proposed protective covenants, including provision for the organization and financing of a property owner's association,
where appropriate.
2. Approval Of Preliminary Plans: Within ninety (90) days of receipt of the development plan and the accompanying documentation, the plan
commission shall take action on the preliminary plan. The action shall be in the form of a written recommendation to the village board approving,
approving with modification, or disapproving the plan and indicating the reasons therefor.
The village board shall thereafter approve, approve with modification, or disapprove the preliminary development and upon determination that said
plan complies with the standards herein set forth. In the case of approval, or approval with modification, the village board shall pass an ordinance
granting the special use and indicate its approval upon the plan. The village board may require such special conditions as it may deem necessary
to ensure conformance with the intent of all comprehensive plan elements and the stated purposes of the planned development ordinance. If the
preliminary plan is disapproved, the village board shall indicate the reasons for such findings and refer it back to the plan commission for further
study.
F. Final Plan: Upon the approval of the preliminary plan by the village board, a final development plat may be submitted for all the land included in the
proposed planned unit development or for a phase or unit thereof. Such plat shall be submitted to the plan commission within one year after approval
of the preliminary plan, and shall be in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan as approved.
1. Submission Requirements: The owner or developer shall submit five (5) copies of the final plan, which shall incorporate any revisions or other
features that may have been recommended by the plan commission and/or the village board at the time preliminary approval was granted. The
submission for final plan approval shall include:
a. A detailed site plan prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') showing the physical layout and design of
all streets, easements, rights of way, lots, blocks, common open space, all off street parking and loading areas, and the exact location of
structures and uses.
b. The plan shall show all radii, internal angles, points of curvatures, tangent bearings, and length of arcs; location, dimensions and purpose for all
easements; all block and lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths; names of all streets; and the location of all
buildings (except for single-family detached residences) and setback lines accurately dimensioned.
c. The description and location of all survey monuments erected in the planned unit development; the scale shown graphically; and the date and
north point.
d. All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated.
e. Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior elevations.
f. Storm drainage and engineering plans for sanitary sewer and water lines, including easements for underground utilities.
g. Proposed lighting system for streets, public areas, and common open space.
h. A general landscaping planting plan with list and size of plant materials, and grading plan, at a scale of not less than one inch equals fifty feet
(1" = 50') and preferably one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20').
i. Estimates of cost of installation of all proposed improvements, confirmed by a registered Illinois engineer.
j. Final drafts of legal agreements and documents including copies of any easements, deeds of dedication and other legal documents necessary
for the transfer of land and improvements to public and common ownership, restrictive covenants, and a copy of the articles of incorporation of
the property owner's association, if any.
k. An accurate legal description and boundary line survey of the area proposed for development in the application for final plan approval, plus
satisfactory evidence of ownership.
l. Final construction schedule, indicating the estimated date scheduled by the applicant for final completion of construction work on required public
facilities, land improvements, and on all buildings and private facilities within the proposed planned unit development, other than single-family
dwellings to be erected on separate lots.
m. A final plat of subdivision for all land included in the planned unit development, or for a phase or unit thereof, suitable for recording with the
county recorder of deeds.
n. A completion bond in a sum sufficient to cover the full cost of required public facilities and land improvements; or in lieu of a bond, a deposit of
cash, or other negotiable securities or guarantee acceptable to the village board of trustees, all as required by ordinance; if a surety bond, or
other guarantee is posted, it shall comply with ordinance, and be in such form as approved by the village attorney; the amount of such deposit or
bond shall be based upon the confirmed estimate of cost hereinabove provided for, and in an amount as required by ordinance.
2. Approval Of Final Plan And Plat: Upon receipt of all the plans and documents required for final approval, the plan commission shall review the final
plan and transmit its findings and recommendations to the village board within sixty (60) days after the meeting or meetings at which such final
plan is considered. The final plan shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan as approved, and, if desired by the developer, it may be
submitted in stages with each stage reflecting the approved preliminary plan which is proposed to be recorded and developed.
After receipt of the final plan from the plan commission, the village board shall, within thirty (30) days, approve, approve with modification, or
disapprove the final plan and shall pass an ordinance authorizing the planned unit development as a special use. If the final plan is disapproved,
the village board shall indicate the reasons and refer it back to the plan commission.
No building permit shall be issued until the final planned unit development plat and supporting documents have been recorded with the county
recorder of deeds, and proof of filing is provided to the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 263/348
G. Changes Or Deviations:
1. No changes or deviations may be made to the approved final development plan during the construction of the planned unit development without
the approval of the village board. Any deviation without the necessary approval shall serve automatically to revoke the original approval and to
avoid future action pursuant to the planned unit development.
2. However, at any time following approval of development plans, including the issuance of permits for any part thereof, the applicant may petition for
review in detail of the previously approved plan, stating his reasons therefor. Such reasons may be based upon such considerations as, but not
limited to, changing social or economic conditions, suggested improvements to layout or design features, or unforeseen difficulties or advantages,
such as site conditions, market conditions or statutory changes, which may mutually affect the interests of the applicant and the village. The plan
commission, upon finding that such petition and reasons are reasonable and valid, may reconsider the design of the planned unit development. A
self-imposed hardship shall not be a valid reason for change.
3. If the proposed change or deviation is considered minor and will not change the concept or intent of the development, the village board may
approve the change without referring it back to the plan commission or going through the preliminary approval steps. However, if the proposed
change is a substantial deviation from plans so approved, the applicant shall be referred back to the plan commission and the procedure and
conditions herein required for original submittal shall be followed in full.
4. A "substantial deviation" shall be defined as any change which includes increases in density, height of buildings, reductions in the amount of
proposed open space, changes in the development schedule, or changes in the final governing agreements, provisions, or covenants or other
changes which change the concept or intent of the development. Any other changes which do not change the concept or intent of the development
shall be deemed minor changes. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-3-6: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES FOR PUD:
A. Requirement; Amount: As a condition of final approval, the village board shall require the posting of such performance guarantees as it deems
necessary to ensure the installation of the improvements. Said performance guarantee shall be for a period of time to be determined by the village
board. The amount of the performance guarantee may be reduced by the village as portions of the required improvements have been completed.
B. Compliance With Final Plan: The planned unit development project shall be developed only according to the approved and recorded final plan and all
supporting data. The recorded final plan and all conditions imposed as a part of any planned unit development shall run with the land and shall not
lapse or be waived as a result of a subsequent change in tenancy or ownership of any or all of said area; however, nothing herein shall be construed
to limit the right of the developer, his successors or assigns to sell property in said planned unit development, except for such conditions imposed
upon said common areas.
C. Time Limit; Extension: If construction on the proposed planned unit development, or stage or unit of said development last approved, has not begun
within one year from the date the final plan was approved by the village board, the board may initiate proceedings to rezone the planned unit
development parcel to its original zone or zones, and the authorization of final approval shall become null and void and all rights thereunder shall
lapse. Upon written application, filed prior to the termination of the one year time limit, the village board may authorize a single extension of the time
limit for a further period of not more than twelve (12) months without a public notice. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-3-7: RECORDING PROCEDURE:
A. Filing Of Plan With County: Within thirty (30) days following the approval of the final plan for all or any portion of a planned unit development or prior
to the issuance of any building permit, the applicant shall record or cause the recordation of said approved plat with the county recorder of deeds
and shall provide proof of said filing to the village.
B. Designation On Zoning District Map: Upon approval of the final plan, the approved planned unit development shall be delineated and designated by
number on the zoning district map. A file, available for inspection by the public, shall be maintained by the village clerk for each planned unit
development so designated. The file shall contain a record of the approved development plan and all conditions and use exceptions authorized
therein. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
Chapter 4
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
11-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulations of nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses, and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses may be continued. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-4-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE:
A. Uses: Any lawfully established use of a building, structure or land on the effective date hereof, or on the effective date of an amendment to this title,
that does not conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is located shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be
continued, except as otherwise provided herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 264/348
B. Buildings Or Structures: Any building or structure lawfully established on the effective date hereof, may continue in use, provided there is no physical
change other than that allowed in this chapter.
C. Building Permits: Any building for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date hereof, or the effective date of an
amendment hereto, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction is started within one year of the date of
issuance of the building permit; and further provided, that all requirements of this title that can in the estimation of the zoning administrator be
complied with are adhered to.
D. Business Licenses: Any business for which a business license has been granted prior to the effective date hereof, may establish that business at the
location specified; provided, that the business begins operation within one year of the date of issuance of the business license; and further provided,
that all requirements of this title that can in the estimation of the zoning administrator be complied with are adhered to.
E. Subdivisions: Any proposed subdivision that possesses a valid preliminary plat or subdivision on the date of adoption of this title, whose lots do not
meet the required lot area or lot width requirements of the district such lots are located in may use such lots for purpose designated by the
preliminary plat, provided all other provisions of this title are adhered to; and further provided, that if the period of validity of such preliminary plat
expires without the developer obtaining final plat approval, any subsequent action to develop such land shall be in full compliance with the provisions
of this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-4-3: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
A. Buildings Or Structures: Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use
conforming to the provisions of this title, such premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use.
B. Uses: Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part thereof, has been discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days,
or whenever there is evidence a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such use shall not be reestablished, and the
use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such land is located.
C. Abandonment: Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days shall
constitute abandonment and shall not thereafter be used in a nonconforming manner.
D. Conformance Required After Vacancy: A building, structure, or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use which
is not permitted in the district in which it is located, and which is vacant on the effective date hereof, or thereafter becomes vacant and remains
unoccupied, or is not used for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, shall not thereafter be occupied or used except by a use which conforms to
the use regulations of the district in which it is located and if recommended by the plan commission and approved by the village board. (Ord. 961, 2-
12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-4-4: VACANT LOTS OF RECORD:
A. Use Restricted: Lots of record existing on the effective date hereof, that do not meet the requirements of this title shall be used only as hereafter
provided.
B. Combination Of Lots: Wherever one or more lots of record or parts thereof which are contiguous and under common ownership, exist that individually
do not meet the requirements of this title, but a combination thereof would meet the requirements of this title, such combination shall be considered a
single zoning lot.
C. Vacant Lot: Any vacant lot of record having a frontage on a dedicated street (not a dedicated right of way) on the effective date hereof, may be used
for a use permitted within the district in which such lot is located, provided one of the following criteria have been met:
1. The lot conformed with the minimum lot area and minimum lot width requirements of the previous ordinance.
2. A variation of the minimum lot area and lot width requirements of the district in which such lot is located has been granted in accordance with the
provisions of section 11-2-7 of this title.
D. Compliance Required: With the exception of the previous allowances for minimum lot area and minimum lot width, all other provisions of this title
shall be met.
E. Resubdivision: Any resubdivision of nonconforming lots of record shall be in full compliance with all provisions of this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff.
2-22-1997)
11-4-5: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
A. Maintenance: Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural
repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 265/348
B. Structural Alterations: No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following
situations:
1. The alteration is required by law;
2. When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the nonconforming building or structure;
3. When the alteration, in the estimation of the building inspector, will reduce the degree of nonconformance;
4. When the alteration would result in improved livability of a dwelling unit or units, provided no structural alteration would increase the number of
dwelling units;
5. When the building inspector determines a structural alteration is necessary to protect the health and safety of inhabitants or users of the structure;
6. When a nonconforming building or structure contains a use or uses permitted in the district where such uses are located, provided such structural
alterations will not increase the degree of nonconformance. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-4-6: DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION:
A. Reconstruction; Conditions: If a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or
more of its replacement value at that time, the building or structure shall only be allowed to be reconstructed in any manner that does not fully
comply with the provisions of this title under the following circumstances:
1. Single-family, two-family and multi-family residences located in a residential district, that do not meet the lot size requirements may be rebuilt,
provided all other requirements are met.
2. A variation has been granted based on evidence that full compliance is not possible due to a unique hardship. The variation will specify what
requirements are to be waived and to what degree. All other requirements of this title shall be met.
B. Restore To Original Condition: If damage and destruction does not amount to fifty percent (50%) of the replacement costs, the nonconforming
building or structure may be restored to its original condition.
C. Time Limit: In any event, restoration or repair must begin within one year of the date of the damage or destruction and be diligently prosecuted to
completion. If this is not done, any future use of such land shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-
1997)
11-4-7: ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS:
A. Conditions For Expansion: No nonconforming building or structure or conforming building containing a nonconforming use shall be expanded or
enlarged except under the following circumstances:
1. The building or structure is nonconforming due to lack of lot size or lot width. Expansion may occur, provided all other provisions of this title have
been met.
2. A conforming building containing a nonconforming use may be expanded, provided the nonconforming use is discontinued.
3. A conforming building or structure that houses more than one use may be expanded, provided such expansion is to be utilized entirely by a
conforming use.
4. The addition or enlargement would not increase the degree of nonconformance.
B. Variance: Expansion may occur if a variation has been granted based on evidence presented to the board of trustees that a unique hardship exists.
The variation will specify the conditions under which expansion may occur.
C. Different Use Prohibited: The nature of a nonconforming use shall not be changed to a different nonconforming use.
D. Detached Accessory Building: A detached accessory building may be constructed in the rear yard of the legal nonconforming building, such
accessory building must not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. Height of the accessory building shall not exceed a height of ten
feet (10').
E. Carports: A shelter designated as a carport may be erected in the side yard of the legal nonconforming building, provided the structure is not
attached to the prime structure and is not located beyond the front of the prime structure. The carport may be covered on the top and two (2) sides.
The side abutting the prime structure and the entrance to the carport are to remain open. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-4-8: ELIMINATION:
A. Signs: All signs shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this title within a five (5) year period; otherwise they shall be removed.
B. Mobile Homes: All mobile homes and mobile structures shall be removed or relocated in a manner to bring full compliance with the yard requirements
of the district in which they are located within a period of five (5) years; otherwise they shall be removed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 266/348
C. Time Period: The period specified for removal shall begin on the effective date hereof, or upon the effective date of any amendment hereto that
creates the nonconformity. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-4-9: CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE:
A. Special Use Permit: Any nonconforming building, structure or use may be converted to a permitted special use by the granting of a special use permit
under the provisions of section 11-2-9 of this title.
B. Conditions For Allowing: This conversion may only occur when it is shown that the nonconforming building, structure or use is providing a particular
service to the residents of the village and that such building, structure or use is not detrimental to the village, or adjacent properties. (Ord. 961, 2-12-
1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
Chapter 5
ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
11-5-1: CREATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. Boundaries: Zoning districts are hereby established in accordance with, and subject to, the provisions of this title, and all boundaries of said districts,
as designated on the village's official zoning map, are intended to define and preserve areas of the village characterized by existing uses, buildings,
and/or structures which fully comply with the applicable provisions of this title for the zoning district in which they are located.
B. Land Usage: The establishment of zoning districts is intended to work towards securing a balanced distribution of land usage, comprising the village's
physical structure. Areas for specific land uses shall be designated in the proper location and proportion so as to encourage and accommodate
economic growth, and increases in population, while enhancing and preserving the character of the community.
C. Nonconformance: It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of those districts that those buildings, structures and uses which do not
conform with the requirements of the district in which they are located not be continued without the restrictions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 961,
2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-5-2: ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS:
Subject to the provisions of this title, and to accomplish the purposes and intent thereof, the village shall hereby classify each lot of record located within
the corporate limits, into one of the following zoning districts:
R-1 Single-family residential
R-2 Multiple-family residential
ER Estate residential district
C-1 Commercial
C-2 Business office
C-3 Commercial center
M-1 Light industrial
M-2 Heavy industrial
M-1A Light manufacturing overlay district
(Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999; Ord. 1097, 7-26-2000)
11-5-3: ZONING MAP:
A. District Boundaries: The boundaries of the zoning districts designated above are established as shown on the map entitled "official zoning map,
Monee, Illinois", as of the effective date hereof, which map is attached to ordinance 961, on file in the office of the village clerk, and is made a part
hereof, and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon
were fully set forth and described herein. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Final Authority: Said map shall be considered the final authority in determining the current zoning for land, water areas, buildings and/or structures
located within the corporate limits.
C. Changes Indicated: Subject to the provisions of this title, and any applicable provisions of the Illinois municipal code1, changes made in zoning
district categories, and/or boundaries, or related matter, illustrated on the village's official zoning map, through annexation, disannexation, and/or
amendment, shall be indicated on said official zoning map.
D. Amending Ordinance: The amending ordinance shall stipulate and said zoning changes shall become effective, only after having been duly entered
in said official zoning map. No substantive changes shall be made on said official zoning map, or related thereon, until and unless, said changes fully
comply with documentation as shown in the provisions of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 267/348
E. Replacement Map: As authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-19, should the village's official zoning map become damaged, destroyed,
lost and/or difficult to interpret because of the nature and/or number of changes, the corporate authorities may, by ordinance, adopt a new
replacement official zoning map which shall supersede all prior zoning maps. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-5-4: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are either the centerline of railroads, highways, streets, alleys or easements or the boundary lines of sections, quarter
sections, divisions of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines extended otherwise indicated.
B. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth of
such strips shall be in accordance with the divisions shown on the maps measured at right angles from the centerline of the street or highway, and
the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the maps from section, quarter section or division lines, or railroad right of
way, unless otherwise indicated.
C. Where a lot held in one ownership and of record on the effective date hereof is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to
be within the less restricted district; provided, that this construction shall not apply if it increases the less restricted frontage of the lot by more than
twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-5-5: ZONING OF STREETS, WATERWAYS AND RAILROAD RIGHTS OF WAY:
All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as
the property immediately abutting on such alleys, streets, public ways and railroad rights of way or waterways. Where the centerline of a street, alley,
public way, waterway or railroad right of way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise indicated, shall be deemed to be
the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-5-6: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
Any area annexed to the village shall be automatically zoned R-1 single-family residence district, unless the property has been zoned otherwise under a
preannexation agreement. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-5-7: ZONING SUBJECT TO PREANNEXATION AGREEMENT:
A. Where a preannexation agreement is in effect that precludes the changing of zoning district classifications on the subject property, the provisions of
this title in effect at the date of annexation and the zoning district classifications specified in the preannexation agreement shall apply.
B. The provisions of this title or any subsequent amendments hereto shall not apply until such time as the term of the preannexation agreement has
expired or the developer has agreed to the application of such provisions.
C. Within six (6) months prior to the expiration of any such annexation agreement, the zoning board of appeals shall initiate an amendment to apply the
appropriate zoning district classification to the subject property, after the expiration of annexation agreement. Such amendments shall be in
accordance with the provisions of section 11-2-8 of this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
Chapter 6
GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS
11-6-1: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
A. Garages: In the residential districts, all garages may be attached or detached. If attached, there shall be a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of one
common wall attached to the main structure. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
B. Setbacks: (Rep. by Ord. 1086, 4-26-2000)
C. Time Of Construction: No accessory building or structure shall be constructed prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
D. Height: In residential districts, no attached accessory building shall exceed twenty feet (20') in height. No accessory building shall exceed the height
of the principal building. No detached accessory building shall exceed twelve and one-half feet (121/2') in height. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-
1997; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 268/348
E. Back Yard Occupancy: No detached accessory building shall occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the back yard. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-
1997)
F. Bolting To Slab; Exterior Finish: Accessory buildings shall be bolted to a concrete slab or placed on an impervious surface. The exterior finish must be
masonry, painted wood, stained wood, aluminum siding or a finish to complement the main dwelling structure and shall not include sheeting. (Ord.
1184, 5-8-2002)
G. Distance From Lot Line; Corner And Reverse Corner Lots: No accessory building shall encroach upon the side yard of a corner lot which is adjacent
to the street, nor upon that side yard of a reverse corner lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon the rear yard of a through lot.
H. Distance From Lot Line: No accessory building, unless it is structurally a part of the principal building, shall be erected, altered, or moved to a location
within ten feet (10') of the nearest wall of the principal building, nor within the required area for front or side yards of the lot as set forth for the district.
An accessory structure in a rear yard shall be not less than five feet (5') from any rear property line, however, all swimming pools located in a rear
yard shall be not less than ten feet (10') from any rear property line, with the exception of corner or reverse corner lots. Provided, however, the total
area of all accessory structures in the rear yard shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1086, 4-26-2000)
I. Permit Required: A permit must be secured for all accessory buildings. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
J. Encroachments: Open and unenclosed porches, decks, steps and supported roofs, when attached or structurally part of the principal building, are
permitted encroachments on the required rear yard setback up to, but not exceeding, ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1106, 10-25-2000)
11-6-2: SWIMMING POOLS:
A. Fence Required: Every outdoor swimming pool, whether aboveground or level with the ground having a maximum depth of over eighteen inches
(18") shall be completely surrounded by a fence not less than five feet (5') in height. A building or existing wall may be used as part of such
enclosure. The walls of any aboveground swimming pool shall not be deemed to constitute such a fence in and of themselves. Such required fence
shall comply with all requirements of other village ordinances pertaining to fences, and the provisions of this section shall not be construed to require
or permit any fence heights greater than permitted by such other ordinances.
B. Gates In Fences: All gates or doors opening through the required fence shall be designed to permit locking and shall be kept locked when the pool is
not in actual use or when the pool is unattended. All such gates or doors shall be self-latching and shall have the latches placed at least four feet (4')
above the ground or otherwise made inaccessible to small children.
C. Location Restriction: No swimming pool shall be located within ten feet (10') of a septic absorption field. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-6-3: DEVELOPMENT OF AIR RIGHTS:
The development of air rights above land located in any zoning district and utilized for public or private use, shall be permitted subject to all the
requirements of the zoning district within which such development is located. However, plans by all such air rights development shall be submitted to the
plan commission for its recommendations as to the appropriateness of the development in regard to the location of structures, traffic control, placement
of utilities, and all other matters related to the physical development of said air rights. Such recommendations shall be forwarded to, and shall be subject
to, the approval of the board of trustees in the same manner as special uses. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-6-4: LOTS:
A. Residential Buildings: Except in the case of planned developments, not more than one principal detached residential building shall be located on a
zoning lot within the R-1 and R-2 districts. No principal detached residential building shall be located on the same zoning lot as any other principal
building.
B. Vacant Through Lots: On vacant through lots, the front lot lines shall be along the street right of way designated by the zoning administrator except
that when a front lot line has been established on one or more lots in the same block and all have front lot lines established along the same street
right of way line, the street right of way line designated as the front lot line for such lot or lots shall be the front line on all vacant through lots in such
block. Only such obstructions as herein permitted in front yards shall be located in that part of a rear yard adjoining a street that is equivalent in
depth to a required front yard, except for lots backing to thoroughfares in subdivisions where no access strips have been provided on the recorded
plats.
C. Corner Lots: On a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line having the shortest dimension along the street right of way line. The other lot line
abutting the street right of way shall be considered the corner side lot line.
D. Multiple Uses: Where two (2) or more permitted or special uses, each requiring a minimum area and frontage, are provided in the same building or on
the same lot, the required area and frontage shall be the sum of the areas and frontage required for each use individually.
E. Frontage On Street: Every lot shall have a frontage on a dedicated street. Such frontage shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the required lot width
for the district in which such lot is located. Each lot containing a permitted or special use shall provide for ingress and egress to a dedicated street, in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 269/348
a manner that conforms with the standards for design and location of the appropriate state, county and village requirements, except in the C-3
district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1893 - FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS . Go to new ordinance.
11-6-5: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS:
A. Supplementary Regulations: The regulations contained in this section shall be supplementary to any floodplain, flood damage prevention, erosion
and sedimentation or any other village ordinance relating to floodplains and to all applicable state laws.
B. Purpose: The floodplain regulations contained in this section are established for the following purposes:
1. To avoid or lessen the hazards to persons or damage to property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters.
2. To maintain the capacity of the floodplain to retain floodwaters.
3. To provide for the development of floodplain lands with uses not subject to severe damage by flooding and uses which are compatible with the
other uses permitted in various zones.
4. To avoid the creation of new flood problems.
C. Floor Elevation: No new or existing buildings or structures shall be erected or moved within a floodplain as indicated upon the floodplain map unless
the lowest floor, including the basement floor, is at an elevation which is not less than two feet (2') above the floodplain elevation for the site;
provided, however, that basement floors may be erected below such elevation when the top of any basement wall or the bottom of any opening
therein is not less than two feet (2') above such elevation and if plans and calculations for such floor and walls prepared by a licensed engineer or
architect clearly indicate that the design is adequate to withstand expected forces and pressures to which it may be subjected.
D. Ground Elevation: The elevation of the ground for a minimum distance of twenty five feet (25') immediately surrounding any building or structure
erected or moved within a floodplain shall be at an elevation of two feet (2') above the flood base elevation for the site and shall extend in width not
less than twenty five feet (25') at, or above, such elevation to a public street or accessway.
E. New Street Elevation: The elevation of the finished surface at the crown of any new street constructed within a floodplain shall be not less than two
feet (2') above the flood base elevation of the area. The design of such streets or accessways shall be such that the normal direction of course of
drainage or runoff through the area is not interrupted.
F. Floor Reservoir: If fill or any type of construction which would displace floodwaters is placed within the floodplain, a flood reservoir shall be
constructed which shall hold water of equal volume to the volume of such fill or construction placed below the flood base elevation, all in accordance
with the standard specifications of the village. Each such flood reservoir shall have adequate provision of drainage to the waterway.
G. Alternate Flood Control Method: The board of trustees may, upon the recommendations of the village engineer, authorize any alternate method of
flood control and storm drainage other than that specified herein, provided such alternate method shall be in harmony with the purposes and interest
expressed in this title and be as effective as the measures provided herein. Upon compliance with the requirement of this title, the board of trustees
will, upon request of an affected property owner, authorize the village clerk to issue a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-6-6: OPEN SPACE ON LOTS:
A. Owner Obligation: The provisions of yards, courts and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a continuing
obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on which it is located, as long as the building is in existence. No legally required yards,
courts or other open space, or minimum lot area allocated to any building, shall by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to
satisfy yard, court or other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
B. Allocated Open Spaces: All yards, courts and other open spaces allocated to a building or group of buildings shall be located on the same zoning lots
as such building or group of buildings.
C. Reduction Of Yard Size: No yards now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the date of adoption of this title shall subsequently be reduced
below, or further reduced if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this title for equivalent new construction. However, a yard adjoining
a street may be reduced to provide right of way for a street widening, except in the C-3 district.
D. Intersections Of Roads; Sight Triangle: At the intersection of roads or at the point of ingress and egress onto roads, no structure, parked vehicle or
plant material shall obstruct a clear path of motor vehicle drivers' vision of approaching vehicles within a triangular square determined by a diagonal
line connecting two (2) points measured seventy five feet (75') equidistant from the point of intersection with the centerlines of the roads and the
points of ingress and egress.
E. Obstructions In Yards: The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified:
1. All Yards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 270/348
a. Open terraces not over three feet (3') above the average level of the adjoining ground, but not including permanently roofed over terrace or
porch;
b. Awnings and canopies, but not projecting more than ten feet (10') out and at least seven feet (7') above the average level of the adjoining
ground;
c. Steps, four feet (4') or less above grade, which are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street or
alley;
d. Chimneys projecting twenty four inches (24") or less into the yard;
e. Arbors, trellises, flagpoles, fountains, sculptures, plant boxes and other similar ornamental objects; and
f. Fences, walls and hedges subject to the provisions of section 11-6-7 of this chapter.
2. Front Yards: One story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less onto the yards; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3')
or less into the yard.
3. Rear Yards: Enclosed, attached or detached off street parking spaces, accessory shed, toolrooms and similar buildings or structures for domestic
or agricultural storage; balconies, breezeways and open porches; one story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard;
overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard. In any residential district, no accessory shall be nearer than ten feet
(10') to any principal building unattached.
4. Side Yards: Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting into the yard for a distance not exceeding two feet (2'). (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-
1997)
11-6-7: FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES:
A. Compliance Required: No fence, wall or hedge shall be constructed or erected except as provided in this section.
B. Building Permit Required: No fence or wall shall be erected or substantially altered prior to receiving a building permit for such purposes.
C. Placement: No private fences, walls or hedges shall be allowed or constructed on public streets, highways or alley rights of way. Fences or hedges
may be placed on public utility easements, provided such fences or hedges do not interfere in any way with existing underground, ground or
overground utilities. The village or any utility company having authority to use such easements shall not be liable for repair or replacement of such
fences in the event they are moved, damaged or destroyed by virtue of the lawful use of said easement. Fences in violation of this subsection may
be summarily removed by the village.
D. Barbed Wire Fences: Barbed wire or barbed wire fences shall not be allowed on property in residential districts or on lots in any district being used for
residential purposes. Barbed wire or barbed wire fences shall not be allowed in commercial or industrial districts where:
1. The barbed wire is located along a property line that abuts a residence district.
2. The barbed wire is located along a property line abutting and not used for residential purposes.
3. The barbed wire would be located in any required front or corner side yard.
E. Construction Material: No fence or wall shall be constructed of material intended to inflict bodily harm to a person attempting to climb or scale it. Such
material includes, but is not limited to, electrically charged wires or other electrical conduit razor blades and sharp or ragged metal spikes or spears.
Barbed wire may be used only as authorized in this section. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
F. Construction Requirements: All fences and walls shall be constructed in conformity with the wind, stress, foundations, structural and other
requirements of the building code and other applicable ordinances of the village. All fence postholes shall be a minimum of thirty six inches (36") in
depth. (Ord. 1220, 2-26-2003)
G. Maintenance: All fences, walls and hedges shall be maintained in good, structurally sound repair and in a neat, clean, presentable and attractive
condition.
H. Residence Districts: Fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in residence districts only in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Fences, walls and hedges located in the rear yard and interior side yards shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
2. With the following exceptions, no fences, walls or hedges shall be permitted in any front or corner side yard:
a. Fences intended primarily for aesthetic purposes. Such fence shall not exceed three feet (3') at its uppermost horizontal level or forty two inches
(42") to the top of its uppermost post. At least fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the overall dimensions of the fence shall be open.
Such fence shall not have a linear length of greater than fifty percent (50%) of the lot width at the building setback line. A woven wire or cyclone
type fence shall not be considered a decorative fence.
b. Hedges that do not exceed either three feet (3') in height or ten feet (10') in linear length may be permitted.
c. Decorative walls, or similar brick or concrete structures may be permitted, provided such structures do not exceed three feet (3') in height or a
total of thirty (30) linear feet in length.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 271/348
I. Commercial And Industrial Districts: Fences, walls and hedges in all commercial and industrial districts may only be permitted in accordance with the
following provisions, except in the C-3 district:
1. Fences, walls and hedges located in the rear yard and that portion of the interior side yards located between the rear lot line and building setback
line shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height.
2. With the following exceptions, no fences, walls or hedges shall be permitted in any front or corner side yard:
a. Fences intended primarily for aesthetic purposes. Such fence shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") at its uppermost horizontal level or fifty
four inches (54") to the top of its uppermost post. At least fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the overall dimensions shall be open. (A
woven wire or cyclone type fence shall not be considered a decorative fence.)
b. Hedges that do not exceed either three feet (3') in height or ten feet (10') in linear length may be permitted.
c. Decorative walls or similar brick or concrete structures may be permitted, provided such structures do not exceed three feet (3') in height or
twenty (20) linear feet in length. A wall or similar structure exceeding the previous standards with the title and basic description information of
the business located on that lot may be allowed as a permitted sign, in accordance with chapter 12 of this title.
3. Barbed wire or a barbed wire fences may be used, where not specifically prohibited in this title, under the following conditions:
a. The barbed wire or barbed wire fencing is located in the rear yard or that portion of the interior side yard located between the rear lot line and
the building setback line and such wire is only used on the top eighteen inches (18") of any fence; or
b. The board of trustees has issued a permit to use barbed wire or similar materials as a protective device from a particular hazard.
J. Screening: Except in the C-3 district, such screening that may be required by other provisions of this title should be in accordance with the provisions
of this section. Where a discrepancy between the location of screening required by another provision of this title and the provisions of this section
exists, the zoning administrator shall determine the applicable provisions.
K. Variance To Provisions: The board of trustees may, upon written application, vary the requirements of this section if presented with evidence of a
specific hardship or unique circumstances that could be abated by varying the standards of this section. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-6-8: SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to require the submittal of site plans for review by the planning commission and approval by the board of
trustees for certain buildings and structures that may have an impact on natural resources, traffic circulation, surrounding land uses, and the
character of the community.
B. Applicability: A site plan shall be required prior to the issuance of zoning certification within all districts for the construction or expansion of any
permitted or special use with the exception of individual single-family and two-family dwellings, unless otherwise specified herein.
C. Fees: The board of trustees shall establish by resolution, a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, for site plan review including planning review,
engineering review, attorney, inspection and other matters pertaining to this title; the schedule shall be available in the village hall and may be
amended only by the board of trustees. Any special meeting of the planning commission or board of trustees requested by the developer shall be
paid for by the developer prior to said meeting at the rate of a regularly scheduled meeting.
D. Filing And Review Procedures:
1. Preapplication Meeting: A preapplication meeting for residential developments will be held with the residential development committee and for all
other developments with the village economic development committee, and any staff and/or consultants requested to attend by the respective
committee, to discuss the proposed development and how it achieves the village's planning and zoning objectives; and raise issues that may
hinder or prevent an expeditious approval of the proposed development.
a. Prior to the meeting the applicant should provide concept plans for the site. The concept plan should be a scaled drawing of the site showing
the existing and proposed methods of ingress and egress, the footprints of all existing and proposed buildings, the location of all proposed
residential lots and the number of residential units, if applicable, and the proposed locations of parking areas and number of spaces.
b. The applicant should submit a brief written statement that contains a general description of the proposed development, a legal description of the
property, and a statement of present ownership and any additional information that provides a more complete overview of the site and proposed
development.
c. The residential or economic development committee, staff, and consultants shall review the proposed concept plans and advise the applicant on
the compatibility of the intended development with the village's comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and other regulations.
Recommendations relative to the preapplication meeting are advisory only, and shall not constitute a waiver from the requirements of this code.
Final approval of all elements of the proposed development remains with the board of trustees as detailed in the village's zoning ordinance.
d. The residential or economic development committee, village staff and/or consultants will prepare a written summary of the meeting and
comments to the plan commission.
e. The applicant may request additional preapplication meetings with the residential or economic development committee and/or consultants in
order to clarify issues, provide more information, or elicit additional comments on the proposal.
2. Submittal Of Site Plan Approval Application: The proprietor shall file twelve (12) copies of the site plan accompanying an application for site plan
approval and zoning certification with the zoning administrator at least eighteen (18) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 272/348
site plan is to be considered.
a. The zoning administrator shall review the submittal for completeness as to form only. If complete, the zoning administrator shall forward the
materials to the village planner and village engineer for their review. If the submittal is not complete, the zoning administrator shall notify the
applicant in writing of the deficiencies. Any plan deemed by the zoning administrator to be incomplete shall not be forwarded to the village
planner and the village engineer until all required information is furnished. If the applicant does not submit additional information which
sufficiently addresses the deficiencies at least fourteen (14) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the site plan is to be
considered, review of the application will be moved to the next available scheduled meeting.
3. Appearance Review: Any site plan proposing the construction or expansion of any permitted or special use within a residential or commercial
zoning district, with the exception of individual single-family and two-family dwellings, must be submitted for a determination of compliance with the
village's appearance code and design guidelines. Projects proposed within any residential zoning district will be reviewed by the residential
development committee. Projects proposed within any commercial zoning district will be reviewed by the economic development committee.
a. At least seven (7) days prior to the planning commission meeting the residential/economic development committee will meet with the applicant
to review the proposed site plan and advise the applicant on the compatibility of the intended development with the village's appearance code
and design guidelines.
b. The residential/economic development committee shall make a determination as to whether the site plan is in compliance with or inconsistent
with the village's appearance code and design guidelines and present their findings to the planning commission.
c. The residential/economic development committee, village staff and/or consultants will prepare a written summary of the meeting and comments
to the planning commission.
4. Planning Commission Review: At a public meeting, the planning commission will review the applicant's site plan for compliance with all applicable
village, county, and state ordinances and statutes including, but not limited to, subsection F, "Standards For Site Plan Review", of this section. The
planning commission shall also consider the findings of the appearance review committee, village planner, village engineer and any appropriate
village staff.
a. Within forty five (45) days of their first meeting, the planning commission must take one of the following actions:
(1) Recommend approval of the application as submitted to the board of trustees; or
(2) On the basis of written findings, recommend approval of the application to the board of trustees subject to specific modifications; or
(3) On the basis of written findings, recommend denial of the application to the board of trustees.
b. Prior to the forty five (45) day requirement for planning commission action, the applicant may request an extension to allow for further
consideration in front of the planning commission for the purpose of working toward a more favorable recommendation.
5. Board Of Trustees Action: At a public meeting, the board of trustees will review the applicant's site plan for compliance with all applicable village,
county, and state ordinances and statutes including, but not limited to, subsection F, "Standards For Site Plan Review", of this section. The board
of trustees shall also consider the recommendation of the planning commission, findings of the appearance review committee, village planner,
village engineer and any appropriate village staff.
a. Within forty five (45) days of their first meeting, the board of trustees must take one of the following actions:
(1) Approve the application as submitted; or
(2) Approve the application contingent upon written specific modifications; or
(3) Deny the application.
b. Prior to the forty five (45) day requirement for board of trustee action, the applicant may request an extension to allow for further consideration in
front of the board of trustees for the purpose of working toward an approval of the application.
6. Certificate Of Zoning, Site Plan Inspection, And Business License/Occupancy Permit:
a. If a site plan is approved contingent upon specific recommendations, the applicant must resolve all issues prior to the issuance of any
certificates or permits.
b. Prior to affixing a certificate of zoning to any business license or occupancy permit application, the zoning administrator shall conduct an on site
inspection to ensure the applicant is in compliance with the site plan as approved and all applicable village titles and ordinances.
c. Once the zoning administrator has determined that the proposed use of land, buildings or structures complies with all the provisions of this title
and issues a certificate of zoning affirming such a determination, the application for a business license for commercial or industrial uses shall be
submitted to the village board for final approval.
d. Once the zoning administrator has determined that the proposed use of land, buildings or structures complies with all the provisions of this title
and issues a certificate of zoning affirming such a determination, the application for a residential permit shall be issued by the zoning
administrator.
E. Required Site Plan Information:
1. General Information:
a. Name and address of the proprietor and proof of ownership, developer, and registered engineer, registered surveyor, registered architect,
registered landscape architect, or registered community planner who prepared the site plan.
b. Date of plan preparation, north arrow, and scale of plan, which shall not be greater than one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20') nor less than one
inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 273/348
c. Existing and proposed zoning designations, property tax number and full legal description of parcel and dimensions of all lot and property lines
showing the relationship to abutting properties, and in which district the subject property and abutting properties are located.
d. Area map showing the relationship of the parcel to the surrounding area within one-half (1/2) mile.
e. The location and description of all existing structures within one hundred feet (100') of the parcel.
2. Physical Information:
a. Proposed plans for site grading, surface drainage, water supply and sewage disposal.
b. The location of existing and proposed landscaping, buffer areas, fences, or walls on the parcel.
c. Existing and proposed structure information, including the following:
(1) Footprint location, dimensions and setbacks.
(2) Finished floor and grade line elevations.
(3) Elevations drawings that illustrate building design, size, height, windows and doors, and describe construction materials. Elevations shall be
provided for all sides visible from an existing or proposed public street or a residential zoning district.
(4) The planning commission may require a color rendering of the building elevation required in subsection E2c(3) of this section.
(5) Proposed materials and colors shall be specified on the site plan. Color chips or samples shall also be submitted at or prior to the planning
commission meeting to review the site plan. These elevations, colors and materials shall be considered part of the approved site plan.
d. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed streets, driveways, sidewalks, service lanes and other vehicular and pedestrian
circulation features within and adjacent to the site.
e. The location, dimensions, and numbers of off street parking and loading spaces.
f. Location of existing and proposed service facilities above and below ground, including:
(1) Chemical and fuel storage tanks and containers.
(2) Storage, loading, and disposal areas for chemicals, hazardous substances, salt and fuels.
(3) Water mains, hydrants, pump houses, standpipes, and building services and sizes.
(4) Sanitary sewers and pumping stations.
(5) Stormwater control facilities and structures including storm sewers, swales, retention and detention basins, drainageways and other facilities,
including calculations for sizes.
(6) Location of all easements.
g. Any other pertinent physical features.
3. Natural Features:
a. Map of existing topography at two foot (2') contour intervals with existing surface drainage indicated.
b. Soil characteristics of the parcel to at least the detail provided by the U.S. soil conservation service "Soil Survey Of Will County, Illinois".
c. On parcels of more than one acre, existing topography with a maximum contour interval of two feet (2') indicated. Topography on the site and
beyond the site for a distance of one hundred feet (100') in all directions should be indicated. Grading plan, showing finished contours at a
maximum interval of two feet (2'), correlated with existing contours so as to clearly indicate required cutting, filling and grading.
d. Location of existing drainage courses, including lakes, ponds, rivers and streams, and all elevations.
e. Location of existing wetlands.
f. Location of natural resource features, including woodlands and areas with slopes greater than ten percent (10%) (1 foot of vertical elevation for
every 10 feet of horizontal distance).
g. Sites which include storage of hazardous materials or waste, fuels, salt, or chemicals will be designed to prevent spills and discharges or
polluting materials to the surface of the ground, groundwater, or nearby water bodies.
F. Standards For Site Plan Review: In the review of all site plans, the planning commission and board of trustees shall endeavor to assure the following:
1. The proposed development conforms to all provisions of the zoning ordinances.
2. All required information has been provided.
3. The movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the site and in relation to access streets and sidewalks will be safe and convenient.
4. The proposed development will be harmonious with existing and future uses in the immediate area and the community.
5. The proposed development provides the necessary infrastructure improvements, such as roads, drainage, pedestrian facilities and utilities, to
serve the site, and be adequately coordinated with the current and future use of adjacent properties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 274/348
6. The applicable requirements of village, county and state agencies are met regarding grading and surface drainage and for the design and
construction of storm sewers, stormwater holding facilities, water mains, and sanitary sewers.
7. Natural resources will be preserved to the maximum extent possible in the site design by developing in a manner which will not detrimentally affect
or destroy natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, steep slopes, and woodlands.
8. The proposed development shall respect the natural topography to the maximum extent possible by minimizing the amount of cutting, filling, and
grading required.
9. The proposed development will not cause soil erosion or sedimentation.
10. Landscaping, including trees, shrubs and other vegetative material is provided to maintain, improve and/or restore the aesthetic quality of the
site.
11. Conformance to the village appearance code and design guidelines.
12. All proposed residential, commercial, office, industrial, and institutional development shall utilize quality architecture to ensure that buildings are
compatible with surrounding uses, protect the investment of adjacent landowners, blend harmoniously into the streetscape and meet the
objectives of the village master plan. New buildings, additions and renovations shall be designed to preserve or complement the design character
of existing development, provide visual harmony between old and new buildings, and create a positive image for the village.
G. Effect Of Approval: Upon final approval of the site plan, construction or expansion of any permitted or special use shall conform to the site plan. The
approval by the board of trustees of a site plan shall expire within one year after the date of such approval, unless a building permit has been issued
and construction has commenced. The zoning administrator shall not authorize the issuance of a building permit for any type of construction on the
basis of the approved site plan after such approval has expired.
H. Amendment Of Approved Site Plan: A previously approved site plan may be amended by the board of trustees upon application by the applicant in
accordance with procedures provided in subsection D of this section.
I. Performance Guarantees: As a condition of approval of the site plan, the board of trustees may require a deposit by the applicant with the village clerk
in the form of a certified check, cash, or a surety bond to ensure performance of any obligations of the applicant to make improvements shown upon
the site plan. Such bond, cash, or check shall be in such an amount as the zoning administrator shall estimate to be a sufficiently adequate sum to
cover the cost to construct or to complete construction of the required improvements. The village shall rebate to the developer, as work progresses,
amounts of such deposits equal to the ratio of work satisfactorily completed to the entire project. Such rebate shall be based upon the report and
recommendation of the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may refer the site plan to the village engineer for review of the proposed
improvements and recommendations of performance guarantees. (Ord. 1406, 7-26-2006)
11-6-9: TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
No building or structure shall be erected, altered, extended or enlarged, unless the exterior walls are constructed of stone, brick, reinforced concrete,
concrete blocks, glass, steel, aluminum or wood paneling or any combination thereof, provided that not more than fifty percent (50%) of the front exterior
elevation of such building or structure shall be constructed of any combination of metal siding, reinforced concrete or concrete blocks. No secondhand
or used building materials shall be used in any such construction. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
Chapter 7
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
11-7-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Statement Of Purpose: The requirements for each district mentioned in this chapter contain a statement of purpose, detailing the intent and any
special requirements for each district.
B. Permitted Uses: Permitted uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in the districts indicated under the conditions specified.
Any use not listed as a permitted use may be permitted if the board of trustees, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote, affirms that the nonlisted use is similar in
nature and clearly compatible with the listed permitted uses.
C. Special Uses: Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed in the zoning districts indicated, subject to the issuance of a special use permit in
accordance with the provisions of section 11-2-9 of this title. An application for a special use permit for a nonlisted use may be made if the board of
trustees by a two-thirds (2/3) vote has affirmed that the nonlisted use is similar in nature and clearly compatible with the listed special uses of that
district.
D. Lot Sizes: Lot size requirements shall be expressed in terms of minimum lot area and minimum lot width. A variance from the required lot area and lot
width shall only be allowed under the provisions of section 11-2-7 of this title.
E. Yards: Yard requirements shall be expressed minimum building setback from the front, corner side yard, interior side yard and rear property lines. In
the case of more than one principal structure on a single zoning lot a separation of structures shall be required. A variance from the specified yard
requirements shall only be allowed under the provisions of section 11-2-7 of this title. Only those permitted obstructions detailed in section 11-6-6 of
this title shall be allowed in a required yard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 275/348
F. Building Bulk: Building bulk limitations shall be expressed as maximum building height, maximum floor area ratio, or minimum building size. A
variance from any building bulk limitation shall only be allowed under the provisions of section 11-2-7 of this title.
G. Ingress And Egress: Point on ingress and egress onto dedicated streets for all uses other than single- and two-family units shall be approved by the
director of public works prior to the beginning of any grading or earthwork.
H. Guarantee Of Improvements: A performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other guarantee of improvement for an amount determined by the
village engineer in a form approved by the village attorney shall be provided to guarantee all improvements required by this title not completed at the
time of issuance of an occupancy permit.
I. Signs: All signs located in residence districts shall be in accordance with the regulations established in chapter 12 of this title.
J. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading facilities, accessory to uses allowed in residence districts shall be in accordance with
the regulations established in chapter 11 of this title.
K. Uses: Uses already established on the effective date hereof shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-
1997)
11-7-2: RESIDENTIAL LOT BUILDING PERMITS:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section the following words shall have the following meanings:
BONA FIDE PURCHASER: An individual who has entered into a binding real estate contract with a developer or property owner to purchase a fully
constructed residence which will be occupied by a date certain.
DEVELOPER/OWNER: An individual company or partnership who owns real estate within the Village which is zoned for residential purposes.
SPECULATIVE RESIDENCE: A residence proposed to be constructed by a developer or property owner of a residential lot without first securing a
bona fide purchaser. (Ord. 1475, 3-10-2008)
B. Building Permits: No more than two (2) building permits shall be issued and remain active, at any one time, to a developer/owner of a residential lot
for the purpose of constructing a speculative residence in an area zoned R-1, R-2 or ER. (Ord. 1873, 9-12-2018)
C. Conveyance Of Vacant Residential Lots: Nothing herein shall prohibit the developer/owner from selling, transferring, assigning, or conveying a
residential lot to any third party. Said third party shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this section. (Ord. 1475, 3-10-2008)
ARTICLE A. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-7A-1: INTENT:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the district regulations in the R-1 Single-
Family Residential District. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Land shall be used and buildings shall be erected, altered, enlarged or used only for one or more of the following purposes:
Accessory buildings.
Automobile parking space.
Group homes.
Nameplates and signs.
One-family unattached dwellings, subject to not more than one detached single-family residential building shall be permitted on any lot.
Professional offices and home occupations subject to the following conditions:
A. Location: A home occupation may be conducted in any dwelling unit in any zoning district in which dwelling units are permitted. Use of
detached accessory buildings or structures for the home occupation is prohibited.
B. Allowable Square Footage: The home occupation shall be subordinate and incidental to the principal use of the building or structure for
residential purposes, and not more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be devoted to the home occupation.
Any area used for the storage of materials used in conjunction with the home occupation shall be included in the mentioned amount.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 276/348
C. Structural Alterations: Structural alterations necessary to accommodate a home occupation are prohibited.
D. Sale Of Goods/Services: Transactions should be conducted in such a way that physical interactions with vendors and customers does not
primarily occur at this location.
E. Manufacturing: Any production on the premises shall not involve the conduct of a manufacturing business typically only permitted in the
industrial districts.
F. Signs: On site signs advertising the home occupation shall be prohibited.
G. Deliveries: Deliveries associated with the home occupation are prohibited unless provided by U.S. postal carrier, parcel service or passenger
vehicle.
H. Traffic/Parking: The home occupation shall not generate any additional traffic or on-street parking beyond that which normally occurs in the
zoning district in which located.
I. Outdoor Storage: Any outdoor storage of goods or materials used in conjunction with the home occupation is prohibited.
J. Hazardous Materials: The use or storage of hazardous or otherwise regulated materials in conjunction with the home occupation shall be
prohibited.
K. Regulated Services: Services regulated by Federal, State, or County agencies in conjunction with the home occupation shall be prohibited
unless the service is approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an annual basis. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall apply the standards set
forth in title 3, "Business And License Regulations", of this Code, including notification requirements if stipulated, when reviewing an annual
application. Additionally, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require the applicant to provide written notice of his/her business application to the
adjoining landowners. If, after due consideration, the Zoning Board of Appeals makes a finding that the application is satisfactory, it shall have the
authority to recommend the issuance of a business license.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes on approval of location, size, and necessity, by the Zoning Board of Appeals, for a period of six (6)
months after which time they may be renewed for six (6) months' period at the discretion of the Zoning Board of Appeals. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-
22-1997; amd. Ord. 1784, 3-13-2017)
11-7A-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following may also be permitted if the location and development plan is approved by the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals,
provided buildings do not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area. Such development plan, three (3) copies of which shall be submitted by an
applicant for a conditional use, shall indicate, whenever appropriate, on site parking and loading facilities, vehicular and pedestrian access, means for
the protection of abutting properties, and such other information as may be necessary to depict the development features of the lot.
Hospital or rest home.
Noncommercial recreation building, playground, park or athletic field.
Nursery school or childcare center, provided there is a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area for each child to be cared for,
and provided further that the area be fenced and screened from view from any adjoining lot in any R-1 District.
Planned unit development.
Public off street parking area, subject to the following regulations:
A. Plans for the development of a parking area shall be referred to the Plan Commission for approval prior to the granting of this conditional use by
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Where a parking area adjoins the side or rear of a lot in an R-1 District:
1. An ornamental fence, having a height of not less than three feet (3') and not more than five feet (5') shall be erected on the boundary of such lot.
Such fence shall extend no closer to the street line than the required front yard for the adjacent R-1 District.
2. Front yard requirements for the adjacent R district shall be observed for a distance of fifty feet (50') from the adjacent R district boundaries.
3. No vehicle parking shall be permitted closer than thirty feet (30') from the adjacent R district boundaries.
4. In a strip of a minimum width of thirty feet (30'), surrounding the area in which vehicle parking will be permitted, plantings having a height of not
less than three feet (3') nor more than five feet (5') shall be maintained for the purpose of deflecting from the adjacent R district headlight glare
arising from parking area. Such plantings shall be of the type which will be effective during all seasons of the year. There shall also be planted
and maintained in said strip, trees so arranged as to deflect from the adjacent R district light arising from the lamp posts in the parking area. All
areas not used for vehicle parking, including the adjacent street parkways, shall be suitably landscaped and maintained.
C. Lighting facilities shall be so arranged as to deflect the light away from the adjoining R district insofar as practicable.
D. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided in the public right-of-way immediately adjacent to the front line of a parking area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 277/348
E. No entrances or exits for a parking area shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to an adjacent R district boundary.
F. Except for approved entrances and exits, a curb not less than six inches (6") in height shall be erected not less than two feet (2') from any lot line
adjacent to a street or other public right-of-way.
Public utility and government buildings and structures and uses, including business service offices as adjunct uses.
Religious and cultural buildings, and buildings usually associated with similar activities.
Schools, public or private. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-7A-4: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
A. No tent, shack, mobile home, basement of an unfinished house or similar enclosure shall be used for residence; except that servants, employed upon
the premises, may be quartered in an accessory building, provided no kitchen facilities are contained therein.
B. The sale of alcoholic beverages in any form. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-7A-5: PARKING REGULATIONS:
Any use that is constructed or reconstructed in the R district shall provide and maintain adequate parking space upon the lot or tract. (Ord. 961, 2-12-
1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-7A-6: BUILDING HEIGHT LIMIT:
Except as approved in the design of a particular site plan, no building shall be erected or enlarged to exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty feet
(30'). (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-7A-7: LOT AREA AND LIVABLE FLOOR AREA REQUIRED:
Each lot shall have a minimum width of seventy five feet (75') and no minimum depth required. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be eleven
thousand (11,000) square feet. No building with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of thirty percent (30%) of the area of an interior or corner
lot. Also, every detached single-family dwelling shall have a minimum of one thousand six hundred fifty (1,650) square feet of livable floor area. (Ord.
961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
11-7A-8: SETBACKS FOR PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES:
A. Yards:
1. Front Yard Depth Required: Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than thirty feet (30').
2. Side Yard Depth Required: The sum of the two (2) side yards shall be not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the width of the lot and neither
one shall be less than twelve and one-half feet (121/2').
3. Rear Yard Required: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the depth of the lot measured from the
rear lot line, but such yard need not exceed thirty feet (30').
B. Corner Lot Requirements: Front yard requirements shall be met on both frontages and corner lots. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
ARTICLE B. R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-7B-1: INTENT:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the district regulations in the R-2 multiplefamily
residential district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Land shall be used and buildings shall be erected, altered, enlarged or used only for one or more of the following purposes:
All principal uses permitted and as regulated in R-1 district, except as hereinafter modified.
Multiple-family residential dwellings (apartments). (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 278/348
11-7B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Same as specified for R-1 district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-7B-4: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Same as specified for R-1 district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-7B-5: BUILDING HEIGHT LIMIT:
No building shall be erected or enlarged to exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-7B-6: LOT AREA REQUIRED:
Each lot shall have a minimum width of one hundred feet (100') and a minimum area of sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet. The minimum living area
per dwelling unit shall be one thousand five hundred fifty (1,550) square feet. The buildings, including accessory buildings, on any lot shall not cover, in
the aggregate, more than forty percent (40%) of the area of such lot. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
11-7B-7: SETBACKS FOR PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES:
A. Yards:
1. Front Yard Depth Required: Each lot shall have a front yard not less than thirty feet (30').
2. Side Yard Depth Required: There shall be a side yard of at least fifteen feet (15') on each side, and the minimum distance between main buildings
shall not be less than thirty feet (30').
3. Rear Yard Depth Required: Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than thirty feet (30') in depth, measured from the rear lot line.
B. Corner Lot Requirement: Same as specified in R-1 district.
C. Court Requirements: Any court shall have a width equal to not less than forty feet (40'). The depth of any court shall not be greater than two (2) times
its width. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
ARTICLE C. ER ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11-7C-1: INTENT:
The ER estate residential district is designed to provide for estate type single-family residential development and is intended to create an environment of
homes on lots larger than typical for urban type residential areas. (Ord. 1097, 7-26-2000)
11-7C-2: PERMITTED USES:
The permitted uses, lot area, setbacks, and other requirements are designed to encourage a quality residential area in a rural setting. Land shall be
used and buildings shall be erected, altered, enlarged or used only for one or more of the following purposes:
Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal use, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Storage of building materials and equipment, and temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the duration of such
construction.
Temporary real estate tract offices for the purpose of conducting the sale of lots of the tract upon which such tract offices are located; provided such
office is removed within a period not to exceed two (2) years after the date of the final plat approval for the subdivision in which such office is located.
(Ord. 1097, 7-26-2000)
11-7C-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be allowed in the ER district:
Athletic fields and playgrounds.
Cemeteries.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 279/348
Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, and tennis clubs.
Cultural institutions, including: public libraries and public art galleries; public museums.
Garages.
Golf courses, including ancillary uses normally provided, such as restaurants (including the sale of alcoholic beverages) and residential uses for guests,
manager and other employees, but not including commercially operated driving ranges or miniature golf courses; and provided that a clubhouse or
accessory building shall be located not less than three hundred feet (300') from a lot line.
Public services uses as follows:
Electric substations.
Filtration plant, pumping station and water reservoir.
Gas regulator station.
Police and fire stations, other municipal buildings.
Railroad rights of way and trackage, but not including reclassification, yards, terminal facilities or maintenance facilities.
Sewage treatment plant.
Telephone exchange, telephone transmission equipment, buildings and microwave relay towers.
Other similar public service uses.
Recreational and social facilities as follows:
Grounds of recreational clubs, noncommercial.
Parks and playgrounds.
Recreational buildings and community centers, noncommercial.
Swimming pools, noncommercial.
Tennis clubs and courts, noncommercial.
Religious institutions as follows:
Chapels.
Churches.
Parish houses.
Parsonages.
Rectories.
Synagogues.
Temples.
Schools, public or private, nonboarding.
Secondary religious facilities servicing a principal religious institution.
Tool houses, sheds, and other similar buildings for the storage of domestic supplies. (Ord. 1097, 7-26-2000)
11-7C-4: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Driving ranges, pitch and putt, or miniature golf courses; carports; guesthouses, private; home occupations. (Ord. 1097, 7-26-2000)
11-7C-5: PARKING REGULATIONS:
Parking requirements are in accordance with the applicable regulations set forth in chapter 11 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 280/348
Public off street parking areas for nonresidential special uses are subject to the following regulations: (Ord. 1097, 7-26-2000)
A. Parking Of Vehicles:
1. Public Streets: It shall be prohibited for an individual to park a vehicle on a Village owned street at any time in areas designated as Estate
Residential. This prohibition shall not be applicable to vehicles with properly displayed Monee vehicle stickers or special guest parking permits as
set forth in subsection A2 of this section.
2. Special Guest Parking Permits: A resident, residing in an Estate Residential zoned area, may submit a written application to the Monee Police
Department for a special guest parking permit. Said application will be available at the Monee Police Department. Residents who are issued a
special guest parking permit shall be responsible for the payment of all costs as set forth in the application. Failure to comply with the terms of the
guest parking permit may result in the issuance of a citation and/or impoundment of the vehicle.
3. Posting Of Signs: Signs shall be prominently placed in Estate Residential Districts indicating that the parking of vehicles in the streets within the
district is prohibited.
4. Impoundment: The Police Department and all members thereof are hereby authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and towed away
by a commercial towing service any vehicle which is illegally parked as set forth herein.
5. Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of this subsection A is subject to a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 1691, 8-13-2014)
B. Approval Of Plans: Plans for the development of a parking area shall be referred to the Plan Commission for approval prior to the granting of this
conditional use by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. Parking Area Adjoining A Lot: Where a parking area adjoins the side or rear of a lot in an ER District:
1. An ornamental fence, having a height of not less than three feet (3') and not more than five feet (5') shall be erected on the boundary of such lot.
Such fence shall extend no closer to the street line than the required front yard for the adjacent R-1 District.
2. Front yard requirements for the adjacent R District shall be observed for a distance of fifty feet (50') from the adjacent R District boundaries.
3. No vehicle parking shall be permitted closer than thirty feet (30') from the adjacent residential district boundaries.
4. In a strip of a minimum width of thirty feet (30') surrounding the area in which vehicle parking will be permitted, plantings having a height of not
less than three feet (3') nor more than five feet (5') shall be maintained for the purpose of deflecting from the adjacent residential district headlight
glare arising from parking area. Such plantings shall be of the type which will be effective during all seasons of the year. There shall also be
planted and maintained a said strip, trees so arranged as to deflect from the adjacent residential district light arising from the lamp posts in the
parking area.
5. All areas not used for vehicle parking, including the adjacent street parkways, shall be suitably landscaped and maintained.
D. Lighting Facilities: Lighting facilities shall be so arranged as to deflect the light away from the adjoining residential district insofar as practicable.
E. Pedestrian Walkways: Pedestrian walkways shall be provided in the public right-of-way immediately adjacent to the front line of a parking area.
F. Entrance And Exits: No entrances or exits for a parking area shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to an adjacent residential district boundary.
G. Curbs: Except for approved entrances and exits, a curb not less than six inches (6") in height shall be erected not less than two feet (2') from any lot
line adjacent to a street or other public right-of-way. (Ord. 1097, 7-26-2000; amd. Ord. 1691, 8-13-2014)
11-7C-6: BUILDING HEIGHT LIMIT:
The absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/2) stories. (Ord. 1097, 7-26-2000)
11-7C-7: LOT AREA AND LIVABLE FLOOR AREA REQUIRED:
A. Minimum Lot Size: Every single-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be served by public sanitary sewer and water facilities, and shall be
located on a lot having an area of not less than one (1) acre, and a width at the established building line of not less than one hundred feet (100'). The
widths of lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') in width measured at the established building line.
For nonresidential special uses the lot size shall be not less than five (5) acres in area and not less than three hundred feet (300') in width, except as
may be otherwise required in this article.
B. Livable Floor Area: Each single-family detached dwelling shall have at least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of livable floor area. All
other permitted and special uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio as well as absolute height limitations. The maximum
floor area ratio for all other permitted uses shall be 0.30 and such ratio for all special uses shall be 0.30. (Ord. 1097, 7-26-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 281/348
11-7C-8: SETBACKS:
No single-family detached dwelling or any accessory use shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in
connection with such buildings, structures or enlargements. Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the space resulting from the following setbacks
(yard requirements) shall be open and unobstructed:
A. Front Yards: A front yard of not less than eighty feet (80').
B. Side Yards:
Interior: Ten feet (10').
Corner side yard: Twenty five feet (25').
Rear yard: Thirty feet (30').
Front yard: Eighty feet (80').
Buildings for uses other than single-family detached dwellings and their accessory uses shall be located not less than one hundred fifty feet (150')
from the nearest residential property line. (Ord. 1097, 7-26-2000)
Chapter 8
BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-8A-1: INTENT:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the district regulations to the C-1 commercial
district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-8A-2: PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES:
A. Permitted Uses: The following retail business and service uses are permitted, provided they are operated entirely within a building, except for off
street parking and loading facilities:
Accessory uses, including off street parking and loading facilities as permitted or required in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Antique shops (not including furniture resale shops).
Any motel, provided that there be not more than one unit per one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area, exclusive of areas devoted to other
purposes by any motel.
Art and school supply stores.
Art galleries and studios.
Automobile parking space and loading space.
Bakery shops, including the baking and processing of food products when prepared for retail use on the premises only.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barbershops, beauty parlors, chiropody, massage or similar personal service shops.
Book and stationery stores.
Camera and photographic supply shops for retail sales.
Candy and ice cream shops.
Carpet, rug and linoleum stores.
China and glassware stores.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Currency exchanges and consumer loan offices.
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair shops, when conducted for retail sale on the premises only.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 282/348
Department stores.
Drive-in window service; provided service is for pick up and delivery only; and materials or services rendered are not used or consumed on the
premises. Ingress and egress of such drives shall not obstruct either vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Drugstores.
Dry cleaning and pressing establishments, when employing facilities for the cleaning and pressing of not more than seven hundred fifty (750) pounds
of dry goods per day, and when using perchlorethylene or other similar noninflammable solvents approved by the fire department.
Dry goods stores.
Electrical appliance stores and repairs, but not including appliance assembly or manufacturing.
Employment agency.
Florist shops and conservatories for retail trade on the premises only.
Food, meat and fruit stores.
Funeral homes.
Furniture stores, and upholstery, when conducted as a part of the retail operations and secondary to the main use.
Furrier, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only.
Gift shops.
Government and public utilities buildings, structures and uses when approved for in R-1 districts.
Hardware stores.
Hobby stores.
Household appliance stores and repair.
Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of draperies, slipcovers and other similar articles, when conducted as a part of the retail
operations and secondary to the main uses.
Jewelry and watch repair shops.
Laundries, automatic, self-service types, or hand.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Light printing and duplicating shop.
Locksmith.
Millinery shops.
Musical instrument sales and repair, retail trade only.
Nameplates and signs, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Newsstands.
Office supply, equipment and furniture.
Offices, business and professional, including medical clinics.
Optician, optometrist.
Orthopedic and medical appliance store, but not including the assembly or manufacture of such articles.
Package liquor store.
Pet shops, but not including animal hospitals.
Photo developing and processing.
Photography studios, including the development of film and pictures when done as a part of the retail business on the premises.
Picture framing, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only.
Postal substations.
Public utility collection offices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 283/348
Restaurants, tearooms or cafes, when the establishment is not of the drive-in type where food is served to occupants remaining in motor vehicles.
Savings and loan associations.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Shoe and hat stores, and repairing and cleaning, when done as a part of the retail business.
Sporting goods stores.
Tailor and dressmaking shop.
Tavern.
Telegraph offices.
Telephone booths, public.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes when approved as provided for in R-1 districts.
Tobacco shop.
Toy stores.
Travel bureau and transportation ticket offices.
Wearing apparel shops.
B. Special Uses: The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of this article:
Other retail business uses not specifically listed above when found to have economic compatibility with established uses on adjoining properties, and
which do not have a negative impact on those properties.
Air conditioning and heating sales and service.
Ambulance service.
Amusement establishments; bowling alleys, skating rinks, and other similar places of recreation.
Auction rooms.
Automobile accessory stores.
Automobile service stations.
Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair.
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
Boat showrooms, sales and service.
Books, printing and wholesale.
Bus terminal or other public transportation terminal facilities.
Catering establishments.
Costume rental shops.
Exterminating shops.
Fairgrounds, circuses, coliseums, racetracks, and other similar exposition and recreational uses.
Frozen food stores and lockers.
Glass and glass products, wholesale and distribution.
Glass sales and services, automotive, plate and window.
Messenger service.
Mirror and glazing shops.
Monument sales, but not including the cutting or grinding of stones or other material, on an open lot or within a building.
Muffler shop.
Parks, when publicly owned and operated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 284/348
Planned unit developments.
Plumbing and heating showroom and shops.
Portable signs.
Public ministorage warehouse.
Radio and television broadcasting stations.
Residential dwelling units, when permitted uses occupy the ground floor, provided that no such residential dwelling unit shall be located on the
ground floor.
Restaurants, drive-in type where goods and services are offered directly to customers waiting in parked automobiles in an off street parking lot.
Schools, music, dance, business, commercial or trade.
Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
Silverplating and repair shops.
Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors or mortuaries.
Upholstery shops.
Other similar uses. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
11-8A-3: CONDITIONS OF USE:
All uses permitted in this district, except residence district uses, shall be retail establishments dealing directly with consumers and shall be subject to the
following conditions:
A. All businesses or service or processing of aforesaid stores, offices, shops or businesses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building, except for automobile parking and off street loading, and sale of automobile fuel.
B. All products produced, whether primary or incidental, shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
C. There shall be no manufacture, processing, or treatment of products other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to the retail business
conducted on the same premises.
D. The repair or processing of goods shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of nuisances they create, such as noise, dust,
vibration, smoke and particulate matter, toxic matter, noxious odorous matter, fire and explosive hazards, glare and heat or water carried waste.
E. Residential dwelling units, when permitted uses occupy the ground floor, provided that no such residential dwelling unit shall be located on the
ground floor. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
11-8A-4: BUILDING HEIGHT LIMIT:
No building shall be erected or enlarged to exceed a height of two (2) stories or forty feet (40'). (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-8A-5: SETBACKS FOR PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES:
A. Front Yard Requirements: Each building or portion thereof shall have a front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
B. Side Yard Requirements: None, except where such use abuts upon the side of a lot in an R district, in which case there shall be a side yard on the lot
in the C-1 district of not less than thirty feet (30') and, in addition, such side yard shall be fenced and screened to restrict the view from any adjoining
lot in the R district, as approved by the plan commission.
C. Rear Yard Requirements: There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the depth of the lot, but such rear yard need not
exceed thirty feet (30'); provided, where the rear of such lot abuts upon a lot in an R district, in which case such rear lot in the C-1 district shall be
fenced and screened to restrict the view from any adjoining lot in the R district, as approved by the plan commission. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-
1997)
11-8A-6: LANDSCAPING:
A. With the exception of ingresses and egresses, sidewalks, permitted signs and permitted decorative fences or walls, a ten foot (10') strip of land
abutting and running parallel to the front and corner side (where applicable) yards for the width or depth of the lot shall be landscaped. Landscaping
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 285/348
shall consist of a combination of the following materials: grass, trees, low living plant materials and defined areas of nonliving ground cover
materials.
B. All applicable landscaping requirements contained in this section shall be in full compliance not later than five (5) years from the effective date hereof;
otherwise it shall be considered in violation of the zoning code. (Ord. 1126, 2-28-2001)
ARTICLE B. C-2 BUSINESS OFFICE DISTRICT
11-8B-1: INTENT:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the C-2 business office
district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-8B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Land shall be used and all buildings shall be erected, altered, enlarged or used only for one or more of the following purposes:
Automobile parking space, for use in connection with other permitted uses.
Business offices.
Dental offices.
Doctor's, surgeon's, or physician's offices.
Governmental offices.
Professional offices.
Signs, as permitted and regulated in this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-8B-3: SPECIAL USES:
A. Uses Enumerated: The following uses may also be permitted if the location and development plan is approved by the board of trustees after public
hearing conducted by the zoning board and receipt of written recommendation from the zoning board:
Residential dwelling units, when permitted uses occupy the ground floor; provided, that no such residential dwelling unit shall be located on the
ground floor.
B. Parking Requirements: Requirements for on site parking, pedestrian access entrances and exits and other requirements for approval of the special
use shall be as determined by the board of trustees after recommendation from the zoning board. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-8B-4: BUILDING HEIGHT LIMIT:
No building shall be erected or enlarged to exceed a height of two (2) stories or forty feet (40'). (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-8B-5: SETBACKS FOR PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES:
A. Front yard requirements: Same as specified for C-1 district.
B. Side yard requirements: Same as specified for C-1 district.
C. Rear yard requirements: Same as specified for C-1 district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-8B-6: LANDSCAPING:
A. With the exception of ingresses and egresses, sidewalks, permitted signs and permitted decorative fences or walls, a twenty foot (20') strip of land
abutting and running parallel to the front and corner side (where applicable) yards for the width or depth of the lot shall be landscaped. Landscaping
shall consist of a combination of the following materials: grass, trees, low living plant materials and defined areas of nonliving ground cover
materials.
B. All applicable landscaping requirements contained in this section shall be in full compliance not later than five (5) years from the effective date hereof;
otherwise it shall be considered in violation of the zoning code. (Ord. 1126, 2-28-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 286/348
ARTICLE C. C-3 COMMERCIAL CENTER DISTRICT
11-8C-1: INTENT:
The purpose of the C-3 commercial center district is to provide areas of land for development of a commercial center or uses in conjunction with a
commercial center. This district should encourage the development of commercial centers with off street parking and loading facilities, safe, well
conceived points of ingress and egress, ample setbacks and attractive landscaping. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-8C-2: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Minimum Initial Acreage: The minimum initial acreage of land for the C-3 zoning district shall be at least two hundred (200) acres.
B. Minimum Area: If the initial acreage of two hundred (200) acres or more is subsequently subdivided, a minimum of one hundred five (105) acres of
land must be used as one parcel and operated as an integrated unit under unified control, upon which a commercial center is constructed.
C. Contiguous Area: Parcels which are contiguous to land which is to be designated a C-3 district may be included within said C-3 district when created
(and hence, thereby rezoned C-3) upon the joint request of the owners of the land and the owners of the land to be designated C-3, provided the use
of the parcels shall be for the development of a commercial center or uses in conjunction therewith.
D. Parking:
1. Required commercial center parking shall be a minimum of five (5) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area
and hotel/motel parking shall be minimum of one parking space per room. Fast food or drive-in restaurants shall be two (2) per one hundred (100)
square feet of gross leasable floor area plus six (6) car holding capacity for each drive-in bay.
2. All parking facilities shall be within eight hundred feet (800') of the building they are required to serve.
3. If parking is provided by parking garage, the square footage lot area is waived as long as one parking space per hotel room is supplied or
equivalent convention center/shopping center parking is supplied.
E. Required Frontage: The total development of two hundred (200) acres or more shall have at least two thousand six hundred forty feet (2,640') of
frontage on a secondary street.
F. Permitted Uses: The following are permitted uses in the C-3 district:
1. All special and permitted uses in the C-1 district, except residential.
2. All special and permitted uses in the C-2 district, except residential.
3. A convention/exposition center.
4. Car dealerships and service centers or auto malls and service centers, including auto body shop repair as an incidental part of the car dealership,
sale of licensed and unlicensed motor vehicles, licensed and unlicensed recreational vehicles, trailers, motor homes, boats, jet skis, motorcycles,
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, and airplanes.
5. Megamalls and shopping centers.
G. Special Uses: Hotels or motels; provided, that there be no more than one hotel room per five hundred (500) square feet of lot area per floor,
exclusive of areas devoted to other purposes and as long as the required parking is provided.
H. Retail Area: All retail and service establishments shall deal directly with retail and wholesale consumers. All goods produced on the premises may be
sold as retail or wholesale where produced.
I. Required Screening: All materials not on display for retail sale to the public shall be concealed from adjacent properties and public rights of way by an
opaque fence, wall, hedge, or earth berm not to exceed eight feet (8') in height, except a fence screening a maintenance area may be higher if
necessary but not higher than twelve feet (12'). All unrepaired vehicles shall not be visible to the public and shall be completely concealed.
J. Landscaping Requirements: With the exception of ingresses and egresses, sidewalks and permitted signs, a twenty foot (20') strip of land adjacent to
and running parallel to the front and corner side yard (where applicable) for the width or depth of the lot shall be landscaped where any parcel abuts
a dedicated street or adjoining property not owned now or previously owned by the owners of the original tracts making up the initial parcels coming
into C-3 zoning. Landscaping shall consist of a combination of the following materials: grass, trees, low living plant materials and defined areas of
nonliving ground cover materials.
K. Traffic Impact Study: A traffic impact study conducted by a traffic engineer licensed by the state and selected by the developer, and approved by the
village, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, detailing the projected traffic impact of a proposed development shall be prepared if in
the opinion of the plan commission the development as proposed would create traffic problems, and the proposed commercial center would require
more than one thousand (1,000) parking spaces. A traffic study paid for by the developer shall be required before site plan approval.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 287/348
L. Setback Requirements: All buildings and structures shall adhere to the following setbacks:
1. Front yard setback, corner side yard setback or any portion of a C-3 district abutting a dedicated street or a property which abuts adjoining
property not owned now or previously owned by owners of the original tracts making up the original parcels coming into C-3 zoning shall be forty
five feet (45') with a twenty foot (20') landscaped buffer in accordance with the provisions of subsection J of this section; and
2. Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, setback and fencing requirements between out parcels and other out parcels, and between out parcels
and shopping centers are eliminated on all land which is a part of the original acreage coming into C-3 zoning.
M. Maximum Height: The maximum building height is thirty five (35) stories or four hundred feet (400'), whichever is less.
N. Subdivision Of Lots: Lots may be subdivided, provided the owner complies with the plat act1.
O. Sidewalks: No sidewalks will be required.
P. Signs: The following requirements apply to the C-3 district, subject to the exceptions therein contained:
1. Illumination: Signs may be illuminated by fixed lighting of an internal or external nature; provided, that such lighting does not glare or beam a light
onto a street or residential building outside the C-3 district.
2. Obstructing View Of Public Ways: It shall be unlawful to post any sign which shall in any way obstruct the clear view of any street, intersection,
traffic control signal or device, driveway or walkway.
3. Anchoring: All signs shall be securely anchored so as not to endanger or imperil public safety.
4. Freestanding Sign; Height: It shall be unlawful to permit any freestanding sign to extend more than one hundred feet (100') in height.
5. Inspection: All signs shall be subject to inspection by the zoning administrator or building inspector. Moreover, such officer may condemn any sign
which does not conform to this title or poses a threat to public safety and order the removal thereof.
6. Permission To Post Signs Required: It shall be unlawful to post any sign on a street right of way or other public property unless permission to do
so has been granted by the board of trustees or the same is otherwise provided for in this article.
7. Prohibited Posting: It shall be unlawful to post or attach any sign to a utility pole, tree, utility standpipe, gutter drain or fire escape.
8. Maintenance: Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and structurally sound condition.
9. Advertising Restrictions: It shall be unlawful to post and maintain any sign, which advertises a use or service which is no longer in existence, or
provided the zoning administrator or building inspector shall apply to the circuit court of the county for an order authorizing the removal of a
particular sign, if the owners thereof including the lienholders of record, after at least fifteen (15) days' written notice by mail to do so, have failed to
remove the sign. Any costs and expenses incidental thereto shall be paid by the owner of the property to which such sign is attached.
10. Freestanding Out Parcel Signs: One pylon sign with a surface area per side no greater than three hundred twenty five (325) square feet per out
parcel business establishment shall be permitted, provided each such sign shall have a vertical clearance of at least nine feet (9') if suspended
over pedestrian traveled areas. The building inspector may permit a sign to extend over public property, provided the following conditions of
subsections P10a and P10b of this section are met:
a. The pylon sign maintains a nine foot (9') clearance above ground level; and
b. The width of the sign does not exceed twenty two feet (22').
11. Shopping Center Pylon Signs: One sign at each entrance is permitted with a surface area per side no greater than four hundred (400) square
feet for multiple tenants, provided the following conditions of subsections P11a and P11b of this section are met: (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-
1997)
a. The sign maintains a nine foot (9') clearance above ground level; and (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
b. The width of the sign does not exceed twenty feet (20').
12. Automobile Dealership; Licensed And Unlicensed Goods Pylon Signs:
a. One sign with a surface area per side no greater than two hundred (200) square feet is permitted for all automobile dealership pylons and up to
four hundred (400) square feet where there is a minimum of four (4) multiple tenants.
b. One sign with a surface area per side no greater than one hundred fifty (150) square feet is permitted for all pylons for the sale of all licensed
and unlicensed recreational vehicles, trailers, motor homes, boats, jet skis, motorcycles, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, and airplanes.
c. Such individual dealership pylons shall be a minimum of two hundred fifty feet (250') apart.
d. "Danglers" are permitted to define sales of used cars as long as they are not more than two (2) colors.
13. Directional Signage: Directional signage is permitted to the various tenants, provided the following conditions of subsections P13a and P13b of
this section are met and the sign is out of the state right of way:
a. The sign maintains a nine foot (9') clearance above ground level; and
b. The width of the sign does not exceed fifteen feet (15').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 288/348
14. Height Limitations: The following height limitation shall govern all signs posted and maintained under C-3 zoning:
a. Buildings under twenty feet (20') in height may have a maximum sign height of thirty five feet (35');
b. Buildings over twenty feet (20') in height may have a maximum sign height of one hundred feet (100') or the top of the building, whichever is
greater.
15. Attaching To Buildings: It is permissible to attach signs to the outside of a building; provided, that the following conditions are met:
a. No linear sign shall project more than one foot (1') from the surface of the wall or roof.
b. The surface area in square feet of such sign shall not exceed six (6) times the number of linear feet of the wall to which it is attached. The length
of such sign shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the building wall opening upon which the sign is located. The end of such sign shall be
no closer to the end of that wall or section of wall containing the sign than ten percent (10%) of the length of that wall.
16. Awnings And Canopies: Awnings and canopies may be internally illuminated as long as the surface area in square feet of such sign shall not
exceed four (4) times the number of linear feet of the awning.
17. Incidental To Businesses:
a. Signs which are incidental to a business establishment and to the purposes of the business transacted therein are permissible under this
provision; such signs include, but not by way of limitation:
(1) Signs identifying parking areas or relating to the parking of vehicles;
(2) Signs denoting entrances, exits, secondary entrances and the like; and
(3) Signs displayed on a window; provided, that such sign covers no more than seventy five percent (75%) of the window area.
b. All signs posted and maintained in accordance with items per subsections P17a(1) and P17a(2) of this section shall be used exclusively for their
obvious and intended purpose. These signs shall not be obtrusive and in no event shall they exceed ten (10) square feet in area.
18. Sale And Rental Signs: Sale and rental signs are permissible, provided there shall be no more than four (4) per zoning lot and two (2) per corner
zoning lot. The following limitations shall govern all signs posted and maintained under this provision:
a. Each sign shall contain no more than one hundred (100) square feet per side of surface area.
b. Each sign shall conform to the location and height limitations and requirements applicable to the C-3 district.
c. Leasing signs can be illuminated.
19. Billboards: Billboards are permitted, provided they are no greater than fifteen feet by forty four feet (15' x 44'), plus an addition of irregular shape
not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the total sign square footage, and are structurally of sound construction. Billboards can be illuminated.
20. Automotive Service Station Signs: It is permissible to post and maintain signs in and about the area of automobile service stations; provided, that
the same are posted in accordance with the rules and guidelines hereinafter set forth in subsections P20a and P20b of this section:
a. Signs attached to the building. The total surface area of all signs so displayed shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet in surface
area, including, but not limited to, all signs containing a commercial message, whether temporary or permanent, which is visible to the public
from outside the building.
b. Freestanding signs. The total surface area of all freestanding signs shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet and only one freestanding
sign may be permitted a maximum height of one hundred feet (100') above grade. Two (2) additional freestanding signs with a maximum height
of eight feet (8') above the adjacent street curb level may be permitted, provided they are located a minimum of five feet (5') or more away from
any street driveway or entry.
21. Freestanding Signs; Extension: Freestanding signs may extend up to one hundred feet (100') above grade in height.
22. Moving Signs: Roof and wall signs over five hundred feet (500') from a road and movie theater marquees may have illuminated signs with
flashing, scintillating, traveling or blinking lights or rotating beacons or beams of light which periodically change color.
23. Time Or Temperature Signs: A sign on which the current time, temperature or a message is indicated by intermittent lighting is permitted.
24. Vehicular Signs: Vehicular signs advertising the project are permitted.
25. Grand Opening Signs: Grand opening signs and banners are permitted for up to thirty (30) days at a time.
26. Flagpoles: Flagpoles are permitted up to sixty feet (60') in height. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
Chapter 9
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-9A-1: INTENT:
The M-1 light industrial district is intended to provide lands for development by industrial firms that have high standards of performance and that can
locate in close proximity to residential and business uses. The district regulations are designed to permit the operations of most manufacturing,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 289/348
wholesaling and warehousing activities with adequate protection to adjacent district uses and sufficient control of external effects to protect one industry
from another. All industrial operations shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings. This article shall apply to such districts. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997,
eff. 2-22-1997)
11-9A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the M-1 district:
Industrial type uses:
Laboratories and research firms involved in the research experimentation or testing of materials or products.
Manufacturing and industrial activities, including fabrication, processing, assembly, disassembly, repairing, cleaning, servicing, testing, packaging,
and storage of materials, products and goods that can be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings.
Printing, publishing or lithography establishments.
Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities:
Essential services.
Hospital.
Office buildings.
Public utility establishment.
State, county or municipal garage.
Vocational school.
Water filtration plant.
Water reservoir.
Wholesale and warehouse uses:
Direct selling establishments, where products are stored and distributed, but not displayed for retail sales.
Establishments that warehouse and distribute beverages.
Wholesale and warehouse establishments that deal in commodities which are the product of a use permitted in the M-1 district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-
1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-9A-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be permitted subject to the provisions of section 11-2-9 of this title:
Outdoor storage.
Planned development - industrial, in accordance with chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-9A-4: CONDITIONS:
All permitted and special uses in the M-1 District are subject to the following conditions:
A. Access: In all lots with less than two hundred feet (200') of frontage on a dedicated street, access is limited to one (1) combined point of ingress and
egress having a minimum width of twenty feet (20') and a maximum width of thirty five feet (35'). On all lots having two hundred feet (200') or more of
frontage on a dedicated street, access is limited to two (2) separate points of combined ingress and egress, each having a minimum width of twenty
feet (20') and a maximum width of thirty five feet (35'). Location and construction specifications shall meet all relevant State, County and Village
requirements.
B. Guarantee Of Improvements: A performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, certificate of deposit or other guarantee of improvements for an
amount determined by the Village Engineer in a form approved by the Village Attorney shall be provided to guarantee all requirements of this title not
completed at the time of the issuance of the occupancy permit or business license.
C. Landscaping: With the exception of ingresses and egresses, sidewalks, permitted signs and permitted decorative fences or walls, a twenty foot (20')
strip of land abutting and running parallel to the front and corner side (where applicable) yards for the width or depth of the lot shall be landscaped.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 290/348
Landscaping shall consist of a combination of the following materials: grass, trees, low living plant materials and defined areas of nonliving ground
cover materials.
D. Fences: A five foot (5') to eight foot (8') high, opaque fence, wall, hedge or earth berm in accordance with the provisions of section 11-6-7 of this title
shall be provided in the following instances:
1. The industrial use abuts a residential district; screening shall be provided along such lot lines (excluding front and corner side lot lines) that abut
the residential district;
2. When outdoor storage, occurring under the conditions of this section exists.
E. Storage Of Equipment, Materials: The outdoor storage of equipment, materials and supplies is allowed, provided the following conditions have been
met:
1. The storage occurs within that portion of the lot located within the setback lines.
2. The storage is screened from view from all nearby public streets, rights-of-way and alleys and all adjacent zoning lots that are not within an
industrial district.
3. No equipment, materials or supplies shall be stored upon the lot in such a manner that they may be transferred off the property by wind or
precipitation. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
F. Performance Standards: The standards contained in section 11-10-2 of this title shall be adhered to. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999
Code)
11-9A-5: ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS:
Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal uses and subject to the provisions of section 11-6-1 of this title
are permitted. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-9A-6: ZONING LOT:
With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot", shall be designated, provided and continuously
maintained for each structure containing a permitted or special use. The minimum lot area shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. The minimum
lot width shall be one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-9A-7: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed an average of fifty feet (50') overall measured from floor to elevation. The maximum floor area
ratio shall be 1:0. (Ord. 1718, 4-22-2015)
11-9A-8: SETBACKS FOR PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES:
All principal buildings and structures shall adhere to the following setbacks: (Ord. 1086, 4-26-2000)
A. Front and corner side yards, forty five feet (45') with a twenty foot (20') landscaped buffer. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Interior side yard, fifteen feet (15'); when abutting a residential district, fifty feet (50') which includes a twenty foot (20') buffer of proper fence or
hedge.
C. Rear yard, twenty five feet (25'); when abutting a residence district, thirty five feet (35').
D. In planned industrial developments and industrial subdivisions, the board of trustees may vary the preceding requirements.
E. If there must be a front dock, there will be a minimum setback of ninety feet (90'). All loading and unloading areas/docks must be restricted to owner's
property. No loading or unloading will be done on the public right of way. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
ARTICLE B. M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-9B-1: INTENT:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the M-2 heavy industrial
district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 291/348
11-9B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Land shall be used and all buildings shall be erected, altered or enlarged or used only for one or more of the following purposes:
Any and all uses permitted in M-1 districts.
Brick, tile and other clay products manufacture.
Bulk storage of gasoline, fuel oil, or other inflammable or explosive liquids for retail sale and distribution, provided the location, plans and construction
shall conform to the laws and regulations of the state and have the approval of the state division of fire prevention.
Cement manufacture.
Chemical manufacturing plants.
Concrete products manufacture.
Contractors' yards and yards for the storage and sale of secondhand machinery.
Paper manufacturing.
Printing plants, including the printing and processing of wallpaper.
Railroad freight stations, service tracks, truck terminals, and other receiving storage and distributing facilities commonly required by light industry.
Railroad industrial and spur tracks.
Ready mix concrete plants and manufacture.
Sewerage disposal plants.
Wholesale establishments and their facilities (receiving, storage and distributing).
Yards for the storage and repair of maintenance and operating equipment of public agencies and public utilities.
Yards for the storage and sale of coal, wood, lumber and building materials, including commercial elevators and warehouses.
The uses hereinabove provided for need not be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, but shall comply with the pollution laws of the
state. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-9B-3: SPECIAL USES:
All uses listed under "special uses" in the M-1 district.
Asphalt manufacturing.
Roofing material manufacturing.
Wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles and farm machinery storage of the parts and material from such operation and the storage of junk only within
a completely enclosed building or if surrounded by a tight painted board or sheet metal fence or other wall, substantially built and not less than six feet
(6') high. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-9B-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Same as in the M-1 district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-9B-5: SETBACKS:
Same as in the M-1 district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-9B-6: LANDSCAPING:
A. With the exception of ingresses and egresses, sidewalks, permitted signs and permitted decorative fences or walls, a twenty foot (20') strip of land
abutting and running parallel to the front and corner side (where applicable) yards for the width or depth of the lot shall be landscaped. Landscaping
shall consist of a combination of the following materials: grass, trees, low living plant materials and defined areas of nonliving ground cover
materials.
B. All applicable landscaping requirements contained in this section shall be in full compliance not later than five (5) years from the effective date hereof;
otherwise it shall be considered in violation of the zoning code. (Ord. 1126, 2-28-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 292/348
ARTICLE C. M-1A LIGHT MANUFACTURING OVERLAY DISTRICT
11-9C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the M-1A light manufacturing overlay district is to accommodate, in a limited manner, specific retail business uses appropriate to and
easily accessible to the manufacturing district, which are not permitted uses in the underlying light manufacturing district. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
11-9C-2: LOCATION:
The M-1A light manufacturing overlay district is located as indicated on the official zoning map. The area covered by the overlay district includes a
portion of Lot 7 in Hellman's Subdivision of part of the South East 1/4 of Section 20, Township 34 North, Range 13 East of the Third Principal Meridian,
the area bordered by Bruns Road on the South, by Lot 6 on the North, and including the area of Lot 7 from the border of Lot 7 on the West to 493.83
feet to the East.
(Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
11-9C-3: PERMITTED USES:
Automobile service stations.
Car washes.
Convenience food stores.
Drive-in restaurants (fast food).
Restaurants. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999; amd. Ord. 1484, 7-9-2008)
11-9C-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
Adult business, subject to the following standards:
A. Purpose And Intent: It is the intent of this section to protect and preserve the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the village by
regulating adult business within the village.
B. General Standards:
1. Special Use Permit Issued: A separate special use permit must be issued for each "adult business" as defined in section 11-1-3 of this title.
2. Location Restrictions: No adult business shall be operated within one thousand feet (1,000') of a residential zoning district within Monee or any
surrounding municipality. No adult business shall be operated within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property boundaries of any school,
daycare center, public park, public housing, nursing home, rest home, sheltered care facility and place of religious worship. The distance
limitation shall be measured in a straight line from the lot lines of said adult business and applicable residential zoning district, school, daycare
center, cemetery, public park, public housing, nursing home, rest home, sheltered care facility and place of religious worship.
3. Number Permitted: Only one adult business shall be permitted per block face.
4. Alcoholic Liquor Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any adult business to sell, distribute or permit beer or alcoholic beverages on the premises.
5. Parking: Parking for an adult business shall be as required in chapter 11 of this title.
6. Signage: Signage will be regulated as follows:
a. Exterior Display: No adult business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or anyone appearing nude or seminude by display, decorations, sign, show
window or other opening from any public way.
b. Number Of Signs: One business wall sign shall be permitted for an adult business and said sign shall be permitted only on the front facade.
Said signage shall meet all of the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. Such requirements shall include direct access to a
public street from that property and a full amount of required parking on the site with the use. All other sign structures shall be prohibited.
c. Sign Surface Area: The sign surface area of a business wall sign for an adult entertainment business shall not exceed an amount equal to five
percent (5%) of the front building facade of the first floor elevation (first 10 feet of the premises occupied by the adult business or 100 square
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 293/348
feet, whichever is the lesser).
7. Lighting: The permitted sign may be illuminated, provided, however, such illumination shall not be by way of exposed neon, exterior lighting
(e.g., spot or flood lights) or any flashing or animated lights (either interior to the sign, on the exterior of the sign, or as a border to the sign).
8. Measurement Of Distances:
a. The distance between an adult business and any residential zoning district or school, daycare center, public park, public housing, nursing
home, rest home, sheltered care facility and place of religious worship shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest adult business zoning lot line to the nearest zoning lot line of a residential zoning district or school,
daycare center, public park, public housing, nursing home, rest home, sheltered care facility and place of religious worship.
b. If an adult business is located within a shopping center or integrated center, the closest exterior wall of the space occupied by the adult
business shall be used in determining the point of measurement. (Ord. 1484, 7-9-2008)
11-9C-5: BUILDING HEIGHT LIMIT:
No building shall be erected or enlarged to exceed a height of two (2) stories or forty feet (40'). (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
11-9C-6: SETBACKS:
A. Front Yard Requirements: Each building, or portion thereof, shall have a front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth, except that no use
shall be within one thousand feet (1,000') of any residential use.
B. Side Yard Requirements: None, except where use abuts upon the side of a lot in an R district, in which case no use shall be within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any residential use.
C. Rear Yard Requirements: There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the depth of the lot, except where such use abuts
upon the side of a lot in an R district, in which case no use shall be within one thousand feet (1,000') of any residential use. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
11-9C-7: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
None. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
11-9C-8: CONDITIONS:
The conditions listed in section 11-9A-4 of this chapter do not apply to this overlay district. No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or
consumed on the premises of any business in the overlay district. All businesses in the M-1A light manufacturing district are subject to village licensing
requirements. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999; amd. Ord. 1484, 7-9-2008)
Chapter 10
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
11-10-1: INTENT:
Any use already established in M-1 and M-2 districts, after the effective date hereof, shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards
governing: noise, vibrations, smoke and particulate matter, toxic matter, noxious and odorous matter, fire and explosive hazards, flammable liquids and
gases, glare and heat and radiation hazards. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-10-2: STANDARDS:
The following performance standards, as well as all applicable federal, state and village standards, shall be adhered to by all uses:
A. Noise:
1. Measuring Devices: For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequency of sound, the sound level meter, the octave band analyzer, and the
impact noise analyzer shall be employed. The flat network and the fast meter response of the sound level meter shall be used. Sounds of short
duration which cannot be measured accurately with the sound level meter shall be measured with the impact noise analyzer. Octave band
analyzers calibrated in the preferred frequencies (American Standards Association SI 6-1950, preferred frequencies for acoustical measurements)
shall be used with the following tables.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 294/348
2. Exemptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations:
a. Noises not directly under control of the property user.
b. Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Such activities
are those which are nonroutine operations accessory to the primary activities and which are temporary in nature, or conducted infrequently.
c. The noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves.
d. Transient noises at moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.
3. Maximum Permitted Sound Levels: At no point along the boundary of a "residential district" or along an "adjacent lot" shall the sound pressure
level of any operation or plant exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVEL
(In Decibels)
Daytime Hours - 7:00 A.M. - 10:00 P.M.
Octave Band
Preferred Center
Frequency (Hertz)
(I)
Along Residence
District Boundaries
(II)
Along Adjacent
Lot Boundaries
31.5 76 79
63 71 74
125 65 69
250 57 64
500 51 58
1,000 45 52
2,000 39 47
4,000 34 43
8,000 32 40
Nighttime Hours - 10:00 P.M. - 7:00 A.M.
Octave Band
Preferred Center
Frequency (Hertz)
(I)
Along Residence
District Boundaries
(II)
Along Adjacent
Lot Boundaries
31.5 72 79
63 67 74
125 61 68
250 53 60
500 47 53
1,000 41 47
2,000 35 41
4,000 30 36
8,000 28 34
Impact noises shall not exceed the following peak intensities:
Along Residence
District Boundaries
Along Adjacent
Lot Boundaries
Overall peak 80 86
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 295/348
B. Vibrations:
1. Vibrations shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three (3) component measuring system approved by the
zoning administrator.
2. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from vibration level regulations:
a. Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user.
b. Vibrations emanating from construction and maintenance activities between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Such
activities are those which are nonroutine operations accessory to the primary activities and which are temporary in nature, or conducted
infrequently.
c. Transient vibrations of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.
3. At no point along the boundary of a "residence district" (column I) or along an "adjacent lot" (column II) shall the earthborne vibrations be in excess
of the limits set forth in the following table:
MAXIMUM PERMITTED EARTHBORNE VIBRATIONS
Frequency
(Cycles Per Second)
(I)
Displacement
(Inches)
(II)
Displacement
(Inches)
0 to 10 .0008 .0004
10 to 20 .0005 .0002
20 to 30 .0002 .0001
30 to 40 .0002 .0001
40 and over .0001 .0001
Steady state vibrations, for purposes of this chapter, are vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than one
hundred (100) per minute. Discrete impulses which do not exceed one hundred (100) per minute shall be considered impact vibrations and shall not
cause in excess of twice the displacements stipulated.
C. Smoke And Particulate Matter:
1. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and so forth within lot boundaries shall
be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other acceptable means.
For the purpose of grading the density equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringelmann chart, published by the United States bureau of mines, shall
be employed.
The emission of more than twenty (20) smoke units per hour per stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann no. 2.
However, once during any six (6) hour period, each stack may emit up to thirty five (35) smoke units, not to exceed Ringelmann no. 2, when
blowing soot or cleaning fires. Only during fire cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of Ringelmann no. 3 be permitted, and then for not more
than four (4) minutes per period.
The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre of
lot area during any one hour, after deducting from the gross hourly emission per acre, the correction factor set forth in the following table:
ALLOWANCE FOR HEIGHT OF EMISSION*
Height Of Emission
Above Grade (Feet)
Correction (Pounds
Per Hour Per Acre)
50 0.01
100 0.06
150 0.10
200 0.16
300 0.30
400 0.50
*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 296/348
2. Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter within the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:
a. Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area
thereby obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre.
b. From each gross hourly rate of emission, derived in subsection C2a of this section, deduct the correction factor (interpolating as required) for
height of emission set forth in the table, thereby obtaining the net rate of emission in pounds per acre per hour from each source of emission.
c. Add together the individual net rates of emission derived in subsection C2b of this section, to obtain the total net rate of emission from all
sources of emission within the boundaries of the lot. Such total shall not exceed one pound per acre of lot area during any one hour.
D. Toxic Matter:
1. The measurement of toxic matter shall be made at ground level or habitable elevation and shall be the average of any twenty four (24) hour
sampling period. The release of any airborne toxic matter shall not exceed the fractional quantifiers permitted of those toxic matters currently listed
in the threshold limit values adopted by the American Conference Of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. If a toxic substance is not contained in
this listing, the applicant shall satisfy the village that the proposed levels shall be safe and not detrimental to the general population nor injurious to
plant and animal life.
2. In the M-1 district the release of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-thirtieth (1/30) of the threshold limit values across lot lines.
E. Noxious And Odorous Matter In M-1 District: No activity or operation shall cause at any time the discharge of matter across lot lines in such
concentration as to be noxious. The emission of matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable as an odor at any point along lot lines is
prohibited.
F. Fire And Explosive Hazards:
1. Flammable Solids:
a. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
b. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted,
provided the materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior
walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
2. Flammable Liquids And Gases: The storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids, or materials which produce flammable or explosive
vapors or gases shall be permitted in accordance with the following table, exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers,
which shall be unrestricted:
TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE
MATERIALS PERMITTED
(In Gallons)
Industries Engaged
In Storage Only Aboveground Underground
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint over 187° F Prohibited 100,000
From and including 105° F to and including 187° F Prohibited 100,000
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint of less than 105° F Prohibited 100,000
Industries Engaged In
Utilization And Manufacture
Of Flammable Materials
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint over 187° F 50,000 100,000
From and including 105° F to and including 187° F 20,000 100,000
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint of less than 105° F 5,000 100,000
When flammable gases are stored, utilized, or manufactured and measured in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet (at STP) permitted shall not exceed
three (3) times the quantities as listed above.
The manufacture of liquid or gaseous oxygen is prohibited. Liquid or gaseous oxygen may be stored or utilized in accordance with the National Fire
Protection Association standard no. 566, as from time to time in force and effect, herein adopted by reference, and the total quantity stored of gaseous
or liquid oxygen shall not exceed five hundred fifty thousand (550,000) standard cubic feet.
3. Detonable Materials: Activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation are
prohibited.
G. Glare And Heat:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 297/348
1. Any operation or activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect
illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half (1/2) foot-candle when measured at the lot line.
Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance across lot
lines.
2. Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public
nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
H. Radiation Hazards:
1. Release Outside Property Lines: The release of radioactive materials or the emission of ionizing radiation outside of property lines shall be in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the state. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
2. Unsealed Radioactive Materials: Unsealed radioactive materials shall not be manufactured, utilized, or stored (except when such materials are
stored in a fireproof container at or below ground level) in excess of the quantities appearing in the following table.
Quantities Of
Radioactive Materials
Unsealed
Curies
Antimony (Sb124) 1
Arsenic 76 (As76) 10
Arsenic 77 (As77) 10
Barium-lanthanum 140 (BaLa140) 1
Beryllium (Be7) 50
Cadmium-silver 109 (CdAg109) 10
Calcium 45 (Ca45) 10
Carbon 14 (C14) 50
Cerium-praseodymium 144 (CePr144) 1
Cesium-barium 137 (CsBa137) 1
Chlorine 36 (C36) 1
Chromium 51 (Cr51) 50
Cobalt 60 (Co60) 1
Copper 64 (Cu64) 50
Europium 154 (Eu154) 1
Fluorine 18 (F18) 50
Gallium 72 (Ga72) 10
Germanium 71 (Ge71) 50
Gold 198 (Au198) 10
Gold 199 (Au199) 10
Hydrogen 3 (tritium)(H3) 250
Indium 114 (In114) 1
Iodine 131 (I131) 10
Iridium 192 (Ir192) 10
Iron 55 (Fe55) 50
Iron 59 (Fe59) 1
Lanthanum 140 (La140) 10
Manganese 52 (Mn52) 1
Manganese 56 (Mn56) 50
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 298/348
Molybdenum 99 (Mo99) 10
Nickel 59 (Ni59) 1
Nickel 63 (Ni63) 1
Niobium 95 (Nb95) 10
Palladium 109 (Pd109) 10
Palladium-rhodium 103 (PdRh103) 50
Phosphorus 32 (P32) 10
Polonium 210 (Po210) 0.1
Potassium 42 (K42) 10
Praseodyminium 143 (Pr143) 10
Promethium 147 (Pm147) 10
Radium 226 (Ra226) 0.1
Rhenium 186 (Re186) 10
Rhodium 105 (Rh105) 10
Rubidium 86 (Rb86) 10
Ruthenium-rhodium 106 (RuRh106) 1
Samarium 153 (Sm153) 10
Scandium 46 (Sc46) 1
Silver 105 (Ag105) 1
Silver 111 (Ag111) 10
Sodium 22 (Na22) 10
Sodium 24 (Na24) 10
Strontium 89 (Sr89) 1
Strontium-yttrium 90 (SrY90) 0.1
Sulfur 35 (S35) 50
Tantalum 182 (Ta182) 10
Technetium 96 (Tc96) 1
Technetium 99 (Tc99) 1
Tellurium 127 (Te127) 10
Tellurium 129 (Te129) 1
Thallium 204 (Tl204) 50
Tin 113 (Sn113) 10
Tungsten 185 (W185) 10
Vanadium 48 (V48) 1
Yttrium 90 (Y90) 1
Yttrium 91 (Y91) 1
Zinc 65 (Zn65) 10
Beta and/or gamma emitting radioactive material not listed above.
(Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 299/348
Chapter 11
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
11-11-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this chapter shall apply in all zoning districts.
B. Responsibility To Provide Off Street Parking: The duty to provide and maintain off street parking space shall be the joint and shared responsibility of
the operator and owner of the use or uses for which off street parking is required.
C. Effective Provisions: For all uses that are lawfully occupied, operated or possessing a valid business license or building permit on the effective date
hereof, the provisions of the ordinance effective at the date of their establishment shall apply.
D. Changing Or Enlarging Use: If such uses are enlarged, expanded or changed, the owner of such use shall provide the amount of parking required by
the provisions of this chapter, and such parking shall meet all requirements in this chapter. If the zoning administrator determines that such
compliance is clearly not possible, the owner shall only be responsible for providing the amount of parking such increment of expansion would
require if it were a separate use.
E. Newly Established Uses: For all uses established or placed into operation after the effective date hereof, there shall be provided and maintained the
amount of off street parking hereinafter set forth.
F. Garages Or Outdoor Areas: Parking and loading spaces for all uses may be provided either in garages or outdoor parking areas conforming with the
provisions of this chapter.
G. Charging Optional: Parking may be with or without charge.
H. Front Yard Parking: With the following exceptions, no vehicle shall be parked in a required front yard:
1. The parking is accessory to residential uses within a residential district.
2. The board of trustees has approved a front yard parking lot, provided such lot is not located in an area of the front yard that is required to be
landscaped or devoted to another specifically required use. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-11-2: DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
With the exception of parking accessory to single- and two-family residences, every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area,
including commercial parking lots and outdoor motor vehicle or recreational vehicle (trailers, mobile home, boats) sales lots shall be designed,
developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Site Plan Required: A plan detailing the number configuration of parking spaces, points of ingress and egress, areas to be landscaped, and
construction specifications shall be submitted to the zoning administrator who will forward such plans to the director of public works for approval.
When a site plan has been submitted and approved by the zoning board of appeals and the board of trustees in accordance with other provisions of
this chapter, a parking plan will not be required.
B. Construction Standards: All off street parking areas and entrances to such areas shall be constructed to the following standards:
1. Industrial And Heavy Commercial Uses:
10 inch compacted aggregate base
11/2 inch bituminous binder course
11/2 inch bituminous surface course
Heavy commercial uses shall be those uses that have a regular traffic of vehicles in excess of four thousand (4,000) pounds.
2. All Other Uses:
8 inch compacted aggregate base
11/2 inch bituminous binder course
1 inch bituminous surface course
C. Grading For Drainage: All parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage.
D. Ingress And Egress: All points of ingress and egress to public rights of way shall be between twenty feet (20') and thirty five feet (35') wide, except in
the C-3 district. Any curb cuts for the purpose of providing ingress and egress are subject to all relevant state, county and village requirements and
shall be reviewed and approved by the village zoning board of appeals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 300/348
E. Fencing: Off street parking areas for more than four (4) vehicles that are adjacent to residential districts shall provide an opaque fence, wall, hedge,
or earth berm of between five feet (5') and eight feet (8') in height between the parking area and the boundary adjacent to residential districts.
F. Aisle Width: Each off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway at least twelve feet (12') wide to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to such parking space.
G. Space Dimensions: Each required parking space shall be at least nine feet (9') in width and at least twenty feet (20') in length, exclusive of access
driveways, aisles, ramps or any use other than parking. Each space shall have a vertical clearance of seven feet (7'). For parallel parking, the length
of the parking space shall be increased to twenty four feet (24').
H. Defining Of Spaces: Each parking space shall be defined by the use of painted lines, curbing, wheel or bumper guards, suspended ropes or chains,
landscaping or some similar device.
I. Lighting At Nighttime: Parking areas regularly used during nighttime hours shall be provided with lighting to enable safe access to parked vehicles.
Such lighting shall be so arranged so as not to exceed three (3) foot-candles measured at the lot line.
J. Attendant Shelter Building: No parking area shall have more than one attendant shelter building, which must conform to all the yard requirements of
the district in which it is located.
K. Determination Of Number Of Spaces:
1. When determination of the number of off street parking spaces required by this title results in the requirement of a fractional space, a fraction of
less than one-half (1/2) may be disregarded, while a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall be counted as one parking space.
2. Employee parking space requirements shall be based on the average number of employees at work during normal business hours.
L. Surface Maintenance: Each parking surface shall be continuously maintained to be free from potholes or other deterioration of the surface, trash,
debris or other waste materials.
M. Location: Except as allowed under the provisions of section 11-11-5 of this chapter, all off street parking shall be located on the same zoning lot or an
adjacent zoning lot under common ownership as the lot on which the permitted or special use is located.
N. Sharing Spaces: Off street parking areas may share spaces; provided, that there is no conflict in the schedules of those uses sharing any space or
spaces. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-11-3: PARKING REQUIREMENTS; AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT:
As required by state and federal regulations. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-11-4: PARKING REQUIREMENTS (EXCEPT FOR C-3 DISTRICTS):
Off street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following table:
Class
#1
Dwelling, single-family 2/dwelling unit
Dwelling, two-family
Dwelling, multi-family (3 or more bedrooms)
Class
#2
Dwelling, multi-family (2 or less bedrooms) 2/dwelling unit
Mobile homes
Class
#3
Apartments for the elderly 11/2 /dwelling, hotel or motel unit
Hotel
Motel
Class
#4
Convalescent home, nursing homes, home for aged,
home for ill or physically infirm persons,
intermediate care facility, sheltered care facility, skilled
nursing home
1/1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Seminaries, monasteries and convents
Rectories, parsonages or parish houses
Religious retreats
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 301/348
Class
#5
Aquarium 2/1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Daycare center, nursery or preschool facility
Historic site
Philanthropic and charitable institutions
Public libraries, art galleries and museums
Telegraph office
Class
#6
All professional, commercial, organizational and
governmental offices not specifically mentioned in this
table
4/1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Animal hospital or clinic
Art gallery (commercial)
Bank or savings and loan (excluding drive-in facilities)
Bus passenger station
Business machine sales and service
Catering establishments
Cleaning and dyeing, pick up and delivery store only
Clothing and costume rental
Clubs and lodges
Detective agency
Dressmaking
Dry cleaning plant employing not more than 6 persons
Employment agencies
Financial institutions and uses
Government administration building, without garages
or shops
Gymnasium or health clubs or spa
Hospital
Indoor tennis or racquetball club
Laboratory - medical, dental or optical
Laboratory - research testing
Lithographing
Loan company
Locksmith
Medical and dental clinics
Nonprofit corporation, service or fraternal
organizations
Office machines, sales service
Painting and decorating
Police or fire station
Post office
Recording of sound studio
Recreational and community center buildings
Repair - shoes or clothing
Research establishments
Sharpening and grinding
Tailor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 302/348
Telephone exchange and equipment building
Transit or transportation facilities
Travel agency
Class
#7
Auto service station 5/1,000
sq. ft. of
gross
floor area
Auto undercoating and rustproofing service
Bowling alley
Furniture store
Leather goods and luggage store
Photography, commercial studio
Class
#8
Antique store 6/1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Apparel store
Appliance store
Art and school supply store
Auto accessory store
Bakery
Barber or hairstyling shop
Beauty parlor
Bicycle store, sales, rental and repair
Book and stationery store
Camera stores
Candy and confectionery store
China and glassware store
Cleaners self-service
Clothes pressing and repair shop
Currency exchange
Department store
Drapery store
Drugstore
Dry goods store
Floor covering store
Floral shop
Funeral parlor
Gift shop
Grocery store
Hardware store
Hobby shop
Home appliances and furnishing shop
Ice cream store
Jewelry store
Laundry or dry cleaners, self-service or pick up
Meat market
Music store
Notions store
Office supplies and stationery store
Package liquor store
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 303/348
Paint and wallpaper store
Pet shop
Radio, television and stereo sales
Record store
Shoe store
Sporting goods store
Tobacco shop
Toy store
Variety store
Class
#9
Auction room 1/100 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Bar, tavern or lounge
Convention hall or exhibition hall
Dance hall
Indoor skating rinks
Meeting hall
Restaurant (excluding fast food or drive-in)
Class
#10
Fast food or drive-in restaurants 3/100 sq. ft. of gross floor
area plus 10 car holding
capacity for each drive-in
bay
Class
#11
Board school, elementary and secondary 2/each 1 employee
Concrete mixing plant
Dry cleaning plant
Elementary school
Extermination service
Federal, state, county or municipal garage
Junior high school
Machinery sales and service
Mail order house
Microwave relay towers
Radar installations and towers
Radio and television stations and towers
Class
#12
Agricultural implements, sales and services 1/1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
plus 1/2,000 sq. ft. of used land
Archery ranges area
Golf driving ranges
Nurseries and greenhouses
Class
#13
Golf course, public and private 100/9 holes (regular golf) or 40/9
(pitch and putt, par 3)
Par 3 golf courses
Pitch and putt golf courses
Class
#14
Arboretum or botanical gardens 1/5,000 sq. ft. of gross land area
or
1/75 sq. ft. of water area when a
public swimming pool is an
isolated use
Athletic field
Forest preserves
Grounds of recreational clubs, noncommercial
Polo clubs
Public parks and playgrounds
Swimming pool
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 304/348
Tennis clubs and courts (outdoor)
Class
#15
Auto laundry Each 3 employees plus reservoir
spaces equal to 5 times the
maximum capacity of the auto
washing units
Class
#16
Business, music, art, dance or commercial school 1/each 2 students based on
design capacity
Fraternity, sorority or dormitory
Vocational school
Class
#17
Senior high schools 2/each 1 employee plus 1/each 6
students based on design capacity
Class
#18
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues 1/each 4 seats provided
Fairgrounds and exposition grounds
Racetracks
Stadiums or auditoriums
Class
#19
Indoor movie theater 1/each 21/2 seats provided
Class
#20
Colleges, junior colleges and universities 1/each 4 students based on
design capacity
Class
#21
Boat dealer 4/1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
plus 1/3,000 sq. ft. of used land
Camper sales area
Equipment rental and leasing service
Mobile home sales
Model homes and garage displays
Monument sales
Motor vehicle repairs and servicing
Motorcycle sales
New or used car dealer
Recreational vehicle sales
Repair service
Tire, battery or other motor vehicle accessories sales
Class
#22
All industrial uses not specifically mentioned in this
table
2/each 3 employees
All essential service and public service uses not
specifically mentioned in this table
Warehousing and wholesaling establishments
Class
#23
Amusements establishments 3/1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
plus 3/1,000 sq. ft. of used land
Arcade or amusement hall area
Billiard and pool halls
Kiddie parks
Miniature golf
Shooting ranges
Uses similar to the listed uses of class #23
Class
#24
Building materials and products, sales and storage 2/each employee
Building trades showroom and shop
Contractor or construction yards
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 305/348
Landscaping service
Class
#25
Auto driving instruction 4/1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
(excluding storage of vehicles)
Auto renting
Taxicab garage. or facility
Towing service
Class
#26
Drive-in banking facility Reservoir space 5 times the
number of teller windows in
addition to spaces required under
class #6
Class
#27
Any use not specifically mentioned in this table Spaces as required by the zoning
administrator after review by the
plan commission
(Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-11-5: OFF SITE PARKING; SPECIAL LOCATION AND REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever all or part of the required off street parking is to be located on a lot other than the lot containing a permitted or special use or an adjacent lot
under the same ownership, the owner or operator shall submit a special location plan subject to the following conditions:
A. Plan Items: The special location plan shall include the following items:
1. Number and configuration of parking spaces.
2. Points of ingress and egress to the parking area.
3. Any uses being conducted on the zoning lot on which the parking is to be located. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
4. The distance from the lot to the location where the permitted or special use will be conducted. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999
Code)
5. Construction standards, if the lot is not in existence.
B. Location Specifications: Off street parking shall be located as hereinafter specified. Where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking
distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the building that such parking facilities are required to serve.
1. Residential Districts: All single- and two-family parking areas shall be on the same lot as the dwelling unit to which such parking areas are
accessory. All multi-family parking areas shall be on the same lot or a commonly owned lot of the multi-family buildings to which such parking
areas are accessory. The parking areas for all other uses shall be located within one hundred feet (100') of the building they are required to serve.
2. Commercial Districts And Industrial Districts: All parking facilities shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of the building they are required
to serve.
C. Pedestrian Access: There shall be a clear, safe route of pedestrian access between any special location parking and the building to be served.
D. Requirements For Issuance: The following steps shall be followed prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate for the permitted or special use
requiring the off site parking:
1. A plan in accordance with all applicable provisions of this title shall be submitted to the zoning administrator.
2. The plan commission shall be responsible for review and approval of all special location plans. Any approval may establish necessary conditions
and limitations.
3. Upon approval of a special location plan, a copy of such plan shall be registered and recorded among the records of the county recorder of deeds
by the village clerk.
4. All special plans registered and recorded hereunder shall limit and control the issuance of zoning certificates, building permits and business
licenses and shall restrict and limit the use and operation of all land included within such special plans to all conditions and limitations specified in
such plans and the approvals thereof.
5. All special plans registered and recorded hereunder may be amended pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and
requirements by which such plans were approved, registered and recorded.
6. Upon application to the board of trustees by the owner or owners of the entire area included within any special location plan registered and
recorded hereunder, the board of trustees may permit any such plan to be withdrawn either partially or completely from registration and released
from recording if arrangements have been to bring all uses into full compliance with the terms of this title without the use of such facilities provided
by the special location plan.
7. If other provisions of this title require that a site plan be approved by the board of trustees for the permitted or special use requiring a special
location plan, the special location plan can be included as a part of the plan. In such case, the board of trustees would review and approve the site
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 306/348
plan instead of the plan commission. All other requirements of a special location plan shall be adhered to. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-11-6: OFF STREET LOADING:
A. Loading Berths Required: In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or substantially altered and which requires the receipt or
distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off street loading berths, not less than the minimum
requirements specified in this section.
B. Location: All loading berths shall be located on the same lots as the use to be served and no portion of the vehicles shall project into a street or alley.
In an industrial district, no loading berth for vehicles of more than two (2) ton capacity shall be located less than fifty feet (50') from any residence
district. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within thirty feet (30') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets, nor
shall it be located in a required front yard or side yard. All loading berths shall be screened from abutting residential districts, except when exempted
from this provision by the board of trustees upon recommendation by the zoning administrator.
C. Size Of Berth: A required off street loading berth shall be at least twelve feet (12') in width by at least seventy feet (70') in length, exclusive of aisle
and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
D. Access To Street Or Alley: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic movements, and shall be subject to approval of the zoning administrator.
E. Improvement Standards: All open off street loading berths shall be improved in accordance with the standards contained in section 11-11-5 of this
chapter.
F. Prohibited Acts: No storage of any kind nor motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted within any required loading berth
except emergency repair service.
G. Parking Not Allowed In Loading Space: Space allocated to any off street loading shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space
requirements for any off street parking facilities or portions thereof.
H. Central Loading Facilities: Central loading facilities may be substituted for loading berths on the individual zoning lots, provided the following
conditions are fulfilled:
1. Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the central loading area without crossing streets or alleys at grade.
2. Total berths provided shall meet the requirements based on the sum of the several types of uses served. (Area of types of uses may be totaled
before computing number of loading berths.)
3. No zoning lot served shall be more than five hundred feet (500') removed from the central loading area.
4. The tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area with the zoning lot served shall be not less than seven feet (7') in width and have a
clearance of not less than seven feet (7').
I. Receiving Facilities: Uses for which off street loading facilities are required herein but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the
minimum prescribed for each required facilities shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent alley,
service drive, or open space on the same zoning lot.
J. Basis For Providing Berths: Loading berths shall be provided on the basis of the required berths for individual use.
K. Uses Enumerated; Berths Required: For uses herein listed and other similar uses, loading berths shall be provided as specified below:
1. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof:
Airports.
Amusement and recreational facilities.
Banks and other financial institutions.
Business and other professional offices.
Convention and exhibition halls.
Health and medical institutions.
Hotels and motels containing retail shops, business or professional offices, convention or exhibition halls or auditoriums.
Public and administration buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 307/348
Radio and television studios.
Recording studios.
Theaters (indoor).
Undertaking establishments.
2. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet of gross floor area plus one additional loading berth for each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof:
Apartment hotels.
Auditoriums.
Charitable institutions.
Clubs and lodges.
Hotels and motels containing no retail shops, business or professional offices, convention or exhibition halls or auditoriums.
Meeting halls.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Religious institutions.
Research or testing institutions.
Schools and educational facilities.
3. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing five thousand (5,000) to forty thousand (40,000) square
feet of gross floor area. For buildings containing forty thousand (40,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, two
(2) loading berths shall be provided plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross
floor area or fraction thereof:
Assembly, manufacturing and fabricating establishments.
Cartage, express and motor freight facilities.
Cleaning, repair, servicing and testing establishments.
Laundries and dry cleaning facilities.
Mail order houses.
Printing and publishing.
Warehousing, storage, and wholesale establishments.
4. For all other uses, including but not limited to furniture and appliance stores, retail stores and restaurants and other establishments handling the
sale or consumption of food or beverages on the premises, loading berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Square Feet Of
Floor Area
Minimum
Number
5,000 to 20,000 1
20,000 to 60,000 2
60,000 to 100,000 3
For each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof, one additional loading berth. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff.
2-22-1997)
Chapter 12
SIGNS
11-12-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter applies to all districts except as otherwise provided for in the C-3 district. Where provisions in this chapter conflict with provisions in the C-3
district, the provisions in the C-3 district will apply to the C-3 district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 308/348
11-12-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is established to create the standards for a comprehensive and balanced system of signs for the village to achieve the following purposes:
A. Communication: To facilitate easy and pleasant communication between people and their environment by authorizing the use of signs which are:
1. Compatible with their surroundings;
2. Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain;
3. Expressive of the identity of individual proprietors as well as of the community as a whole;
4. Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen; and
5. Respectful of the reasonable rights of other sign owners.
B. Public Welfare: To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and welfare.
C. Balance Economy: To balance the economy, and the village business and industrial activity by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective
display of signs.
D. Aesthetic Appreciation: To protect the physical and mental well being of the public by encouraging a sense of aesthetic appreciation for the village's
visual environment.
E. Architectural Elements: To ensure that signs are designed as integral architectural elements of the building and site to which they principally relate.
F. Private Property: To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff.
2-22-1997)
11-12-3: SCOPE:
No sign shall be constructed, erected, originally painted, converted, altered, rebuilt, enlarged, remodeled, relocated or expanded until a permit for such
sign has been obtained from the village building department in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in this chapter. The required fee,
as established by the village board of trustees, shall be paid upon application for such permit. However, no permit shall be required for maintenance as
outlined in a following section of this chapter. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
11-12-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following shall be exempt from all but the maintenance and public safety requirements of this chapter.
A. Emblem: Emblems of governmental or political, civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organizations displayed on private property.
B. Governmental Signs: Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or other similar regulatory devices, directional signs, legal
notices, warnings at railroad crossings, and other instructional or regulatory signs having to do with health, hazards, parking, swimming, dumping,
etc.
C. Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets listing names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be
part of the building or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.
D. Addresses: Address numerals and other signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule, or regulation; provided, that the content
and size of the signs do not exceed the requirements of such law, order, rule, or regulation.
E. Directional Signs: Nonelectrical signs, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, which provide instructions or direction and are located entirely on
the property to which they pertain to identify restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking lot entrances and exits, and features of a similar
nature. Such signs may not bear the name of a business enterprise or any other advertising information.
F. Holiday Decorations: Displays of a primarily decorative nature, clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national, local or
religious holidays.
G. Business Nameplates: Nonelectrical nameplates denoting the business name of an occupation legally conducted on the premises; provided, that the
sign area does not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 309/348
H. Bulletin Boards: Bulletin boards, not exceeding forty (40) square feet, for religious institutions where the same are located on the premises of said
institutions. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
I. Warning Signs: No trespassing or no dumping signs, not exceeding one and five-tenths (1.5) square feet per sign, and not exceeding one per lot,
except that special permission may be obtained from the village building department for additional signs under proven special circumstances. (Ord.
961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
J. Religious And Historic Symbols: Religious symbols, identification emblems of religious order, or commemorative plaques of recognized historical
agencies; provided, that no such symbol, plaque, or identification emblem shall exceed four (4) square feet; and provided further, that all such
symbols, plaques and identification emblems shall be placed flat against a building, stone, or other permanent surface.
K. Residential For Sale Or For Rent Signs: Residential for sale or for rent signs are exempted to the extent that they conform to the following
regulations:
1. Illumination: Such signs shall not be illuminated.
2. Size: No such sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet.
3. Location: All signs shall be located on the lot that they are advertising. No such sign shall be placed more than fifteen feet (15') from the building
line.
4. Height: No such sign or supporting structure shall project higher than five feet (5') above ground level at that point where it is located.
5. Number: There shall not be more than one sign per lot.
L. Exception: Except as otherwise provided in the C-3 district. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-12-5: MESSAGES:
The following restrictions shall govern messages permitted on signs:
A. Character: No sign shall be permitted to contain statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, pornographic, immoral character, or which contain
advertising material which is untruthful.
B. Traffic Conflict: No sign shall be permitted which purports to be or is an imitation or resembles an official traffic sign or signal.
C. Limited Words And Phrases: No sign shall make use of the words "Stop", "Go Slow", "Caution", "Warning", "Look", "Drive In", "Danger" or any word,
phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
D. Zoning Designation: No sign shall recite that real property is zoned for land uses or will be zoned for land uses in the future under the zoning rules
and regulations of the Village, when in fact such real estate is not so zoned.
E. Land Use Designation: No sign on real estate shall declare that the property is reserved for or is being held for future land use which is inconsistent
with the then existing zoning classification of the Village for the land, or any words of like import of a similar nature.
F. Name Or Type Of Business: Business or industrial signs shall pertain only to the name of business or type of business conducted on the premises.
(Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-12-6: LOCATION:
The following restrictions shall govern sign location:
A. Blocking Exits: No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape.
B. Block Ventilation: No sign shall interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
C. Electrical Conductors: Signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors
in accordance with National Electrical Code specifications, depending on voltages concerned. However, in no case shall a sign be installed closer
than two feet (2') horizontally or vertically from any conductor or public utility guywire.
D. Blocking View: No sign may be so located as to obstruct the view from a public thoroughfare or an existing sign, display window, or major entrance of
an adjacent business.
E. Fire Safety: No sign of any kind may be attached to a standpipe or fire escape or to any other fire safety related device.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 310/348
F. Traffic Conflict: No sign shall be maintained at any location where by reason of its position, size, shape, or color, it may obstruct, impair, obscure,
interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any traffic control sign, signal or device, or where it may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
G. Vision Triangles: No sign shall be located in any of the following vision triangles formed by intersecting streets. At any intersection where at least one
(1) of the intersecting streets is a major or collector street as defined in the Comprehensive Plan of the Village, the sides of the triangle formed by the
centerlines of the intersecting streets shall be one hundred twenty feet (120') in length as measured outward from the point of intersection of said
centerlines along such centerlines. At all other intersections, each of such sides shall be eighty feet (80') in length.
H. Vegetation: No signs shall be nailed, tacked, or otherwise affixed to trees or other vegetation.
I. Added Signs: No advertising other than a permitted sign shall be placed on any sign support. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
J. Vehicular Signs: Any vehicle or trailer which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device shall be parked only in approved
parking locations for the purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business or activity. Vehicles displaying signage
parked in a residential area are limited to one (1) ton or less. (Ord. 1720, 4-22-2015)
K. Off Site Signs: No off site signs are permitted. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
L. Public Right-Of-Way: No sign may be allowed to encroach upon the public right-of-way or public property. The Village Building Department may grant
exceptions from this requirement for signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area that direct motorists to places of public interest, including
government facilities, public utilities, schools, and churches. (Ord. 1720, 4-22-2015)
M. Residential Lot Lines: No sign facing the side or rear lot line of an abutting residentially zoned lot shall be located within fifty feet (50') of that
residential lot line.
N. Roof Mounted Signs: No sign shall be erected or mounted on the roof of any building without first having obtained a special use permit. (Ord. 961, 2-
12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-12-7: HEIGHT:
The following regulations shall govern sign height and clearance: (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
A. Freestanding Signs: No freestanding sign shall extend above the predominant roof of any building to which it relates. In no case shall any
freestanding sign exceed thirty feet (30') in height above grade except in sign corridor. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. Ord. 1046, 4-14-
1999)
B. Wall Signs: No sign which is fixed to a wall of a building shall extend above the vertical surface of that wall.
C. Roof Signs: One story flat roofed buildings may have a roof sign which does not extend more than three feet (3') above the roof line, except in a C-3
district.
D. Vertical Clearing: Any projecting or hanging sign or marquee must have a vertical clearance from the bottom of the sign to the grade below of nine
feet (9').
E. Vertical Clearance Adjacent To Driveways And Parking Lots: Any projecting or hanging sign or marquee located within three feet (3') of a driveway or
parking area shall have a vertical clearance from the bottom of the sign to the top of curb of twelve feet (12'). (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-12-8: DESIGN AND MOUNTING:
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to meet the requirements of the building code for wind pressure, dead load, foundations, and
other structural and safety requirements. All signs shall be securely anchored in a manner acceptable to the village building department so they will not
swing or come loose, or otherwise endanger persons. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
11-12-9: ILLUMINATED SIGNS:
All illuminated signs must be internally illuminated and shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. Electrical Permit: All electrical work on illuminated signs and signs with electrical wiring must be covered by a valid electrical permit. Electrical
inspections must be made by the village electrical inspector with any cost incurred to be paid by the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 311/348
B. Relettering: Relettering which requires a change of electrical piping or sign wiring shall be subject to the approval of the electrical inspector.
C. Voltage: The voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection with the sign shall be conspicuously placed on that apparatus.
D. Moving Lights: Except in a C-3 district, illuminated signs shall not have any flashing, scintillating, traveling or blinking lights or rotating beacons, nor
shall any beam of light be projected through a mechanism which periodically changes the color of the light reaching the sign. A sign on which the
current time or temperature, or both, is indicated by intermittent lighting changes shall not be deemed to be a flashing sign if the lights do not exceed
forty (40) watts per lamp, the changes are limited to the numerals indicating the time or temperature with no less than seven (7) seconds between
changes, and the sign is in conformance with the other regulations for such signs in this section. A freestanding sign which contains an electronic
message reader limited to displays with no less than seven (7) seconds between changes shall not be deemed to be a flashing sign.
E. Adjacent Property: Signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district or upon
any public street or park.
F. Internal Illumination: Internally illuminated signs shall permit light to shine through only the lettering and graphic elements of the sign, and shall be
controlled to prevent glare.
G. Weatherproof Disconnect: All electrical signs shall have a disconnect within sight of the sign. Outside sign disconnects must be weatherproof. (Ord.
961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-12-10: PERMITTED NUMBER, AREA AND CONFIGURATION:
A. Sign Area Calculation: The following methods shall be used to calculate the sign area of various types of signs: (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
1. Freestanding And Projecting Signs: For ground signs, pole signs, projecting signs, pylon signs, and roof signs, the sign area shall be calculated by
measuring the entire area enclosed within the smallest regular geometric form, or combination of regular geometric forms, which may be inscribed
to encompass the perimeter of the sign structure, excluding structural support members extending beyond the frame or background border of the
sign. In the case of signs with more than one face, the area shall be computed only for the maximum signal display surface which is visible from
any one ground position except in interstate sign corridor. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
2. Flush Signs: For wall signs, awning and canopy signs, and exterior window signs, the sign area shall be calculated by measuring the entire area
enclosed within the smallest regular geometric form, or combination of regular geometric forms, which may be inscribed to encompass all letters
and graphic symbols of the sign, including horizontal spacings between such letters and symbols plus any additional portion of the background
which is framed by a border, internally illuminated, consisting of a color or tone different than the wall to which the sign is attached, or projects
more than three inches (3") beyond the plane of the wall to which attached.
B. Signs In Residential Districts: Identification signs for structures other than a dwelling unit are subject to the following regulations:
1. Area: One (1) identification sign per principal use is permitted, provided it does not exceed ten (10) square feet.
2. Location: No such sign shall be closer than eight feet (8') to any side or rear lot line or closer than one-half (1/2) the depth of the required front
yard. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
C. Signs In C-1 And C-2 Districts: The Village recognizes that the reasonable display of signs is necessary as a public service and to conduct
competitive commerce and industry. It also recognizes there is a significant relationship between the manner in which signs are displayed and public
safety and the value and economic stability of adjoining property. To achieve these goals, the following standards are established for the display of
signs in direct relationship to the functional use of the property and to the intensity development as permitted within the zoning district. Business and
identification signs are subject to the following regulation except as provided for in the regulation of signs in the interstate sign corridor: (Ord. 961, 2-
12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
1. Signs Attached To Building:
a. Only one (1) permanent sign per dedicated street frontage may be permitted each principal business establishment. (Ord. 1720, 4-22-2015)
b. The area in square feet of all signs on a parcel shall not exceed two (2) times the number of linear feet of the front of the principal building,
except that no wall mounted sign may exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area. Each side of a principal building fronting on a dedicated
street shall be considered a front for these purposes, but no signs based upon the calculation of one (1) frontage may be located on another
frontage. Where a property owner determines that in his opinion an alternate facade is more advantageous for displaying his allotted signage,
he may request this location by application to the Plan Commission.
c. The length of such sign shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the length of the building wall on which the sign is located. The end of such
sign shall be closer to the ends of that wall or section of wall containing the sign than fifteen percent (15%) of the length of that wall.
d. Except for movie theater marquees, and except for signs in the C-1 District, no sign shall project more than one foot (1') from the front of the
structure. In the C-1 District, signs may be permitted to extend over the public sidewalk, but shall not extend further than six feet (6') or beyond
the street side edge of the public sidewalk, whichever is lesser.
2. Freestanding Signs:
a. Face Area: Except in the C-1 District, or as indicated elsewhere in this chapter, the area of such freestanding sign shall not exceed one hundred
twenty (120) square feet. In the C-1 District, the area of such sign shall not exceed thirty six (36) square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 312/348
b. Number: One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted by right per each business site. Additional freestanding signage may be permitted by
application to the Plan Commission as detailed elsewhere in this chapter. Shopping centers will be allowed one (1) sign per each additional five
hundred feet (500') of dedicated street frontage.
c. Height: Freestanding business signs shall not exceed the height of the predominant roof of the business to which it refers or thirty feet (30'),
whichever is lower, where property fronts on Route 50. In all other cases, the following shall apply:
(1) In designated front yards, freestanding signs shall not exceed the predominant height of the roof of the business to which it refers or twenty
feet (20'), whichever is lower.
(2) In all other yards, freestanding signs shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height.
d. Location: All freestanding business signs shall be located entirely within the property line of the building site to which they refer. The sign base
shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10') within any property line.
3. Directional Signs: The number of permitted directional signs per business site shall be determined by the plan commission during its site plan
review. The appropriate number, size and location of these signs shall be determined by the size of the site, its location in respect to major
roadways, the complexity of traffic patterns in the area and the orientation of the building to off street parking. Directional signs located at street
entrances shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and messages are limited to the business name and the words, "Welcome", "Exit",
"Entrance" or similar informative language. Freestanding directional signs shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height.
4. Design:
a. All freestanding signs shall have bases a minimum of three feet (3') in width, except in the case of freestanding directional signs which shall
have bases in proportion to the size of the sign as approved by the plan commission.
b. Continuity of design is encouraged on multiuse development sites where similar landscaping and building materials have been used to create a
unified, parklike setting.
5. Message Information: Freestanding signs may be used to identify a regional or community shopping center containing a site area of five (5) acres
or more. Such signs shall contain the name of the shopping center and/or the center's logo. The names of individual tenants shall not be permitted
on such signs unless the tenant has a lease agreement of at least five (5) years and the sign face area for the tenant is a minimum of fifteen (15)
square feet. No individual tenant sign area may exceed the area of the sign face of the shopping center name. In no case, however, shall more
than four (4) tenant names be listed on a single freestanding sign face.
6. Message Board Signs: Signs with changeable lettering are permitted.
7. Additional Signage: The plan commission may grant additional signs or signage for business sites in these districts based upon one or more of the
following criteria or other health, safety or welfare considerations:
a. It is deemed necessary to protect or promote the health, safety or welfare of employees and/or pedestrians or vehicular traffic in or near the site.
b. The business location, lot configuration or unique topographical condition indicates the need for additional signage.
c. The additional signage will not adversely impact on adjacent property or essentially alter the character of the locality.
d. The scale of other development is such that additional signage is necessary in order to maintain a realistic relationship between building size
and site identification.
e. It is deemed necessary that mixed use, unified development sites require identification signage in addition to their street addresses to assist
emergency services, deliveries and customers. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
Requests for additional signage not explicitly stated in this chapter shall be made in writing and submitted to the village building department to
be forwarded to the plan commission with his recommendation. The plan commission shall act on this request at any of its regularly scheduled
meetings, provided they are in receipt of all information and relevant facts to render a decision. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999
Code)
D. Signs In Industrial Districts: Business and identification signs in industrial districts are subject to the following regulations except as provided for in the
regulation of signs in the interstate sign corridor: (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
1. Area Without Building: For industrial premises which do not contain building areas larger than four hundred (400) square feet and which lawfully
store their merchandise outside, the permitted sign area shall be calculated on the basis of 0.0005 square feet of sign area for each one square
foot of the subject parcel, up to maximum of eighty (80) square feet of sign area.
2. Area Related To Building: The area in square feet of all signs on a parcel shall not exceed three (3) times the number of linear feet of the front of
the principal building. Each side of a principal building facing a major public thoroughfare shall be considered a front for these purposes, but no
signs based upon the calculation of frontage may be located on another frontage.
3. Length: No sign attached to a building shall exceed seventy percent (70%) of the length of the building wall on which the sign is located. The ends
of such sign shall be no closer to the ends of the wall or section of wall containing the sign than fifteen percent (15%) of the length of that wall.
(Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
E. Signs In The Interstate Sign Corridor:
1. Purpose: The purpose of the interstate sign corridor is to appropriately regulate signs in a district comprised of those establishments located along
I-57 which depend to a large extent on attracting customers traveling on I-57. Within this sign corridor, the following regulations will apply:
a. Freestanding Signs:
(1) Face Area: The area of such freestanding signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet per face of sign, if located more than
fifty feet (50') from the business activity being advertised; and shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet per face of sign, if located fifty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 313/348
feet (50') or less from the business activity being advertised.
(2) Height: The height of such freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty six feet (36') if located more than fifty feet (50') from the business activity
being advertised; and shall not exceed seventy two feet (72'), if located fifty feet (50') or less from the business activity being advertised.
(3) Number: Not to exceed one such freestanding sign per two hundred feet (200') of highway frontage.
b. Signs Attached To Buildings (Wall Signs):
(1) Area: Twenty percent (20%) of wall area, or three hundred (300) square feet, whichever is less.
c. Total Sign Area Per Lot: The total of all sign areas on any one lot, including all wall signs and freestanding signs, shall be the lower of: 1) one
thousand (1,000) square feet; 2) eight percent (8%) of ground floor area of principal building; or 3) four (4) square feet of signage per linear foot
of highway frontage. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
11-12-11: SIGNS WITH UNIQUE CONDITIONS:
A. Signs For Motor Fuel Dispensing Establishments: Establishments that dispense motor fuel for sale to the public have been found to be unique
because their primary functions are performed out of doors in a manner prescribed by state statutes. Therefore, the following regulations apply
uniquely to such establishments:
1. Signs Attached To Building: The total face area of these signs, which includes all signs containing a commercial message, temporary or
permanent, visible to the public from outside the building, shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
2. Freestanding Signs: Except in a C-3 district, the total face area of freestanding signs shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet. One
freestanding sign may be permitted a height of thirty feet (30') above grade. Two (2) additional freestanding signs with a maximum height of eight
feet (8') above the adjacent street curb level may be permitted.
3. Motor Fuel Stations: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this title, the following signs are permitted at motor fuel stations:
a. Two (2) signs per pump island which designate the functions of the island as "self-service" or "full service". Such signs shall not have more than
two (2) faces and shall not exceed three (3) square feet per face.
b. One sign per type of fuel sold which designates the price of that fuel. Such signs shall not have more than two (2) faces and shall not exceed six
(6) square feet per face. The sign area for more than one type of fuel may be combined into one sign.
c. One nonilluminated sign identifying the service performed in each service bay may be placed over the opening to each bay. Such signs shall
have one face and shall not exceed three (3) square feet each.
d. One nonilluminated nameplate, identifying the owner or operator is permitted adjacent to the doorway of the station. Such nameplate shall have
one face and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
e. Temporary signs advertising batteries, tires, oil or other products directly related to motor vehicles, if the signs are located directly adjacent to a
display of the product(s) described. Such signs may have two (2) faces; however, their total area shall not exceed ten (10) square feet.
f. Any signs required by the state of Illinois or the federal government.
4. Applicability To Dispensing Operation: Where the dispensing of motor fuel is only one of the business activities conducted on the premises, the
unique sign conditions permitted in the subsection above apply only to the motor fuel dispensing operation and not to the other areas.
B. Real Estate Signs: Except in a C-3 district, signs for the sale or rental of real estate have been found to be unique because the premises upon which
such signs are located is the product advertised and the scale of that product is quite large. Because of this uniqueness, a sign may be permitted for
the purpose of selling or renting any lot or group of lots and/or any existing or proposed building or group of buildings or segment thereof (excluding
individual residential dwelling units) based upon the following regulations.
1. Eighty Square Feet Or Less: Signs with a surface area of eighty (80) square feet or less. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
a. Procedure: Such signs shall be reviewed, and a sign permit be issued by the village building department. The sign permit shall be valid for one
year, after which time it may be renewed by annual application and payments of the required fee to the village clerk.
b. Area: The allowable surface area shall be based upon one square foot of sign area for each one foot (1') of linear building frontage, if
developed, or vacant land frontage if undeveloped, not to exceed eighty (80) square feet.
c. Length: The length of such sign shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the length of any building wall on which the sign is located.
d. Number Of Signs: The number of signs permitted shall be based upon the total acreage of the site.
e. Location: Not more than one sign shall be permitted on each street frontage of the property being advertised.
f. Existing Special Use Permit: No sign(s) provided for in this chapter shall be permitted if the property has a special use permit in effect for an
existing sign having a surface area in excess of eighty (80) square feet.
2. Greater Than Eighty Square Feet: Signs with a surface area greater than eighty (80) square feet.
a. Special Use Permit: Signs with a surface area greater than eighty (80) square feet may be permitted when required by unique conditions, but
only after obtaining a special use permit approved by the village board upon recommendation of the plan commission. Such special use permit
shall be formally reviewed annually by the village building department for compliance.
b. Required Findings: Granting of a special use permit for such signs shall be conditioned upon due consideration and findings on the following
factors:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 314/348
Necessity of sign due to unique conditions of the site or market.
Nature of surrounding land use.
Size of property.
Size of proposed sign.
Traffic safety.
Size and nature of existing/proposed development (if applicable).
c. Cancellation: If, at the required annual review or any other time, the village building department finds that the conditions related to the evaluation
factors above have changed significantly, he may recommend to the board of trustees that the special use permit for such signs be terminated.
The board may revoke such permit without public hearing.
d. Sign Permit: Should a special use permit be granted or renewed, a sign permit may be issued by the Village Clerk upon proper applicant
payment of the required fee. Such fee shall be payable annually at the time of the formal review by the Village Building Department.
C. Temporary Signs: There are unique events which may warrant the temporary permission of signs not otherwise permitted. Such temporary signs shall
be governed by the following regulations:
1. Area: A temporary sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot of sign area for each one (1) linear foot of the length of the wall of the principal
building which contains the primary entrance to the establishment, up to a maximum area of one hundred (100) square feet.
2. Number: Only one (1) temporary sign is permitted, unless the principal building fronts on more than one (1) public street, then one (1) sign may be
mounted on each street frontage. However, the total area of all such signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
3. Location:
a. Zoning Districts: Temporary signs are permitted only in commercial and industrial zoning districts.
b. Mounted Flush: All signs shall be mounted flush with the building wall upon which they are located, except in the case of freestanding signage,
designating a grand opening.
4. Type And Construction:
a. Safe Mounting: All signs shall be securely anchored so that they will not swing, sway in the wind, or endanger users of sidewalks or roadways.
b. Cloth Signs: All signs constructed of cloth or other weak and combustible materials shall be securely attached to their supports. They shall be
removed as soon as they are torn or damaged at the discretion the Village Building Department.
c. Freestanding Signs: No freestanding signs are permitted, except in the case of a "grand opening". These signs may be permitted only upon the
specific approval of the Village Building Department.
d. Partially Unsecured Signs: No pennants, streamers, balloons or any other partially unsecured signs are permitted except as provided herein.
Pennants and/or flags may be permitted on the specific approval of the Board of Trustees subject to the following conditions:
Pennants and/or flags shall only be permitted in conjunction with retail businesses having a permanent outdoor display area of merchandise
offered for retail sale as regulated by this title.
The erection of pennants shall be limited to the immediate area containing the outdoor display, and shall not exceed a height of twenty feet (20').
Upon approval by the Board of Trustees, a permit may be issued by the Village Clerk for pennants to be erected on a zoning lot once per
calendar year for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
All pennants and/or flags erected for display purposes shall be maintained in an orderly fashion. Torn and badly faded pennants and/or flags
shall be immediately taken down or replaced at the discretion of the Village Building Department.
e. Electrical Installations: No temporary sign constructed of combustible materials may have an electrical wiring as a part of the sign, nor shall any
temporary sign be internally illuminated.
f. Length: The length of a temporary sign shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the length of any building to which it is attached.
5. Duration And Frequency:
a. Grand Opening: Temporary signs designating a "grand opening" may be erected within six (6) months of obtaining an original business license.
Said sign may be erected for a period not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days. (Ord. 961, 2-12-2997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
b. Other Temporary Signs: Temporary signs may be permitted on any business location for not more than four (4) time periods during any calendar
year. Each time period shall not exceed ten (10) calendar days in length. (Ord. 1720, 4-22-2015)
6. Procedure: The village reserves the right to review any proposed temporary sign for compliance and to reject any sign that is deemed unsafe or
not in keeping with the intent of this title.
a. Grand Opening: All freestanding "grand opening" sign applications must be approved by the village building department. The department shall
take into consideration the size of the proposed sign, its proposed duration, any colors of illumination, traffic safety, public safety, the impact
upon adjacent properties, and general compliance with this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 315/348
b. Civic, Charitable Or Religious Signs: Temporary signs of a civic, charitable or religious nature are exempt from the provisions contained in this
chapter, but shall require the specific approval of the village building department.
c. Other Temporary Signs: All other temporary signs shall be reviewed by the village building department for compliance.
D. Flags: Flags of governmental, civic, philanthropic, education or religious organizations displayed on private property are permitted subject to the
following regulations:
1. Number: There shall be a maximum of one flagpole for each zoning lot except as may be allowed by an approved site plan if the plan commission,
in its review of the site plan, indicates that this flag display, which may include a corporate flag, is an integral part of the site landscaping and
compatible with the architectural design elements.
2. Height: The height of a flagpole above grade shall be in proportion to the scale of the building to which it relates, and in no case shall be higher
than the following height limitations:
Building Height Pole Height
1 - 2 stories 20 feet
3 - 4 stories 35 feet
5 - 7 stories 60 feet
The American flag shall be flown higher than all others in any group display.
3. Length: The length of a permitted flag on a flagpole shall not exceed one-third (1/3) the length of the pole upon which it is hung.
4. Maintenance: All flags are to be maintained in an orderly fashion. Torn and badly faded flags shall be taken down and replaced at the discretion of
the village building department. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
E. Political Signs1: (Rep. by Ord. 1499, 6-10-2009)
F. Construction Signs: Construction signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts for the purpose of denoting the construction of individual buildings or
projects. All "construction" sign applications must be approved by the village building department. The department shall take into consideration the
size of the proposed sign, its proposed duration, traffic safety, public safety, the impact upon adjacent properties, and general compliance with this
title.
1. Number: No more than one construction sign shall be allowed per street frontage per project.
2. Height: No construction sign shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height. Signs of a greater height may be permitted upon the specific approval of the
plan commission.
3. Area: The maximum allowable size of any construction sign in a residential zoning district shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. The
maximum size of any construction sign located in a commercial or industrial zoning district shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, except
that signs with a greater area may be permitted upon the specific approval of the plan commission.
4. Location: Such signs shall not be placed or otherwise erected upon any public right of way, nor attached to any building, structure, or vegetation
thereon. Such signs shall be situated on the same property as the construction project to which they refer.
5. Message: The content of construction signs shall be limited to the project name/logo; the architect; the engineer; the general contractor; the
building developer; the lending institution; the business of the establishment under construction; its opening date; the type of residential units being
offered; and information pertaining to the price of such residential units, financing and amenities.
6. Duration: No construction sign shall be erected any earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the actual commencement of construction. Such signs shall
be removed within ten (10) days after completion of construction and prior to occupancy.
G. Subdivision Monuments Or Identification Signs: Monuments or signs that identify a particular residential subdivision or unified residential
neighborhood may be permitted subject to the following regulations:
1. Location: Such signs shall be located at points where subdivision streets intersect with arterial streets (as designated by the comprehensive plan).
2. Maintenance: Subdivision monuments or identification signs are to be maintained in an orderly manner. Such signs are to be kept clean and in
good repair. Signs not properly maintained may be removed by order of the board of trustees.
3. Procedure: The village reserves the right to review any proposed subdivision monuments or identification signs for compliance and to reject any
sign that is deemed unsafe or not in keeping with the intent of this title. Subdivision monuments or identification signs shall require specific
approval by the board of trustees upon recommendation of the plan commission. The board shall take into consideration the size of the proposed
monument or sign, any colors or illumination, traffic safety, public safety, the impact upon adjacent properties, the general compliance with this title.
(Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
H. Installation Of Official Signs: The village may, at its sole discretion, authorize the installation of official signs as freestanding and multiple sided
structures and located in public right of way that display directional information to residential developments. (Ord. 1371, 9-28-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 316/348
11-12-12: MAINTENANCE:
All signs (including those for which no permit is required) and their supports shall be kept in a safe, presentable, and good structural condition in
accordance with the following requirements and with the applicable codes or ordinances of the village as determined by the village building department:
A. Clean: The owner of any sign shall keep the sign and support structure clean and properly treated so as to prevent rust peeling, flaking, or fading.
B. Good Repair: Broken panels, missing letters, flaking or peeling paint and other damage to a sign or support structure shall be repaired within thirty
(30) days of its occurrence.
C. Area Around Signs: The area surrounding all signs shall be maintained free of any debris or nuisances and any related grassed area or landscaping
shall be kept trimmed and in a healthy condition.
D. Enforcement; Fine: In the event of a violation of this section, a thirty (30) day notice shall be given by the village building department stating the
amount of time granted for repair or removal of said sign, and if not repaired or removed in that time, there shall be assessed a fine of fifty dollars
($50.00) plus the cost of removal by the village. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
11-12-13: REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
A. Public Safety: Any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property shall be removed summarily and without notice at the sole discretion of the
village building department.
B. Obsolete Message: Any sign which is located on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of three (3) months or more, or any
sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or persons having
the beneficial use of the structure or property upon which such sign may be found. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended
because of a change of ownership or management may be granted an additional three (3) month time extension by the village building department
after written application. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
11-12-14: POLITICAL SIGNS:
Political signs of any kind shall not be permitted on public property including public rights of way, parkways and easement areas. (Ord. 1597, 3-14-2012)
Chapter 13
ILLUSTRATIONS
11-13-1: LEGAL EFFECT:
This chapter is established solely as a reference guide and shall not be construed to be binding or a part of this title. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-
1997)
11-13-2: LOT TYPES:
EXAMPLE OF LOT TYPES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 317/348
CORNER LOT: A lot abutting on two (2) streets at their intersection, where the angle of intersection is not more than one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
INTERIOR LOT: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
REVERSED CORNER LOT: A corner lot the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
THROUGH LOT: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel public streets. On a through lot both street lines shall be
deemed front lot lines. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-13-3: LOT WIDTH AND LOT DEPTH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 318/348
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at the narrowest width within the first thirty feet (30') of lot depth
immediately in back of the front yard setback line. (Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-13-4: FLOOR AREA MEASUREMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 319/348
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 320/348
(Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
11-13-5: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
FLOOR AREA RATIO - ILLUSTRATED
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 321/348
(Ord. 961, 2-12-1997, eff. 2-22-1997)
Chapter 14
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
11-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
A. Provide for the appropriate location and development of communication towers and antennas to serve the residents and businesses of the village of
Monee and the surrounding region.
B. Minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscaping, screening and innovative camouflaging
techniques.
C. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
D. Lessen traffic impacts on surrounding residential areas.
E. Maximize use of any new and existing communication towers to minimize the need to construct new towers, and minimize the total number of towers
throughout the village and the region.
F. Maximize and encourage the shares used of tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single use towers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 322/348
G. Promote the location of new communication towers in manufacturing districts and/or on municipally owned property. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
11-14-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Location: Upon receipt of a conditional use permit and building permit and conditional on meeting all relevant criteria, freestanding communication
towers may be located in the following zoning districts:
1. M-1 light industrial.
2. M-2 heavy industrial.
3. On municipally owned property (as an overlay district).
B. Building Codes; Safety Standards:
1. To ensure the structural integrity of communication towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards
contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as
amended from time to time.
2. Tower owners shall conduct periodic inspections of communications towers at least once every three (3) years to ensure structural integrity.
Inspections shall be conducted by a licensed structural engineer, and the results of such inspections shall be provided to the board of trustees.
3. All guywires and all guyed towers shall be clearly marked to be visible at all times. All guywires shall be located a minimum of twenty feet (20')
from any property line.
C. Regulatory Compliance:
1. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal
government with the authority to regulate communications towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners
of the communications towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such communications towers and antennas into compliance with
such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency.
2. Tower owners shall provide documentation showing that each communication tower is in compliance with all federal requirements. Evidence of
compliance must be submitted every twelve (12) months.
D. Height: Communication towers may exceed the height limitations of the zoning district, provided they shall be set back from adjacent property lines
the largest of the following distances, as may be applicable:
1. A distance of one hundred percent (100%) of the tower height from any school property, or improved public park area; or
2. The minimum setback in the underlying zoning district; or
3. The maximum collapsible fall zone for the proposed tower as specified.
E. Lot Size, Setbacks And Separations: The site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide an adequate setback from the base of the tower to any
property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public streets. Such setback shall be sufficient to:
1. Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or other buffer as required in the area.
2. Preserve the privacy of surrounding residential property.
3. Protect adjoining property from the potential impact of tower failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site.
4. Provide a setback equal to the height of the tower to any property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public street.
5. Provide a setback equal to or exceeding the rear yard setback required for the adjoining property where the adjoining property is not in a
residential district nor a public property or a public street.
6. Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower.
Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not
lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails.
7. For a guyed structure, the site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide a setback equal to at least the height of the tower from a guy
anchor to any property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public street in addition to the size requirements of this chapter.
8. All structures and uses associated with the transmission use other than the transmission tower shall be located to meet the setbacks required in
the zoning district where the tower is to be located. To encourage and accommodate shared use of a tower, the board of trustees may waive or
reduce setback requirements of these structures and uses by up to fifty percent (50%) to accommodate the placement of additional buildings or
other supporting equipment at a tower site.
9. No freestanding communication tower shall be allowed within a two thousand foot (2,000') radius of an existing tower currently existing within a
residential area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 323/348
F. Shared Use Of Towers And Tower Sites: If shared use of an existing or approved tower or an existing or approved tower site is not proposed, the
applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed equipment cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or an existing or approved
tower site for the following reasons:
1. The proposed equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved towers and reinforcement of the existing or approved
towers cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
2. The proposed equipment will cause RF (radio frequency) interference with other existing or proposed equipment for that tower or that existing or
approved tower site and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
3. Existing or approved towers or the existing or approved tower site does not have adequate space to accommodate the proposed equipment.
4. Addition of the proposed equipment would result in NIER (nonionizing electromagnetic radiation) levels which exceed any adopted local, federal or
state emission standards.
5. There are other valid reasons that make it impractical to place the proposed equipment on any existing or proposed tower or any existing or
approved tower site.
G. Visual Impact:
1. Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state
agency, be painted a neutral color, to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
2. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment.
3. Towers clustered at the same site shall be of similar height and design.
4. Towers shall be the minimum height necessary to provide parity with existing similar tower supported antennas, and shall be freestanding where
the negative visual effect is less than would be created by use of a guyed tower.
H. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways, public property, and
residential property, and shall be as follows:
1. For towers one hundred fifty feet (150') tall or less, a buffer area no less than six feet (6') wide shall commence at the property line.
2. The buffer zone is to consist of materials of a variety which can be expected to grow to form a continuous hedge at least five feet (5') in height
within two (2) years of planting.
3. Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guywires shall be of a kind that would not exceed twenty feet (20') in height or would not affect the stability of
the guys, should they be uprooted, and shall not obscure visibility of the anchor from the transmission building or security facilities and
staff/maintenance.
4. Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
5. Landscaping will be addressed in the site plan.
I. Easement: A minimum twenty foot (20') easement or right of way for access shall be provided to the tower which is adequate to accommodate
maintenance and emergency vehicles, and which is improved with a dust free, all weather surface sufficient to accommodate the weight of vehicles
proposed to use the easement or right of way subject to approval by the village board. The right of way or easement shall be maintained by the
landowner or lessee.
J. Parking: A minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces shall be provided on the tower site, plus one off street parking space for each on site
personnel.
K. Security: Communication towers shall be enclosed by decay resistant security fencing not less than six feet (6') in height, with self-latching gate, and
shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device.
L. Accessory Uses: Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage.
Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or pared on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the
tower are being made.
M. Advertising: No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower.
N. Lighting: No illumination is permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, FAA, or other state or federal agency of competent
jurisdiction. All required lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjoining properties. The board of trustees may review lighting alternatives
and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views.
O. Procedures For Siting A Communication Tower: A scaled site development plan shall be prepared to show precisely the location of the tower in its
site, support buildings on the ground, guy anchors, and access to the site and parking areas. The applicant shall submit evidence that the tower and
its method of installation has been designed by a registered engineer and is certified by that registered engineer to be structurally sound and able to
withstand wind and other loads in accordance with accepted engineering practice. The applicant shall include, from a registered engineer or architect
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 324/348
responsible for designing the proposed tower, a specification of the maximum collapsible fall zone of the proposed tower. Such plans shall be
reviewed and decided according to the provisions of this section as well as those regulating special uses in this chapter.
P. Removal Of Towers And Antennas: The applicant shall submit proof that it has guaranteed removal of any tower which becomes obsolete or
abandoned and that adequate financial security has been posted to cover the cost of such removal.
Q. Ownership: Each tower owner shall inform the village of any changes in ownership or responsibility for a tower immediately after the change occurs.
R. Duties And Burdens: The applicant shall have both the duty of initial presentation of evidence and the burden of persuasion with respect to the
criteria of this chapter.
S. Rooftop Mounted Devices: Rooftop mounted communications towers and antennas may be located on any nonresidential buildings and alternative
tower structures so long as:
1. Such tower or antenna is set back from any existing or planned off site residence and separated from any residentially zoned property at least a
distance equal to two (2) times the full height of the tower and antenna, but in no event less than one hundred feet (100').
2. The existing freestanding nonresidential structure other than a tower on which such tower or antenna will be placed is fifty feet (50') in height or
greater and the tower and antenna will add no more than fifteen feet (15') total to the height of said existing structure.
3. No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower.
4. No signs or illumination are permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, FAA, or other state or federal agency of competent
jurisdiction in which case the board of trustees may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding uses and views.
5. The number and location of antennas, communication towers or other receiving or transmitting devices located on a single structure is not
excessive and does not adversely affect adjacent properties and views. (Ord. 1046, 4-14-1999)
Chapter 15
DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES
11-15-1: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
The following information must be submitted to the Monee Building Department before a demolition permit can be issued:
A. Letter of authorization from the owner;
B. Up-to-date plat of survey indicating building(s) to be demolished, location of any wells, septic tanks or cisterns;
C. A list of all people/firms connected with the demolition with their addresses and telephone numbers. This includes the general contractor, well sealer,
septic pumper/hauler, etc.;
D. A performance bond or other performance surety acceptable by the Village Attorney in the amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
demolition contract for Village owned properties;
E. A copy of a Certificate of Insurance in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) property damage, and five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) personal injury (note the dollar amount changes for buildings over 2 stories);
F. A list of work the demolisher is to do;
G. Proof of compliance with any other County rules or regulation pertaining to demolition;
H. Affidavit that all utilities (i.e., gas, electric, phone, water and sewer) have been abandoned/removed:
1. Commonwealth Edison - 800-334-7661 (48 - 72 hour notice).
2. Northern Illinois Gas - 800-730-6114 (48 hour notice).
3. It is the responsibility of the demo contractor to contact JULIE (800-892-0123) for utility locates as well as local phone, cable providers, etc., to
ensure proper disconnects have been completed.
I. A field inspection report by the Village official verifying proper abandonment and/or sealing of private water and sewer systems must be on file. (Ord.
1775, 12-14-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 325/348
11-15-2: NOTIFICATION:
A. The applicant shall be required to adhere to the following notification process:
1. Public Works requires no less than forty eight (48) hours notice prior to demolition so that water services can be shut off at the buffalo-box, and the
meter can be removed and secured.
2. All contact regarding these notifications should go through either the Public Works Director or Assistant Director.
3. The contractor is responsible for the removal of the buffalo box. (Ord. 1775, 12-14-2016)
11-15-3: INSPECTION:
The contractor must arrange for an inspection by the Village prior to the backfill of the excavation. (Ord. 1775, 12-14-2016)
11-15-4: BACKFILL REQUIREMENTS:
The contractor shall be required to provide adequate acceptable backfill at the site and restore the site to a natural condition. Any and all debris, excess
backfill, or discarded material shall be removed from the site by the contractor at its sole expense. (Ord. 1775, 12-14-2016)
11-15-5: PERMIT COSTS:
The following permit fees shall be assessed in connection with a demolition:
Residence $ 100.00
Commercial unit 500.00
Industrial unit 1,000.00
(Ord. 1775, 12-14-2016)
11-15-6: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted pursuant to section 1-14-11 of this Code. In addition to the imposition of fines, a contractor who fails to
comply with the terms of this chapter is subject to a red tag order thereby prohibiting any further work at the site. (Ord. 1775, 12-14-2016)
Title 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE FOR THE VILLAGE OF MONEE, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 831, 8-
10-1994)
12-1-2: OFFICIAL STATUS:
This title is hereby made a part of the official plan of the village. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-1-3: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To ensure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community growth, and to safeguard the interests of the homeowner, the subdivider, the
investor and the village.
B. To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 326/348
C. To prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and prevent excessive development costs.
D. To assure the development of land for the highest possible use with all the necessary protection against deterioration and obsolescence.
E. To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working relationship between the village and the developer. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-1-4: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
A. No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located within the village or in any unincorporated area which is located entirely or in part within
one and one-half (11/2) miles of the nearest limits of the village except in conformity with the provisions of this title.
B. The subdivision plans and plats, proposed improvements to be installed, and all procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance
with the regulations herein. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-1-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Submission Of Plats For Approval:
1. Whenever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out which is located within the incorporated limits of the village, or is located entirely or in
part within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the nearest limits of the village, provided such territory is not included in any other municipality, the
subdivider thereof or his agent shall submit both a preliminary and final subdivision plat to the plan commissioners for their approval.
2. The subdivision plats and all procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance with these regulations.
3. The developer shall submit a time schedule of activities as well as a timetable for completion of the project to the plan commission.
B. Activities Prohibited Until Plats Approved: Until plats and plans for the subdivision are approved:
1. No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any improvements made to the natural land.
2. No lot, tract, or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be offered for sale nor shall any sale, contract for sale, or option be made or given.
3. No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service, lighting,
grading, paving or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be made by any owner or his agent, or by any public service corporation at the request of
such owner or his agent.
C. Completion Of Improvements:
1. The final plat for the subdivision will be approved only upon completion of improvements as required by this title, specifically including storm
sewer, sanitary sewer laterals, water main and service laterals, curbs, base course and lot line elevation established.
2. No building permit shall be issued by the village authorizing the building on or improvement of any subdivided land not of record as of the effective
date hereof unless the provisions and requirements of this title have been met.
D. Review Of Land Dedications: All offerings or dedications of land to the village for use as streets, highways, alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds, or
other public uses shall be referred to the plan commission for review and recommendation before being accepted by the village board or by any
other governing authority of the village.
E. Area Plan:
1. Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the village as a whole, the plan commission
may, before approval, cause to be prepared a plan for the entire area or neighborhood, such plan to be used by the plan commission as an aid in
judging the proposed plat.
2. The village engineer shall cooperate with the plan commission in reviewing plans and surveys prepared by the developer.
3. The developer shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, this plan and shall furnish such surveys and data as may be necessary.
F. Street And Lot Arrangement: Whenever an area is subdivided into lots of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more and there are indications that
such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building lots, consideration shall be given to the street and lot arrangement of the original
subdivision so that additional minor streets can be located which will permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots.
G. Interpretation:
1. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements.
2. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title upon the use of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this title or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 327/348
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
3. This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this title are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of
this title shall govern.
4. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this title is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions thereof.
H. Architectural And Engineering Obligations: The developer shall be required to meet all architectural and engineering obligations imposed by state
and federal law, including but not limited to any requirements imposed by the Americans with disabilities act (ADA). In the event that the
requirements of state and/or federal law differ from this title, the stricter requirements must be met. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-1-6: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
In an interpretation of this title, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural
number the singular.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece", and "parcel".
E. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for".
ALLEY: A public right of way primarily for vehicular traffic along the side or in the rear of properties which affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting properties.
APPLICANT: The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording the plats of the subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate
requirement relating thereto as outlined in this title.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or
shorelines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the village.
BUILDING: Any structure designed, built, or intended for the shelter, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of
any kind.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land which determines the area on the land where the erection of a building or
accessory building is prohibited. The area between the building setback line and the adjacent boundary of the street which the lot abuts is the area
on which the erection of a building or accessory building is prohibited.
CROSSWALK: A public right of way located across a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent streets or areas.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
DEVELOPER: The person(s) having site control over real estate being subdivided to erect any structure, or to install any improvements on a tract
of land, or to undertake any activities such as grading in preparation therefor.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons for a
specific purpose or purposes.
EXTRATERRITORIAL PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTION: The unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of
the village and not included in any other municipality.
FRENCH DRAIN: A pipe installed for the purpose of discharging flows from sump pumps and/or groundwater when storm sewer pipe is not readily
available to a property.
FRONTAGE: The length of the front property line of the lot, lots, or tract of land abutting a public or private street or right of way.
GRADE: The slope of any portion of the earth's surface or any improvement placed thereon, specified in percent (%) and shown on the street
profile plans as required herein.
HIGHWAY: A right of way for vehicular traffic which traverses a nonurban area, usually a state or federal numbered route.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision containing not more than ten (10) lots fronting on an existing, improved, public, minor street, not involving
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 328/348
any new street or road to the extension of municipal facilities, not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property, and not conflicting with any provision or portion of the official plan, or the zoning title of this code.
NEIGHBORHOOD DRAINAGE PLAN: A plan establishing finished garage floor and lot corner elevations for each lot based on USGS datum.
OFFICIAL VILLAGE STANDARDS: Those standards of installation, construction and design on file for public inspection in the office of the village
engineer and included as appendices to ordinance 831, on file in the office of the village clerk, as the same may be approved and adopted from
time to time by the village board of Monee, Illinois.
OUTLOT: A tract or portion of land in a subdivision or other parcels of land authorized or granted for use for one or more specific purposes
intended as a unit, whether for immediate or future development. The lot shall be reserved and recorded as an outlot.
OWNER: The person, partnership, corporation, trustee, trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest of record in the land
sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under the statutes of the state of Illinois or under this title.
PARKWAY: A route intended to be used primarily by passenger vehicles and whose right of way is or is intended to be developed in a parklike
character.
PAVEMENTS: See definition of Roadway.
PLAN COMMISSION: The plan commission of the village of Monee, Illinois.
PLAT: A plan, map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plan for the subdivision of land is presented and which he submits for approval and
intends to record in final form.
PLAT, FINAL: The drawings and documents presented for final approval and as described in section 12-2-3 of this title.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: The drawings and documents presented for final approval and as described in section 12-2-2 of this title.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road, walkway, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, or another
special use. Every right of way established under this title and shown on a final plat is separate and distinct from the lots and parcels adjoining
such right of way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
ROADWAY: The paved area within a street right of way intended for vehicular traffic, including all curb and gutter facilities.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street, walkway or crosswalk which is paved to meet the current Americans with disabilities act requirements and
is intended for pedestrian use only.
SKETCH PLAN: The preliminary general site development plan.
STREET: An area which primarily serves or is intended to serve as a vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands or to other streets. The
word "street" refers to the right of way or easement, whether public or private, and not to the roadway or paving or other improvement within the
street right of way.
STREET, APPROVED: Any street, whether public or private, meeting standards and specifications of the village of Monee.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to highways and primary thoroughfares and which provides access
to abutting properties and protection to local traffic from fast, through moving traffic on the highways and primary thoroughfares.
STREET, MINOR: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
STREET, PRIVATE: Any street which is under the jurisdiction of an individual, corporation, or trustee, or any street which is privately owned or
established.
STREET, PUBLIC: Any primary or secondary thoroughfare or minor street which is shown on the subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated for
public use.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, partnership, corporation, trustee, trust, or any legal entity commencing proceedings under this title to effect a
subdivision of land hereunder.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more parts, any of which is less than five (5) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including all public streets, alleys, ways for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds,
school grounds or public grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lots, or blocks and numbering all such lots, blocks, or parcels by progressive
numbers, giving their precise dimensions; provided, however, that the following shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from the
requirements of this title:
A. The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements
of access.
B. The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access.
C. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and contiguous land.
D. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not
involve any new streets or easements of access.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 329/348
E. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
F. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
G. Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
H. The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land existing on July 17, 1959, into no more than two (2) parts and not involving any new streets
or easements of access.
SUBDIVISION FEE: A fee assessed by the village to be paid by the developer as a condition of subdividing. The fee schedule is included in
appendix E attached to ordinance 831, on file in the office of the village clerk, and may be amended from time to time by the village board of
Monee, Illinois.
THOROUGHFARE, PRIMARY: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve as a principal traffic artery between the
various sections of the Monee area and is so designated as a primary thoroughfare on the general development plan.
THOROUGHFARE, SECONDARY: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the primary thoroughfare system, or between primary
thoroughfares, and is so designated as a secondary thoroughfare on the general development plan.
VILLAGE BOARD: The words "village board", "board", or "board of trustees" as used in this title refer to the board of trustees of the village of
Monee, Illinois.
WALKWAY: A right of way within a block, twenty feet (20') or more in width, dedicated for public use, intended primarily for pedestrians but which
may include utilities where necessary and from which motor and engine propelled vehicles are excluded.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Monee zoning ordinance, as amended, title 11 of this code. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994; amd. Ord. 938, 11-13-1996; 1999
Code)
12-1-7: PROHIBITIONS:
A. Contract Of Sale After Final Approval: No person proposing to make or having made a subdivision within the village, or the area within the
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the village, shall enter into any contract for the sale of or shall offer to sell said subdivision or any part
thereof until he has obtained the approval of the final subdivision plat of the proposed subdivision.
B. Construction On Land After Preliminary Approval: No person proposing to make or having made a subdivision within the village, or the area within the
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the village, shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, until
he has obtained the tentative approval of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision.
C. Entitled To Record After Approval: No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in the appropriate county recorder's office, or have any validity, until it
has been approved in the manner prescribed by law. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-1-8: VARIANCES:
Where the plan commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary enforcement of the
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent
and purpose of the official comprehensive plan of the village or these regulations. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-1-9: INSPECTION AT SUBDIVIDER'S EXPENSE:
All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions of this title shall be inspected during the course of construction by the village
engineer or a duly designated deputy. All fees and costs connected with such inspection and with reviewing the plans and specifications for such
improvements shall be paid by the subdivider. See fee schedule in appendix E attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the
village clerk. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
12-1-10: CERTIFICATION OF PLATS:
When the village board shall, upon motion and majority vote, approve the final plat, the president and village clerk shall be authorized to sign the original
tracing. The certificates on the final plat shall be in such form as determined by the village, on file in the office of the village clerk, with the signatures of
the chairman of the Will County board, the township highway commissioner, the county engineer, the chairman of the county planning and zoning
committee, and the county clerk to be necessary only where the plat covers land in the unincorporated areas. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
12-1-11: APPENDICES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 330/348
(Rep. by Ord. 1333, 1-12-2005)
12-1-12: PRIVATELY OWNED COMMUNITIES:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
AGENCY AGREEMENT: An agreement by and between a developer or homeowners' association providing for the village of Monee to provide police
protection and traffic enforcement.
PRIVATE COMMUNITIES: A subdivision or community located within the corporate limits of the village but are privately operated and maintained by
a developer or homeowners' association.
B. Authority To Execute Agency Agreement: Upon receipt of a written request by an authorized agent of a private community, the appropriate village
staff shall have the authority to execute an agency agreement.
C. Terms Of Agency Agreement: Each agency agreement shall include the location of the private community, a specific request for police protection and
traffic enforcement, and an indemnification/hold harmless provision on behalf of the village of Monee, its officers, agents and officials. (Ord. 1289, 3-
24-2004)
Chapter 2
PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL
12-2-1: COMPLIANCE WITH DESIGN PRINCIPLES:
The subdivider or his agent shall comply with the general principles of design and minimum requirements for the layout of subdivisions set forth in
chapter 3 of this title and with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title establishing minimum design standards and procedures for the installation of
subdivision improvements of this title, and in every case shall pursue the following procedures set out in this chapter. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-2-2: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE; SKETCH PLAN:
Any owner or representative of the owner of land located within the village, or located entirely or in part within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the
nearest limits of the village shall first submit to the plan commission of the village such information as may be required by the plan commission as
specified in section 12-5-1 of this title. This step does not require formal application fee or filing of a preliminary plat with the plan commission. The
applicant will be supplied with pertinent information on plan commission requirements not herein contained, or as these regulations may be applied to
the subject property. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL:
A. Preparation: On reaching conclusions, informally, as recommended in section 12-2-1 of this chapter, regarding his general program and objectives,
the applicant shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together with construction drawings, specifications, and other supplementary material as
specified in chapter 5 of this title.
B. Copies Submitted To Plan Commission: Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified shall be submitted to the plan
commission with written application for conditional approval at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. (Ord. 831, 8-
10-1994)
C. Application For Conditional Approval; Fee:
1. The application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a certified check or money order payable to the village in
the amount as specified in the subdivision fee schedule found in the appendix E attached to ordinance 831, on file in the office of the village clerk,
to cover the cost of checking and verifying the proposed plat. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
2. Upon the acceptance of the application by the plan commission, the secretary shall surrender the check or money order to the village treasurer for
deposit in the general fund of the village.
D. Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat will be checked by the plan commission and the village engineer as to conformity with the general development
plan and the principles, standards and requirements set forth in this title.
E. Construction Drawings And Specifications: The construction drawings and specifications will be checked by the village engineer and plan commission
for conformity to the preliminary plat and the principles and provisions set forth in this title.
F. Village Board Action: Upon receipt of the report of the plan commission, the village board shall either accept or reject the preliminary plat. Such action
shall be taken within sixty (60) days after the first regular meeting of the village board following receipt of the plan commission's report.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 331/348
G. Notify Subdivider Of Conditions Of Approval: The subdivider shall be notified in writing of any conditions of such conditional approval or the reasons
for rejection.
H. Approval Of Construction Drawings And Specifications: Such conditional approval of the preliminary plat of the subdivision by the village board shall
include approval of the construction drawings and specifications.
I. Entitlement To Final Approval: Conditional approval of the preliminary plat, which includes the subdivision construction drawings and specifications,
shall entitle the subdivider to final approval of the layout shown by such plat if the final plat conforms substantially to said plat and any and all
conditions of approval have been met and it complies with all applicable village ordinances. The final plat will not be considered until all
improvements are constructed and approved by the village.
J. State Permits Required: The subdivider shall obtain the necessary permits from the appropriate agencies of the state, as an agent of the village, upon
specific authorization.
K. List Of Existing Covenants: The subdivider shall provide a complete listing of all existing covenants which apply to the land to be subdivided, and a
complete listing of all covenants which are proposed by the subdivider to apply to the subdivided land.
L. Tentative Approval: Tentative approval shall be effective for not more than twelve (12) months following the date of conditional approval, unless by
mutual agreement between the subdivider and village board this time limit is extended in writing.
M. Action Of Village Engineer: Whenever any action or recommendation is requested of the village engineer by subdividers, or other parties, exclusive
of members of the village board of trustees, the village engineer shall obtain the approval of the plan commission prior to providing any such action
or recommendation. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-2-4: MINOR SUBDIVISIONS:
Final plats for minor subdivisions may be submitted without proceeding through the preliminary plat procedures set forth herein.
A. Application Submitted To Plan Commission:
1. Prior to final plat being submitted as a minor subdivision plat under these provisions, the subdivider shall make written application to the plan
commission that it recommend to the board of trustees that the subdivision or resubdivision be considered a minor subdivision and shall furnish a
sketch plan of the proposed subdivision.
2. The subdivider shall meet informally with the plan commission and the plan commission shall make written recommendation to the board of
trustees, either in favor of such designation or against such designation.
B. Action Of Board Of Trustees: Upon receipt of a recommendation from the plan commission, the board of trustees shall either approve or disapprove
the designation of the subdivision as a minor subdivision under these provisions. The decision of the board of trustees shall be final. If the board of
trustees disapproves such designation, the subdivider shall be required to process the subdivision or resubdivision through the preliminary plan
procedures contained in this title.
C. Compliance With Subdivision Regulations: If a subdivision or resubdivision is approved as a minor subdivision under these procedures, the
subdivider shall comply with the provisions of this title with regard to approval of a final plat, except those provisions which refer to approval of or
conformity with a preliminary plat. (Ord. 938, 11-13-1996)
12-2-5: CONSTRUCTION OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Construction Required; Permit:
1. Upon conditional approval of the preliminary plat by the village board and the approval of all appropriate agencies, the subdivider shall construct
and install the required subdivision improvements.
2. The submissions required to obtain all required permits shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. All permits shall be obtained prior to beginning
work on the improvements. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
B. Deposit To Guarantee Construction: The subdivider shall deposit with the village money in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
approved estimate of cost of said improvements to act as a guarantee running to the village for a period of one year following completion of
construction and final plat approval as outlined in chapter 4 of this title and contained on the approved plans and specifications. If the improvements
are satisfactory at the end of the year, the deposit will be returned. If they are unsatisfactory, the amount expended during that year on repair of the
improvements shall be deducted from the deposit before its return. (Ord. 1124, 2-14-2001)
12-2-6: FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 332/348
A. Conformance With Preliminary Plat; Exception: The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat given conditional approval, unless it
has been determined to be a plat of a minor subdivision as has been provided in section 12-2-4 of this chapter. If desired by the applicant, it may
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposed to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such
portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. (Ord. 938, 11-13-1996)
B. Application For Approval: Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing to the plan commission at least fifteen (15) days prior to
the meeting at which it is to be considered.
C. Copies Submitted To Plan Commission: Six (6) copies and a reproducible mylar of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be
prepared as specified in chapter 4 of this title, and shall be submitted to the plan commission within one year after approval of the preliminary plat;
otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless application for an extension of time is made to and granted by the plan commission.
D. Quit Claim Deed: A quit claim deed shall be provided at the time of final plat submission for all dedicated lands other than public right of way (i.e.,
parks, detention basins, etc.).
E. Guarantee Of Improvements: The final plat submitted to the plan commission for approval shall be accompanied by a notice from the board of
trustees of the village stating that there has been filed with and approved by the board, one of the following:
1. A certificate by the village engineer that all improvements and installations to the subdivision required for its approval have been made, or installed
in accordance with the specifications in which case the as built drawings shall accompany the final plat, and that technical details of the plat itself
have been checked and found satisfactory; or
2. A bond which shall:
a. Run to the president and board of trustees of the village;
b. Be in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the infrastructure improvements not in place at the time of the submittal of the final plat,
said amount to be determined by the village's consulting engineer assigned to review the project;
c. Be in one of the following forms:
(1) Surety by a company licensed to do business in the state;
(2) Cash;
(3) An irrevocable letter of credit; or
(4) An escrow account set up in a manner acceptable to the village attorney; and
d. Specify the time for the completion of the improvement and installations. The time limit for completion shall be no longer than one year.
3. A certificate by the developer and the developer's engineer disclosing and detailing all revisions of the preliminary plat. It shall be the duty of the
developer to make a complete disclosure of all differences of any type between the preliminary and final plats.
F. Recommendation To Village Board: Within thirty (30) days after application for approval of the final plat, the plan commission shall recommend
approval or disapproval of the final plat to the village board.
G. Mylar Of Final Plat Submitted To Village Board: After approval of the final plat by the village board and fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations, one reproducible mylar of the final plat of the subdivision, drawn in accordance with the standards established by the Will County
recorder of deeds and the laws of the state, shall be submitted to the village board for approval.
H. Village Board Action: Action must be taken by the village board within forty five (45) days after the plan commission has made its recommendation
with regard to approval or disapproval of the final plat unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. In the event that the village
board rejects the final plat, the reasons for rejection shall be stated in the minutes of the council meeting, and a copy thereof or a written statement
of the reason for the rejection will be supplied the subdivider by the village clerk.
I. Recording Of Plat With County: Upon approval by the village board, the developer shall record the plat with the county recorder of Will County within
four (4) months. If not recorded within this time, the approval shall be null and void. Immediately after recording, the original or a duly certified mylar
and two (2) copies shall be filed with the village clerk. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
Chapter 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
12-3-1: GENERAL CONFORMANCE:
In laying out a subdivision, the subdivider shall conform to:
A. The zoning ordinance, title 11 of this code, and all other applicable ordinances of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 333/348
B. The general development plan of the village.
C. Applicable laws, rules and regulations of the state and county and fully constituted agencies thereof.
D. In all instances where a requirement of this title is similar to or in conflict with other provisions of the village, township or county ordinances, rules or
regulations, the most restrictive shall apply and prevail.
E. The subdivider shall improve any existing platted road adjacent to the proposed subdivision. The road may be under the jurisdiction of the county,
township, or village. This improvement shall conform to the design specified in this title for the type of road specified, as shown in the general
development plan. The subdivider will be required to construct these improvements for the half of the road adjacent to the proposed subdivision. The
remaining half of the road may be improved by the agency having jurisdiction, or a subdivider adjacent to the road on the opposite side of the road,
and these improvements may be constructed at a later date. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
F. The village of Monee stormwater management ordinance, as revised from time to time. (Ord. 1334, 1-12-2005)
12-3-2: STREETS:
A. Street Classification: Highway, major, collector and local streets as classified in this subsection shall be as shown and designated in the general
development plan.
1. Highway: Those state, county and village designated routes which provide continuity of travel and freedom from hazards and congestion
necessary for interregional and village traffic movement.
2. Major Street: Those routes so designated by the village to be of importance in intravillage traffic movement and necessary to provide easy access
to neighboring communities.
3. Collector Street: Those primary streets within the neighborhood unit, providing a reasonable alignment coupled with an attractive pavement, which
will act to collect traffic from minor streets for travel to major streets and highways.
4. Local Street: Those streets whose prime function is to give access to abutting property. They are not intended to carry heavy through traffic and
are designed to discourage such movement.
5. Marginal Access Street: Those local streets which serve to control access to major thoroughfares and permit development of lands adjacent to
high speed and high capacity highways. Their prime function is property access.
B. Platting Of Street: Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a public street so designed in the comprehensive plan, such part of such
street shall be platted by the subdivision at the location and width indicated on the plan.
C. Relation To Existing And Planned Streets: All streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions,
to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
D. Arrangement: Where such is not shown on the general development plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
1. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or
2. Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood approved or adopted by the plan commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or
other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
E. Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
F. Highway Or Primary Thoroughfare: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed highway or primary thoroughfare, as shown on the
general development plan, the plan commission may require marginal access streets; reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
nonaccess reservation, at least thirty feet (30') wide, along the rear property line; deep lots with rear service alleys; or such other treatment as may
be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of residential development from highways or primary
thoroughfares.
G. Approach Grades: Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or highway, the plan commission may require a street approximately parallel
to and on each side of such railroad or highway, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
H. Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to streets or alleys are prohibited.
I. Intersections: All street intersections and confluences should encourage safe traffic flow.
J. Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be avoided. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 334/348
K. Tangents: Tangents shall be introduced between reverse curves on all streets per "minimum standards for street design" in appendix A attached to
ordinance 831, on file in the office of the village clerk.
L. Curve And Radius: When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten degrees (10°), they shall be connected by
a curve with a radius adequate to ensure clear sight distances per "minimum standards for street design" in appendix A attached to ordinance 831,
on file in the office of the village clerk.
M. Intersections: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less
than sixty degrees (60°).
N. Right Of Way Widths: Street right of way widths shall be as specified in "minimum standards for street design" in appendix A attached to ordinance
831, on file in the office of the village clerk.
O. Half Streets: Half streets are prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations and where the plan commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such
tract.
P. Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs are streets designed to have one end permanently closed. They shall be designed to be no longer than five hundred feet
(500') from the intersection of the origin through the center of the circle to the end of the right of way, and shall be provided at the closed end with a
turnaround having a right of way diameter and an outside pavement diameter as specified in "minimum standards for required street and lot
improvements" in appendix A attached to ordinance 831, on file in the office of the village clerk.
Q. Street Names: No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be
projected wherever possible. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the plan commission.
R. Gradients And Curves: Street gradients and vertical curves shall be as specified in "minimum standards for street design" in appendix A attached to
ordinance 831, on file in the office of the village clerk.
S. Access To Lots: Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street and the first floor elevation of the houses or buildings and permit
convenient and economical access to and drainage of the lots. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
12-3-3: ALLEYS:
A. Waiver Of Requirements: Alleys shall be provided in commercial, business, and industrial districts, except that the plan commission may waive this
requirement where other definite and assured provisions are made for service access, such as off street loading, unloading, and parking, consistent
with and adequate for the uses proposed.
B. Residential Areas: Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted, except where deemed necessary and on the recommendation of the plan
commission.
C. Width: The width of an alley, where permitted, shall be thirty feet (30') right of way and pavement width shall be twenty feet (20') minimum.
D. Intersections: Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall be avoided, but, where necessary, corners may be modified to allow the
vehicle types anticipated adequate space to perform turning maneuvers safely.
E. Dead End Alleys: Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at
the dead end, as determined by the plan commission. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-3-4: EASEMENTS:
A. Width: Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least twelve feet (12')
wide.
B. Design: Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
C. Watercourses:
1. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right of way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and shall include such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose and as determined by the plan commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 335/348
2. A minimum of ten feet (10') shall be provided on either side of the ditch measured from the top of the bank away from the centerline of the
drainageway.
3. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
D. Drainage Plan: When a subdivision drainage plan proposes use of retention basins or ponds, which are to be dedicated for public use, provision shall
be made that a public access be possible through extension of a public access easement to connect the facility to a public street. (Ord. 831, 8-10-
1994)
12-3-5: BLOCKS:
A. Length, Width, Shape: The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
1. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated.
2. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the corporate limits of the village.
3. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
4. Limitations and opportunities of topography.
B. Minimum Dimensions: The lengths of blocks shall not exceed one thousand two hundred sixty feet (1,260') nor be less than four hundred feet (400')
nor have less than sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth between street lines, except where fronting on marginal
access streets.
C. Pedestrian Crosswalks: Pedestrian crosswalk rights of way shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide where required by the plan commission
through the center of blocks more than nine hundred feet (900') long where deemed essential to provide for pedestrian circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities.
D. Commercial And Industrial Blocks: Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designated as such, and the plan
shall show adequate off street areas to provide for parking, loading docks, and other such facilities. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-3-6: LOTS:
A. Dimensions And Shape: The lot size, width, depth, shape, and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of
development and use contemplated.
B. Conformance With Zoning Regulations: Lot dimensions and areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance, title 11 of this code,
where applicable, but in no case shall a lot for residential purposes in a new subdivision be less than seventy feet (70') wide at the building setback
line, nor less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. However:
1. Residential lots where not served by public sanitary sewers and water supply shall be not less than one hundred feet (100') wide at the building
setback line nor less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area. Where either public sanitary sewers or water supply is provided, a lot shall
be not less than eighty feet (80') wide nor less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in area or as outlined by the county health department.
2. Where unusual soil conditions or other physical factors exist which may impair the health and safety of the residents of the neighborhood in which
a subdivision may be located, upon recommendation of the Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) or the Will County public health
department, the plan commission may increase lot area requirements as may be necessary.
3. Lots abutting a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream shall have minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site
and to afford the minimum usable area required in this title or the zoning ordinance, title 11 of this code, for front, rear, and side yards.
4. Depths and widths of lots or properties reserved or laid out for commercial, business, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off
street service and parking facilities required in the zoning ordinance, title 11 of this code.
C. Corner Lots: Corner lots for residential use shall have a minimum of ten percent (10%) extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and
orientation to both streets on which they abut.
D. Abut Publicly Dedicated Street: Within the corporate limits of the village, all lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
E. Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential
development from highways or primary thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen
easement of at least thirty feet (30'), and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such
highways and primary thoroughfares or other disadvantageous use.
F. Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 336/348
G. Angular Lots: Angular lots in residential zones shall be a minimum width of seventy feet (70') measured at the building setback line. (Ord. 831, 8-10-
1994)
12-3-7: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
A. Conformance With Zoning Regulations: Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall conform to the front yard provisions of the
zoning ordinance, title 11 of this code, except that in no case shall the building setback line be less than twenty five feet (25') from the front property
line.
B. Corner Lot: A corner lot shall maintain not less than the minimum building setback lines required on both streets on which the lot abuts. (Ord. 831, 8-
10-1994)
C. Eyebrow Or Cul-De-Sac Locations; Curb Stakes: The developer shall cause the installation of curb stakes for eyebrow or cul-de-sac locations as
herein described:
1. Stakes shall be installed at an interval not to exceed twenty five feet (25') as soon as practicable following rough grading. These stakes shall be
clearly marked. The stakes must be present to allow the Village building inspector to utilize these stakes to measure to any proposed
foundation(s), and for the Village Engineer to check site grading. Any proposed foundation(s) which is not in conformance with the building setback
distance will not be allowed. The building inspector shall not allow any foundation to be constructed in a case where a measurement to the
building setback line is not available.
2. Following completion of curb construction, stakes will not be required.
3. In cases of uncurbed streets, stakes shall be installed at the right-of-way line, at the same interval as specified above, prior to layout of
foundations, and may be removed following construction of the foundation. Following completion of the pavement construction, these stakes will
not be required. (Ord. 947, 1-8-1997)
12-3-8: PARKS, SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC AREAS:
Where deemed essential by the Plan Commission, upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision, the Plan
Commission may recommend and the Village Board request the dedication or reservation of land for park and recreational purposes and land for school
site(s), to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the parcel, to make a cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or to provide
a combination of both at the option of the Village. Such dedication is necessary to ensure proper provision of park and school sites for persons who are
expected to reside within the subdivision or development, which sites would otherwise have to be acquired at the expense of the general public but
whose utility would generally be limited to residents of the parcel. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
A. Criteria For Requiring Park And Recreation Land Dedication:
1. Amount Of Land: (Rep. by Ord. 1876, 9-12-2018)
2. Site Location; Storage Of Materials:
a. Location: The location of the site to be dedicated will be determined by the Village Board upon recommendation of the Plan Commission, taking
into account the suitability of the site for park purposes or development, its relationship to population concentrations, and its proximity to other
park or recreational lands. No wetland, detention or retention areas shall be considered as a contribution to the Village under this subsection.
(Ord. 1427, 3-14-2007)
b. On Site Storage: No storage of materials, including spoil materials or topsoil, will be allowed on a park site designated for recreational use or
land designated as future or proposed school sites.
3. Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas: Private open space or recreation areas may be utilized in lieu of dedication required by
this subsection; provided, that detailed improvement plans shall be approved by the Plan Commission and Village Board and that satisfactory
guarantees of the permanency of the use and its maintenance, enforceable by the Village, shall be entered into by the subdivider.
B. Criteria For School Site Provision: Subdividers may be required to begin negotiations with the school district to determine requirements for school site
locations, or cash contributions to ease the impact of a proposed development. The subdivider shall provide a written statement to the Village that an
agreement has been reached regarding any future school sites or contributions to the school district.
C. Criteria For Requiring Contribution In Lieu Of Park And School Sites:
1. Size Of Development; Cash Held In Trust: When the resulting site in a proposed subdivision or development is too small to be usable for the
purpose intended or where it is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes or a school site, the Village may require the subdivider to
contribute cash in lieu of the land dedication. The cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication shall be held in trust by the
Village or other public body designated by the Village, solely for the acquisition of park and recreation land as hereinbefore classified, which will
serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or the improvement of other existing park and recreation
land which already serves such needs. The cash contributions in lieu of school sites shall be held in trust by the Village, or other public body
designated by the Village, solely for use in the acquisition of land for a school site to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that
subdivision or development or for the improvement to any existing school site which already serves such needs, but not for the construction of any
school buildings or additions thereto. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication or cash contribution in lieu
of school site(s) is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within seven (7) years from the date of receipt, it will be refunded to the
subdivider who made such contribution. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 337/348
2. Fair Market Value: The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be based on the current "fair market value" of the acres of land as improved, that
otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreation sites. The subdivider shall submit an appraisal showing the current "fair market
value" of such improved land or other evidence thereof and final determination of said current "fair market value" per acre of such improved land
shall be made by the Village Board based upon such information from other sources which may be submitted to the Village Board by any local
park district, school district or others. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
D. Criteria For Requiring Dedication And Fee: There will be situations when a combination of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both
necessary. These occasions will arise when:
1. The subdivision or development does not have sufficient or adequate land to meet the dedication requirements hereunder. That portion of the land
within the subdivision or development which is adequate or sufficient for the park or school location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a
cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated.
2. A major part of the local park or recreation site or school site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the
subdivision or development to complete the site. The portions needed to complete the park or school site shall be dedicated, and cash contribution
will be required in lieu of the balance of the required dedication.
E. Improved Sites: The slope, topography and geology of the site to be dedicated as well as its surrounding must be suitable for its intended purposes.
Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding land. Before dedication, all sites shall be improved
with a vigorous stand of grass. The grass shall be a mixture of bluegrass, fescue, and rye as approved by the Village Engineer. The
applicant/developer shall be responsible for all maintenance of the site until the site is accepted by the Village, or acceptable provisions shall be
made for such improvement before dedication. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-3-9: UTILITIES, STREET AND LOT IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Standards Enumerated:
1. Public Water: Per Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) and Village specifications, and connected to the water distribution system of the
Village. All fire hydrants shall be spaced to provide coverage for all buildings within a three hundred foot (300') radius of a hydrant. The Fire Chief
of the Monee Fire Protection District or his designee may require additional hydrants where deemed necessary.
2. Public Sanitary Sewers: Per "Standards for Sewer and Water Main Construction in Illinois", as published by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency (IEPA) (current edition).
3. Primary Thoroughfares: In accordance with the official Village standards, see appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the
Office of the Village Clerk.
4. Secondary Thoroughfares: In accordance with the official Village standards, see appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in
the Office of the Village Clerk.
5. Streets: In accordance with the official village standards, see appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the
village clerk.
6. Streetlights: Streetlights shall be located at all street intersections and at intervals not to exceed three hundred fifty feet (350'). The plan
commission or village engineer may require additional streetlights for unusual circumstances.
7. Streets Along Development Boundaries, And Streets Connecting Development With Existing Improved Street System: Cross sections are
determined by the village engineer and the plan commission.
8. Alleys: Per the official village standards, see appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the village clerk.
9. Lot And Street Grading: Per plans and profiles approved by the village engineer.
10. Drains To Be Designed For Placement On Property Lines, Storm Sewer System And Other Drainage Improvements: Per the official village
standards, see appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the village clerk, and the plans and specifications
approved by the village engineer and the plan commission. Shall include access to each lot for storm sewer connection either to the main street
storm sewer system or to a supplement system for all lots where groundwater is a problem and sump pumps will be utilized. All streets shall be
provided with inlets and underground drainage facilities having a design capacity adequate to carry off surface water falling or coming onto the
streets in the duration storm specified in the official village standards. Sufficient inlets shall be provided so that no pavement is designed to allow
water to drain across the crown of an intersecting street or is carried in the gutter for more than the distance specified in the official village
standards. Storm sewer systems shall be constructed per the official village standards. The proposed storm sewer system shall be in conformance
with the general development plan of the village which is on file with the village clerk, and as approved by the village engineer.
11. Combination Concrete Curb And Gutter: Per the official village standards. See appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the
office of the village clerk.
12. Concrete Valley Gutter: Per the official village standards. See appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the
village clerk.
13. Pavement Base: Per the official village standards. See appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the village
clerk.
14. Wearing Surface: Per the official village standards. See appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the village
clerk.
15. Driveways: Per the official village standards. See appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the village clerk.
16. Street Trees: Three inch (3") caliper, forty feet (40') to fifty feet (50') apart per village specifications.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 338/348
17. Sidewalks: Per the official village standards. See appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the village clerk.
18. Pedestrian Walkways: Per the official village standards. See appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the
village clerk.
19. Landscaping: Per the official village standards. See appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the village clerk.
20. Street Name Signs: Per the official village standards. See appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, on file in the office of the village
clerk. Street name signs shall be located at all intersections. Regulatory signing as per the village engineer.
21. Telephone And Electric Service: In rear or side lot easements.
22. Gas: In street planting strip.
23. Cable/Pay TV: In rear or side lot easements.
24. Lot Grading: Per neighborhood drainage plan. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
25. Stormwater Control: (Rep. by Ord. 1334, 1-12-2005)
26. General: Any damage done to the village infrastructure system at the time of construction shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the village
engineer or the appointed village official.
27. Enforcement: The building inspector of the village is charged with the responsibility to enforce the provisions of this title.
B. Plans And Specifications: All plans and specifications for utility and street improvements shall be prepared by and certified by an Illinois registered
professional engineer. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
C. Water Main Specifications:
1. Water Main: Pipe shall be ductile iron manufactured in accordance with the requirements of ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51. Pipe joints shall be push
on TYTON joint in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11. Pipe thickness shall be class 52 designed in accordance with ANSI/AWWA
C150/A21.50.
2. Water Main Fittings: Fittings three inch (3") through twenty four inch (24") shall be mechanical joint SSB ductile iron class 350 and shall be
produced in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C153/A21.53 and ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11. Fittings shall be cement lined and seal coated in
accordance with ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4. All fittings shall be made in North America.
3. Mechanical Joint Restraints: All mechanical joints shall be restrained using series 1100 MEGALUG restraint as produced by EBBA Iron, Inc.
4. Gate Valves: Valves four inch (4") through sixteen inch (16") shall be Mueller A2360-23 mechanical joint resilient wedge gate valves. Valves shall
have a two inch (2") square operating nut, stainless steel trim bolts and shall open left. Valves shall be UL listed FM approved and comply with
C509. All six inch (6") gate valves shall be installed with either an Alberico valve box stabilizer or an Adapter Inc., valve box adapter. All eight inch
(8") through twelve inch (12") gate valves shall be installed with an Adapter Inc., valve box adapter.
5. Fire Hydrants: Hydrants shall be East Jordan model 5BR 3-way with one 41/2-inch NST pumper nozzle and two (2) 21/2-inch NST hose nozzles
and a six inch (6") mechanical joint shoe. A six inch by twelve inch (6" x 12") anchor coupling shall be installed between the auxiliary valve and the
hydrant and an anchor tee shall be used to secure the auxiliary valve to the main. All hydrants shall be painted safety red.
6. Valve Boxes: Shall be a five and one-fourth inch (51/4") Tyler/Union series 6850 screw type cast iron valve box model 664S.
7. Tapping Sleeves: Sleeves shall be a Mueller model H-615 mechanical joint tapping sleeve or a Smith Blair 663 all stainless steel tapping sleeve.
8. Tapping Valves: Valves shall be Mueller model A2360-16 flange. Mechanical joint valve shall have a two inch (2") square operating nut, stainless
steel trim bolts and shall open left. Valves shall be UL listed FM approved and comply with C509. All six inch (6") gate valves shall be installed with
either an Alberico valve box stabilizer or an Adapter Inc., rubber valve box adapter.
9. Water Service Pipe: One inch (1") through two inch (2") pipe shall be type K copper tubing.
10. Water Service Fittings: All service valves and couplings shall be constructed of brass in compliance with ASTM B62 and manufactured and
tested to ANSI/AWWA C800 standard. All service boxes shall be cast iron. All service saddles shall have a ductile iron body and stainless steel
straps.
a. Corporation Stops: One inch (1") through two inch (2") shall be Mueller H-15000 AWWA taper by copper flare.
b. Curb Stops: One inch (1") through two inch (2") shall be Mueller H-15204 copper flare by copper flare.
c. Service Boxes: A Tyler 6500 series screw type cast iron service box model 95-E shall be used with one inch (1") through two inch (2") curb
stops. One and one-half inch (11/2") and two inch (2") curb stops must also have a Tyler series 6500 enlarged base. A concrete pad shall be
placed under all curb stops.
d. Service Saddles: All service saddles shall be a Smith Blair model 317 double strapped service saddle.
D. Sanitary Sewer Specifications:
1. Sewer Pipe: All four inch (4") through twelve inch (12") gravity sewer pipes shall be gasketed SDR 35 PVC and meet the requirements of ASTM
D-3034. All gravity sewer pipe fifteen inch (15") and larger shall be either Ultra-Rib PVC meeting the requirements of F794 or Ultra-Corr PVC
meeting the requirements of F794.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 339/348
2. Sewer Fittings: All fittings used in conjunction with SDR 35 PVC pipe shall be gasketed and meet the requirements of ASTM D-3034. All fittings
used in conjunction with Ultra-Rib or Ultra-Corr shall be specifically designed for such pipe and meet the requirements of ASTM F949 or from SDR
35 pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM F679. Service line connections to the main shall be done with a t-wye, wye or an insertatee.
3. Sanitary Sewer Manholes: All manhole joints shall be press seal gasket, E-Z wrap or equivalent, primed and sealed on exterior surface in addition
to Conseal gaskets between sections.
E. Miscellaneous Specifications:
1. Storm Sewer Pipe: All storm pipe up to the curb line shall be ADS N-12 polyethylene pipe. All polyethylene pipe four inch (4") through ten inch
(10") shall be installed with a split premium soil tight coupler. All polyethylene pipe, twelve inch (12") through sixty inch (60"), shall be installed with
a Pro Link ST soil tight integral coupling. (Ord. 1207, 10-9-2002)
2. Culverts: Corrugated metal pipe.
3. "As Builts": Upon completion of construction and before final approval, the developer is required to submit to the village two (2) copies of "as built"
plans. These plans shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
a. Water main location and size.
b. Water main valve location dimensioned from lot lines.
c. Buffalo box location dimensioned from lot lines.
d. Fire hydrant location.
e. Sanitary sewer size, location and direction of flow.
f. Storm sewer size, location and direction of flow.
g. Streetlight location with wiring diagram.
h. Street width, back to back of curb.
i. Lot lines with dimensions.
j. Location of concrete monuments.
All additional requirements included in the village of Monee ordinance shall be followed. (Ord. 1127, 2-28-2001)
4. Manhole Chimney Seals: All sanitary manhole frames shall be sealed using a Cretex external manhole chimney seal. (Ord. 1207, 10-9-2002)
5. Roads: Appendix A of ordinance 831, "minimum standards for required utilities and street and lot improvements" shall be modified to include the
following:
6. Pavement Design:
a. Design of the pavement structure shall conform to the Illinois department of transportation (IDOT) design manual. The design period shall be 20
years, and the estimated ADT shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer. The road subbase shall be separated from the road base
by a geotextile fabric, SUPAC-N5 or equal, for all publicly maintained surfaces. The design shall meet the following minimum requirements:
Backfill For Utility Trenches In Pavement
All utility trenches under and within two feet of existing pavement, curbs or sidewalks shall be backfilled as follows.
Clean CA-07 crushed stone is to be used as trench backfill material and shall be compacted in one foot lifts using a vibratory hand tamper with a
minimum of six passes of the vibratory plate per lift. This material shall be used up to the soil subgrade elevation of the pavement. All
excavations crossing pavement shall have edges that are sawcut.
The pavement is to be replaced using the same cross section of materials as is existing in the street with the exception that the minimum
pavement section will be 10 inches of CA-06 crushed stone base course and 3 inches of asphalt. Base course stone is to be placed in lifts no
thicker than six inches and compacted using vibratory equipment to a minimum of 95 percent of Standard Proctor density. Asphalt is to be
placed in two inch maximum lifts and shall be hot mix asphalt compacted with a steel wheel roller in accordance with Illinois department of
transportation Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction, latest edition.
(Ord. 1127, 2-28-2001)
Chapter 4
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
12-4-1: IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETED:
A. All of the improvements required under this title shall be constructed in accordance with these provisions prior to the filing with the village of the final
plat for final approval by the village board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 340/348
B. Before a subdivision will be approved, the village engineer shall certify that the improvements described in the subdivider's plans and specifications,
together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all ordinances of the village. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
12-4-2: CERTIFICATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Before a preliminary plat is approved, the village engineer shall certify that the improvements described in the construction drawings and specifications,
together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all ordinances of the village and that they comply with the following insurance
requirements:
A. The party initiating or installing any of the improvements herein shall, prior to the installation thereof, agree to protect and save the village harmless
from any and all claims, expenses, liability or judgments, in any manner resulting from, arising out of, or incident to the making of any of the aforesaid
improvements or the granting of permission to so make. Said party, naming said party and the village as the insured, shall cause a policy of
insurance to be issued providing minimum public liability coverage in the amounts of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury or death
to one person, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury and death to more than one person in any one accident, and property damage
in any amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
B. All such policies of insurance shall be approved by the village plan commission prior to the installation of any of the aforesaid improvements. (Ord.
831, 8-10-1994)
12-4-3: AS BUILT PLANS:
After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider or village, whichever is responsible for
installation for the particular works, shall make or cause to be made a map showing the actual location of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewer and water
mains, and such other facilities as the village engineer shall require. This map shall be in black ink, on tracing cloth or mylar and shall bear the signature
and seal of a professional engineer registered in Illinois. The presentation of this map shall be a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and
release of the surety bond assuring their completion. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
After fire hydrant heights have been approved by the village, or cognizant parties, a bench mark shall be established on each fire hydrant in the
subdivision. A table of "as built" fire hydrant locations and their elevations shall be submitted and shall be subject to the approval by the village engineer
prior to the first occupancy being granted. The bench marks shall be shown on the "as built" plans. All bench marks shall reference the north cap bolt of
the hydrant. (Ord. 1116, 1-10-2001)
12-4-4: MONUMENTS AND MARKERS:
A. Specifications: Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle points of the outside boundary but no further than one-fourth (1/4) mile apart. The
monuments shall be of concrete, not less than six inches (6") in diameter and thirty six inches (36") deep, with a center metal dowel rod at least
twelve inches (12") long cast in place. Iron pipe or steel bars not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and eighteen inches (18") long shall be set
at the intersection of street centerlines and at all corners of lots not marked by monuments.
B. Level With Grade: The monuments and markers shall be set level with the finished grade. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-4-5: ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATIONS, IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Village Board Approval: The approval of the final plat by the village board shall constitute acceptance of the dedication of any public street, open
space, or other public area.
B. Improvement Guarantee Period: The acceptance of the improvements constructed, in accordance with this title for operation and maintenance
proposed, shall be after successful completion of the guarantee period covered by the guarantee bond and by formal resolution of the village board.
However, the normal operating costs of any pumping station(s), etc., will be assumed by the village when put in operation upon being tentatively
accepted subject to the guarantee. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
C. Keeping Streets Free Of Construction Debris: After completion of the construction and acceptance of any street, and if construction traffic continues
to utilize said street, developer shall be responsible for keeping the street free from debris and for repair of damages to the street caused by
construction traffic. All deliveries of construction supplies or materials may be restricted to certain streets or temporary haul roads designated by the
village. (Ord. 939, 11-13-1996)
Chapter 5
PLATS AND DATA
12-5-1: PREAPPLICATION; SKETCH PLAN AND DATA:
A. Proof Of Ownership: Proof of ownership of the land to be subdivided, in the form of a deed or certificate of title search, shall be presented by the
subdivider at the time of the presentation of the sketch plan. No further consideration will be given the proposed subdivision unless such proof of
ownership is established.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 341/348
B. General Data: General subdivision data shall describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to
supplement the drawings required below. This shall include information on existing covenants, existing adjacent zoning, land characteristics,
available community facilities, utilities, and information describing the subdivision proposal, such as number of residential lots; typical lot width and
depth; business areas; school, playground, and park areas; other public areas; proposed protective covenants; proposed utilities; and proposed
street improvements.
C. Sketch Plan: Sketch plan of topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to
existing conditions. The sketch plan shall be an engineered sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey, with all details to scale. The
sketch plan shall include the existing topographic data sufficient to show drainage patterns, any designated wetlands from the national wetlands
inventory map, and any designated floodways or floodplains. Similarly, a map shall be prepared indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in
relation to the village. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-5-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT AND DATA FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
A. Information On Plat: The preliminary plat shall be legibly drawn on a reproducible mylar not larger than twenty four inches by thirty six inches
(24" x 36"), or divisible into parts not exceeding twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), with waterproof, nonfading, black ink on
reproducible mylar of good quality at a scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100'), and shall show correctly on its face:
1. The proposed subdivision name, which shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in the village;
2. Date, scale, and north point;
3. The name and address of the owner, the subdivider, and the engineer, surveyor, or land planner preparing the plat;
4. Location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter section, section, township, range, and county;
5. A small scale drawing of the section or government subdivision of the section in which the subdivision lies, with the location of the subdivision
indicated thereon, and oriented in the same manner as the main drawing;
6. The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, such boundary to be indicated by a solid, heavy line;
7. A legal description for the tract of land defined by the boundaries in subsection A6 of this section;
8. Location and names of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land;
9. Zoning on and adjacent to the subdivision;
10. Location, widths and names of all existing and platted streets, alleys, or other public ways and easements, railroad and utilities, rights of way,
parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, bridges, and other pertinent data as determined by the plan commission
within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed subdivision or property owned or controlled by the subdivider;
11. The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevation of such lakes or
streams; all elevations shall be referred to USGS datum;
12. The boundaries of the highest known flood of record affecting the subdivision and the source of information;
13. If the subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distances and bearings of a meander line established not less than twenty feet (20') back from the
ordinary high water mark of the lake or stream;
14. Layout and width of all streets and rights of way, such as alleys, highways, easements for sewers, water mains, and other public utilities;
15. Approximate dimensions of and areas of lots;
16. Proposed building setback lines;
17. Approximate radii of all curves and length of tangents;
18. Approximate location and area of any property proposed to be dedicated for public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property
owners in the subdivision with the conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservation;
19. All corporate boundary lines on or adjacent to the proposed subdivision;
20. A statement, near the owner's name to read:
PRELIMINARY PLAT, NOT TO BE RECORDED
21. A table of the following information: total acreage of subdivision, acreage of streets, total number of lots, average area of lots, and acreage of
public lands to be dedicated other than streets.
B. Construction Drawings And Specifications: As required under chapter 3 of this title, and this chapter, construction drawings and specifications shall
accompany the preliminary plat. However, if only a portion of the plat is to be improved and submitted for final approval, construction drawings and
specifications need be prepared for such portion only. However, the entire area necessary to proper design of facilities shall be the basis for design
and be so indicated. Conditional approval of the remainder of the plat shall be valid and lawful only for a period of one year from the date of final
approval of the most recently developed portion of the plat. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by construction drawings and specifications,
which shall include the following:
1. Proposed building setback lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 342/348
2. Profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed street grades.
3. Finished garage floor elevations, elevation of lot corners.
4. Curve data of all curves.
5. Typical cross sections of the proposed grading, roadway and sidewalks.
6. Plans of proposed sanitary and storm water sewers with slopes and sizes indicated, or direction and distance to nearest water and sewer mains, if
the plans do not show the mains. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
7. (Rep. by Ord. 1335, 1-12-2005)
8. Plans for proposed water lines and fire hydrant locations.
9. Locations and specifications for streetlights.
10. All elevations shall be based on USGS datum.
11. Ground elevations on the tract, based on the USGS datum plane. For land that slopes less than one-half of one percent (0.5%), show not less
than one foot (1') contours; for land that slopes one-half of one percent (0.5%) to two percent (2%), show not less than two foot (2') contours; and
for land that slopes more than two percent (2%), show not less than five foot (5') contours. Contours shall be shown at more frequent intervals as
may be required by the plan commission or village engineer for land of unusual topography.
12. Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the plan commission: location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and
groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet (5'); written approval from the health department of the
appropriate county if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed and proof that the county health department has approved the individual
sewage disposal system.
13. Other conditions on the tract: watercourses, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in diameter,
structures and other significant features.
14. Other conditions on adjacent land: approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character
and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; and owners of adjacent
unplatted land (for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name, recording date, and number, and show approximate percent built up).
(Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
12-5-3: FINAL PLAT AND DATA FOR FINAL APPROVAL:
A final plat of subdivided land shall meet the following requirements:
A. General Requirements: All plats shall be legibly prepared as follows:
1. On reproducible mylar not larger than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), or divisible into parts not exceeding twenty four inches by
thirty six inches (24" x 36").
2. With waterproof, nonfading, black ink, on a scale not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100'). The scale used shall be indicated on the
plat graphically and in letters.
B. Map And Engineering Information: The final plat shall show correctly on its face:
1. The name or names of the owners of the property.
2. The name of the registered land surveyor who prepared the plat and the date thereof.
3. The legal description of the property subdivided.
4. All monuments erected, corners, and other points established in the field in their proper places, including the corner of all lots; the material of
which the monuments, corners, or other points are made shall be noted at the representation thereof or by legend.
5. The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries, the boundary lines of all blocks, public grounds, streets and alleys and all lot lines, except
that when the lines in any tier of lots are parallel, it shall be sufficient to make the bearings of the outer lines on one tier thereof; easements shall
be shown by centerline and width when lines are parallel to a boundary; otherwise, boundary bearings and distances shall be shown.
6. All blocks consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order; the blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall
be numbered or lettered consecutively through the several additions.
7. All lots in each block consecutively numbered.
8. The exact width of all easements, streets and alleys.
9. All lake or stream shore meander lines established by the surveyor in accordance with this chapter, the distances and bearings thereof, and the
distance between the point of intersection or such meander lines with lot lines and the ordinary high water mark.
10. All building setback lines, including setback lines on corner lots.
11. Accurate boundaries and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and of
any area to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property owners in the subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 343/348
12. Date, scale, and north arrow. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
13. All portions of curvilinear roads shall be tangent to adjoining elements of said roads unless so noted otherwise. Curve data shall include the
following dimensions: radius, central angle, chord length and arc length. For all lots on a curve, the chord length of each lot shall be shown. (Ord.
1019, 7-22-1998)
14. The plat shall specifically indicate that no building or structure shall be permitted in any area designated as an outlot. (Ord. 1453, 7-25-2007)
C. Name, Location And Position: The name of the plat shall be printed thereon in prominent letters and shall not be a duplicate of the name of any plat
previously recorded in the village. The following information relating to the position and location of the subdivision shall be shown on the plat:
1. The location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter section, section, township, range, and county noted immediately under the name given
the subdivision.
2. The exact location of the subdivision indicated by distances and bearings with reference to a corner or corners established in the United States
public land survey.
3. Where provisions are made for access from any subdivision to any lake or stream, the plat shall show the area over which access is provided to
the lake or stream.
4. The names of adjoining streets, state highways, and subdivisions shown in their proper location.
5. Abutting street and state highway lines of adjoining plats shown in their proper location by dotted lines; the width of these streets and highways
shall be given also.
D. Roads And Public Spaces:
1. The name of each road or street shown on the plat which is to be dedicated shall be printed thereon in prominent letters.
2. All lands reserved for public use except roads and streets shall be clearly marked "Reserved For Public Use".
E. Site Conditions And Topography:
1. All existing buildings and structures.
2. All watercourses and drainage ditches.
3. Boundary of any floodplain area or zone, or area subject to flooding.
F. Documents To Accompany Final Plat:
1. To entitle a final plat to be recorded, such certificates as are required by law shall be lettered or printed legibly with black durable ink or typed
legibly with black ribbon.
2. Restrictive covenants shall accompany the final plat.
3. Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him, that the monuments and markers thereon exist
as located and that all dimensions and details are correct.
4. Notarized certification, by the owner or owners, of the dedication of streets and other public areas.
5. Approvals by county authorities as required.
6. A statement signed by the subdivider setting forth the public improvements he proposes to make in the subdivision.
7. Construction drawings and specifications, including profiles, cross sections and details as applicable, of all public improvements, reflecting
improvements as built must accompany the final plat submission unless any subdivision improvements are not completed at the time of final plat
approval, such as built plans shall be provided to the village at the time of completion of improvements and prior to the release of the bond or
security posted by the developer. Elevations shall be referred to USGS datum.
8. A notice from the village board stating that there has been filed with and approved by the board, one of the following:
a. A certificate by the village engineer that all improvements and installations to the subdivision required for its approval have been made or
installed in accordance with the specifications; or
b. A bond has been posted pursuant to subsection 12-2-6E2 of this title in sufficient amount to assure completion of all required improvements.
9. Protective covenants in form for recording.
10. Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as may be required by the plan commission in the enforcement of these
regulations. (Ord. 831, 8-10-1994)
11. A stormwater permit indicating that all requirements of the village of Monee stormwater management ordinance have been met. (Ord. 1335, 1-
12-2005)
Chapter 6
STREET AND ALLEY IMPROVEMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 344/348
12-6-1: INTRODUCTION:
A. All developments, regardless of size within the corporate limits or under the village's jurisdiction, shall include provisions for the construction of streets
and appurtenances designed in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1440, 5-9-2007)
12-6-2: BASIC DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. In no case shall the design result in a pavement of lesser strength that those shown in Illinois department of transportation "Bureau Of Local Roads
And Streets Manual" (BLRS) unless otherwise stated by this chapter.
B. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall be subject to the approval of the village. The village will consider the
street's relation to existing and planned streets; reasonable circulation of traffic within the development and adjoining lands; topographical conditions;
runoff of stormwater; public convenience and safety; and their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
C. Preliminary engineering plans shall be accompanied by a traffic study detailing the development impact to the village roadway system and
recommended roadway improvements.
D. Where streets are dedicated (whether used or not), but do not meet the standards of this chapter, and border on, or are wholly within, the proposed
development land, same shall be improved to the standards of this chapter.
E. When development occurs outside the corporate limits of the village, but such development requires access to a village street, such street shall be
improved to the standards of this chapter. (Ord. 1440, 5-9-2007)
12-6-3: STREET CLASSIFICATIONS:
A. Certain variables in geometric and structural design discussed in this chapter are dependent on the functional classification of the street in question.
For the purposes of these standards, all streets will be classified as the following unless otherwise established by the village. The village board shall
determine all existing and new street classifications.
1. Arterial Streets: Arterials streets shall have the following general characteristics:
a. Serve the more important intracounty or intraregional travel corridors not served by higher route classifications such as highways and
expressways.
b. Provide service to surrounding communities.
c. Typically has a traffic count larger than two thousand four hundred (2,400) average daily traffic (ADT).
2. Collector Streets: Collector streets shall have the following general characteristics:
a. Receiving traffic from a residential development containing twenty (20) acres or more in area and where the lots are one-half (1/2) acre or less in
area.
b. As an extension of a collector street in an adjacent development.
c. Receiving traffic from a commercial, industrial, or manufacturing development.
d. Typically has a traffic count less than two thousand four hundred (2,400) average daily traffic (ADT) and larger than one thousand (1,000) ADT.
3. Local Streets: Local streets shall have the following general characteristics:
a. Serve primarily to provide access to immediately abutting property and connections to higher classified routes.
b. Local streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
c. Offer a low level of mobility and usually do not contain bus routes.
d. Typically has a traffic count less the one thousand (1,000) average daily traffic (ADT).
4. Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall have the following general characteristics:
a. Residential district cul-de-sac streets shall be not more than five hundred feet (500') in length, measured along the street centerline from the
centerline of the street of origin to the center of the pavement bulb.
b. Cul-de-sacs in zoning districts other than residential shall not exceed seven hundred feet (700') in length measured along the street centerline
from the centerline of the street of origin to the center of the pavement bulb.
c. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape.
d. Each cul-de-sac street terminus shall have a minimum pavement diameter, measured from the back of curbs on opposite sides of circular
turnaround.
e. A temporary cul-de-sac street may have a "tee" type terminus or other variation of the circular shape, if approved by the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 345/348
5. Frontage Roads:
a. Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property abutting a thoroughfare either by: 1) frontage roads, or 2)
double frontage lots backing to the thoroughfare.
b. Where double frontage is used, a no access strip shall be dedicated on the plat along the thoroughfare to prohibit access to the thoroughfare.
c. These standards are established for the purpose of providing protection to residential properties and to separate through and local traffic.
6. Alleys:
a. Alleys are not permitted in new developments unless deemed necessary by the village.
b. Where alleys are permitted the pavement width shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide and alley right of way shall be not less than thirty feet
(30') wide.
c. Dead end alleys shall not be allowed.
7. Half Streets:
a. Where existing roads front on new developments, the developer of the new development shall be responsible for reconstruction of both sides of
the roadway fronting the development in accordance to the standards set forth herein for the street classification determined by the village.
Transitions from the existing roadway to the new roadway shall take place outside of the section fronting the development and shall be such that
public safety and welfare are protected.
b. The developer of the shared street shall be allowed to recapture costs not associated with the developer's property as approved by the village
board and adopted under a recapture ordinance passed by the village board. (Ord. 1440, 5-9-2007)
12-6-4: RIGHT OF WAY:
All right of way widths shall conform to the following standards:
Type Of Street Residential Nonresidential
Arterial streets In no instance less than 100 foot width
Collector streets 80 feet 80 feet
Local streets 66 feet 70 feet1
Cul-de-sac streets 66 feet 70 feet1
Cul-de-sac bulbs 100 feet diameter 120 feet diameter1
Utility easement 20 feet minimum1 20 feet minimum1
Frontage roads 50 feet 60 feet
Thoroughfares Thoroughfares shall be in accordance with federal, state, or county authorities having jurisdiction
Note:
1. Greater width may be required by the village board.
(Ord. 1440, 5-9-2007)
12-6-5: PAVEMENT WIDTHS:
All streets shall be improved with roadway pavements to an overall width in accordance with the following minimum dimensions:
Type Of Street Parking1
Pavement
Width
(Ft.)2
Lane
Width
(Ft.)
Minimum
Return
Radius
(Ft.)3
Arterials streets To be designed in accordance with Illinois department of transportation requirements for local roads and streets
Collector streets:
Residential 1 side 36 12 30
Nonresidential 1 side 38 12 30
Local streets:
Residential 1 side 28 12 15
Nonresidential 1 side 32 12 15
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 346/348
Cul-de-sac street:
Residential 2 sides 28 12 30
Nonresidential 1 side 32 12 15
Cul-de-sac bulb radius:
Residential None 35 n/a n/a
Nonresidential None 40 n/a n/a
Frontage road:
Residential None 26 12 15
Nonresidential None 32 12 30
Notes:
1. Requirements for on street parking shall be set by the village board, parking shall be opposite side of street from water main.
2. Measurement does not include curb and gutter. Rural cross sections pavement shall conform to Illinois DOT requirements for rural local roads and
streets.
3. The larger radius shall be provided at interface between districts.
(Ord. 1440, 5-9-2007)
12-6-6: GEOMETRICS:
A. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and in no case shall be less than sixty degrees (60°). Intersecting curb lines at a
block corner shall be rounded by an arc having a radius of not less than the tabular values given in section 12-6-5 of this chapter. Where, because of
existing conditions, street intersections are likely to require channelization for proper traffic control, streets shall be designed to accommodate such
special treatment as the planning and zoning commission may specify.
B. Intersections of more than two (2) streets shall be avoided unless specific conditions of design indicate otherwise.
C. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be avoided.
D. Where there is a deflection in horizontal centerlines in excess of ten degrees (10°), within a given block at any given point, a curve shall be inserted
with a centerline radius of not less than:
Arterial and collector streets 400 feet
Local and cul-de-sac streets 200 feet
E. A three hundred foot (300') minimum tangent length shall be introduced between reverse curves on all arterial streets; one hundred foot (100')
minimum on collector streets; fifty foot (50') minimum on all local and cul-de-sac streets.
F. Minimum horizontal centerline curve radius at "EL" intersections shall be ninety feet (90'). An "EL" intersection is defined as a two-way, ninety degree
(90°) intersection of two (2) streets.
G. Street gradients shall be at least 0.50 percent and not exceed:
Collector streets 5 percent
Local streets 5 percent
H. Changes in grade exceeding 1.0 percent shall be connected with vertical curves.
I. Consecutive vertical curves shall be separated by a tangent not shorter than the following:
Arterial and collector streets 200 feet
Local streets 100 feet
J. Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 347/348
1. Minimum length in feet of vertical curves shall be equivalent to the algebraic difference in percent of gradient times a K factor. Such K factor to be
derived as follows:
K FACTOR BY TYPE OF STREET
Street Designation
K Factor
Crest Curve Sag Curve
Arterial 110 90
Collector 60 60
Local and cul-de-sac 30 40
(Ord. 1440, 5-9-2007)
12-6-7: PAVEMENT DESIGN:
A. Roadway Design: All roadway design shall be based on the Illinois department of transportation bureau of design and environment (BDE) procedures
for modified AASHTO design. All material types shall conform to section 12-6-8 of this chapter.
B. Residential Streets: The following minimum pavement structures shall be provided. Full pavement design may be required by the village.
1. Collectors: The base shall be crushed stone, type B minimum thickness shall be twelve inches (12"). The surfacing shall be bituminous concrete
binder and surface courses. The binder course shall be six inches (6") in thickness. The surface course shall be two inches (2") in thickness.
2. Local streets and cul-de-sacs: The base shall be crushed stone, type B, minimum thickness shall be twelve inches (12"). The surfacing shall be
bituminous concrete binder and surface courses. The binder course shall be four inches (4") in thickness. The surface course shall be two inches
(2") in thickness.
C. Nonresidential Streets:
1. A complete pavement design for roadways in nonresidential areas shall be provided to the village for review and approval. However, the
pavement structure shall not be less than that for a collector street in residential developments.
2. A soil investigation report shall be provided to the village to verify the IBR value. Pavement structures with subgrade soil having an IBR value less
than three (3) shall have an increased pavement structure as necessary to carry the design traffic loading.
D. Parking Lots: Privately owned and maintained areas shall meet the following minimum requirements: The base shall be crushed stone, type B,
minimum thickness shall be ten inches (10"). The surfacing shall be bituminous concrete binder and surface courses. The binder course shall be one
and a half inches (1.5") in thickness. The surface course shall be one and a half inches (1.5") in thickness.
E. Driveways: Paved access driveway from the right of way to the street pavement shall be provided. Driveways shall be constructed in accordance with
Illinois department of transportation requirements for local roads and streets and meet the following minimum requirements:
1. Bituminous Pavement: The base shall be crushed stone, type B, minimum thickness shall be eight inches (8") and bituminous surface course shall
be three inches (3.0") in thickness.
2. Portland Cement Concrete: The base shall be crushed stone, type B, minimum thickness shall be four inches (4") and class SI portland cement
concrete shall be six inches (6") in thickness, with six inch by six inch (6" x 6") 10/10 welded wire paving mesh.
3. Grade: No driveways shall be constructed at a grade that exceeds six percent (6.0%) from the right of way to the street unless the village
specifically approves a greater slope.
F. Parkways:
1. Parkways shall be required on both sides of all streets. They shall be graded and prepared for seeding or sodding by the developer with at least
six inches (6") of topsoil. Median strips shall be constructed as parkway unless paved.
2. Three inch (3") caliper trees will be planted in the parkway forty (40) to fifty feet (50') apart.
G. Alleys: Alley pavement design shall conform to the design standards for residential local streets and cul-de-sacs. (Ord. 1440, 5-9-2007)
12-6-8: MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Street Construction Materials: All street construction materials shall be in accordance with Illinois department of transportation "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction In Illinois" unless otherwise stated by this chapter. This includes aggregate base course, prime
coat, bituminous concrete binder, and surface course.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=964 348/348
B. Subgrade: The subgrade shall be graded and rolled to provide uniform density and shall comply with the profile and cross sections contained in the
drawings.
C. Base Course:
1. The finished base course shall be fine graded in preparation for paving.
2. Prime coat shall be applied between the base course and binder course.
3. The road subgrade shall be separated from the road base course by geotextile fabric, SUPAC-N5 or equal, for all classifications of roadway that
are publicly maintained.
4. Base course shall be uniformly graded and shall conform to the requirements of the IDOT gradation classification for CA-6.
D. Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA) Paving:
1. The surface course shall not be applied until the binder course has weathered through one winter season, all underground utilities have passed
their respective tests, the development has reached seventy five percent (75%) built (including homes), and approval has been granted by the
village board.
2. All cracks greater than one-fourth inch (1/4") in the binder course shall be sealed prior to application of the surface course.
3. Joints shall be lapped from binder course to surface course.
4. Tack coat shall be applied to the binder course prior to construction of the surface course to ensure proper bond.
E. Tack Coat Material: The tack coat material shall be cut back asphalt, grade RC-70. (Ord. 1440, 5-9-2007)
12-6-9: TESTING AND APPROVAL:
A. Proof Roll:
1. All subgrade and base course shall be proof rolled in the presence of a village representative with a fully loaded triaxle dump truck or similar
equipment prior to placement of upper material layers or curb and gutter.
2. Maximum allowable deflection shall be one-half inch (1/2").
3. If the subgrade deflects greater than one-half inch (1/2"), the developer or his representative shall determine the course of action to be approved
by the village.
4. The subgrade must be proof rolled an additional time if it rains following the initial proof roll and prior to paving.
B. Compaction Testing:
1. The density of the binder course and of the surface course shall be measured either by nuclear test methods or from cores obtained by the
developer. (Ord. 1440, 5-9-2007)